LESSON  XXVII. 

We  shall,  after  this,  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  ordinances 
relating  to  food  and  drink.  Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of 
Atri.1 

Physicians  skilled  in  the  science  of  Life  say  that  food  and 
drink  that  are  agreeable  in  point  of  color,  scent,  taste,  and  touch, 
and  consistent  with  the  ordinances  laid  down,  are  the  very  Life  of 
those  living  creatures  that  are  said  to  be  animated.  This  appears 
from  the  visible  effects  thereof.  In  consequence,  again,  of  the 
fuel  of  food  and  drink  is  the  existence  of  the  (digestive)  fire; 
Food  and  drink  develop  strength  of  both  body  and  mind. 

If  taken  according  to  the  measure  that  is  directed,  food  and 
drink  lead  to  the  growth  of  the  several  ingredients  of  the  body, 
©f  strength  and  complexion,  and  contribute  to  the  cheerfulness  of 
the  senses.  If  taken  otherwise,  they  become  injurious.*®.. 

Hence,  O  Agnive§a  we  shall  expound  in  detail  what  the 
ordinances  in  detail  are  of  food  and  drink  for  explaining  ( to  men  ) 
what  is  beneficial  and  what  injurious.3 

From  its  nature,  water  forces  out  impurities ;  salt  assists  at 
the  flow  of  all  liquid  substances ;  strained  ashes  assist  at  digestion  ; 
honey  unites  dislocated  or  dissociated  parts ;  Ghee  produces  lu¬ 
bricity  and  unctiousness  ;  milk  makes  us  vigorous ;  meat  adds  to 
©ur  growth;  the  juice  (of  meat)  leads  to  gratification  ;  alcohol 
perforates  and  renders  infirm  ;  the  wine  called  Sidhu  furrows  the 
body  ;  the  juice  of  the  Drakha  (  Uvse  pass#)  excites  or  increases 
the  appetite  ;  the  inspissated  juice  of  the  sugar-cane  stores  up 
many  faults ;  curds  produce  intumescences ;  dry  oil-cakes  cause 
depression  and  sorrow ;  the  soup  of  Masha  [Phaseolus  radiatus) 
increases  the  quantity  of  faeces;  strained  (saline)  ashes  are  des- 

*  ‘Praninam  Pranisamjakanam’  means,  as  pointed  out  by  the  Commentator,  ‘those 
among  living  creatures  that  are  animate.’  Under  living  creatures  are  included  both  men 
and  trees.  Animate  existence,  it  would  seem,  would,  according  to  the  author,  exclude 
tress.— T. 


42 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


tructive  of  vision  and  vital  seed ;  save  Dadima  (  Pumca  Granatum, 
Linn.)  Amalaka  ( Phyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn.)  and  all  other  sour 
things  are  provocative  of  bile ;  save  honey  that  is  old,  and 
£ali  rice  and  barley  and  wheat,  all  sweets  are  provocative  of 
phlegm  ;  save  the  sprouts  of  Vetra  (  Calamus  Rotang,  Linn  ).  and 
the  leaves  of  Patola  l  Tricosanthes  dioica,  Roxb. ),  almost  all 
bitters  are  provocative  of  the  wind  and  destructive  of  virile  power; 
save  Pippali  (  Piper  longitm ,  Linn.  )  and  dry  ginger,  all  pungents 
are  provocative  of  wind  and  destructive  of  the  virile  power.4 

After  this  we  shall  expound  the  diverse  articles  of  food  accord¬ 
ing  to,  their  respective  groups  or  classes.6  J 

£uka  paddy  {a),'£ ami  paddy,  (b),  meat,  potherbs,  and  fruits, — 
each  constitutes  a  group ;  these  with  Harita  (c),  Wines,  Water, 
Milk,  and  Sugar-cane,  and  the  modifications  of  Milk  and  those  of 
sugar-cane,  constitute  the  ten  and  two  groups  of  food  prepared 
(  cooked)  and  unprepared  (  uncooked ). 

They  are  being  explained  with  reference  to  their  tastes, 
potency,  and  assimilation.6-* 

The  red  £ali,  the  Maha^ali,  Kalama,  £akulakrita,  Churnaka, 
Dirghatjuka,  Gaura,  Panduka,  Langula,  Sugandhika,  Lauhavala, 
£arika,  Pramodaka,  Patanga,  Tapaniya,  and  all  other  varieties  of 
<^ali  that  are  beneficial,  are  cooling  in  potency  ;  in  taste  and  assi¬ 
milation,  they  are  sweet,  capable  of  exciting  the  wind  a  little,  a  little 
constipating,  oily,  nutritive,  and  increasing  semen  and  wine.*8-10 


a  Cuka  paddy,  as  a  group,  includes  all  varieties  of  paddy  or  rice. 

b.  Cami  paddy,  as  a  group,  includes  all  varieties  of  Phaseoli  and  pease.  Grains 
generated  within  cods  are  so  called.  They  are  called  paddy  or  Dhanya  in  consequence 
of  their  being  seeds. 

c.  All  birds  and  fowls  are  included  in  this. 

*  The  several  varieties  of  paddy  here  mentioned  belong,  as  observed  by  Chakrapani, 
to  various  parts  of  India.  They  have  many  local  names.  Chakrapani  remarks  that  he 
would  confine  himself  to  such  names  as  were  current  in  Gauda  or  Bengal.  The  red  Cali 
is,  of  course,  well  known.  The  Maha9ali  or  great  Cali  used  in  those  days  to  be  grown 
in  Behara  (the  Magadha  country).  Kalama  is  spoken  of  Chakrapani  as  grown  in 


CHA  RAKA  -54  MtllTA . 


331 


Amongst  these,  that  which  has  been  mentioned  first,  vis,  the 
red  £ali,  is  the  foremost. 

The  red  £ali  allays  thirst,  and  subjugates  all  the  three  faults 
when  they  are  excited. 

Mahafali  is  next  to  red  £ali  in  virtues.  Kalama  is  next  to 
Mahagali  (and  each  of  those  coming  after  is  lesser,  and  lesser  in 
the  possession  of  virtues  ).  1 2 

Yavaka,  Hayana,  Pantju,  Vapya,  Naishadhalca,  and  others, 
included  within  the  class  called  £ali,  resemble  the  red  £ali  and 
others  mentioned  before,  in  respect  of  their  merits  and  demerits.*13 

That  variety  of  paddy  which  is  called  Shashtika  is  cooling, 
oily,  heavy,  agreeable,  destructive  of  all  the  three  faults,  and  in¬ 
vigorates  the  body  and  makes  it  hard. 

In  all  these  respects,  Shashtika  is  the  foremost;  its  two  species 
which  are  white  and  dark  are  possessed  of  the  same  virtues  in  a 
lesser  and  lesser  degree.14 

Baraka,  Uddalaka  China,  £arada,  Ujjwala,  Darddura,  Gandh- 
ana,  and  Ivuruviddha,  are  like  Shashtika.  They  differ,  indeed,  from 
it,  very  little  in  virtues.f15 

Vedagrahara.  The  Ayuveddrtha  Ckantlrikd  speaks  of  it  as  grown  in  Kashmiaa.  Cakula- 
krita,  or  as  some  manuscripts  have  it,  Kuyalakrita,  was  grown  in  Cravanti.  One  of  the 
latest  Commentators  reads  ‘Cakunarhita,  ’  ‘  brought  by  birds  ’  from  a  distant  country. 

The  other  varieties  have  not  been  commented  upon. — T. 

*  Yavaka  is  not  Yava  or  wheat,  but  a  kind  of  small  grain  which  the  Rishis  included 
in  the  class  called  paddy. 

Hayana  is  a  variety  of  paddy  difficult  to  identity. 

Panqu  is  equally  difficult  to  identity. 

Vapya  is  a  species  of  paddy  that  grows  in  deep  water. 

Naishadhaka  was  grown  in  the  country  of  the  Nishadhas. 

All  these  seem  to  be  local  names. 

The  medical  lexicons  mention  them  merely  as  ‘varieties  of  paddy’. — T. 

+  These  are  different  varieties  of  paddy.  The  names  appear  to  be  local.  Carada 
is  that  which  is  reaped  in  autumn.  Gandhana  is  a  fragrant  variety.  Probably,  it  is  what 
in  Bengal  is  known  under  the  name  Samati  or  Manibhoga  or  Randhanipagla,  China 
probably  came  from  China  or  further  Asia,— T, 


332 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


That  variety  of  paddy  which  is  called  Vrihi  is  sweet,  sour  in 
assimilation,  provocative  of  the  bile,  and  heavy.18 

The  paddy  called  Patala  (  called  also  A<ju  in  consequence  of 
its  being  reaped  very  quickly,  for  it  is  gathered  in  the  month  of 
A§win  ),  increases  faeces  and  urine,  enhances  the  heat  of  the  body, 
and  provokes  all  the  three  faults.17 

The  paddy  called  Koradusha,  and  that  called  £yamaka,  are 
astringent,  sweet,  and  light.  They  provoke  the  wind,  destroy 
phlegm  and  bile,  are  cooling  and  constipating,  and  dry  up  the 
fluids  of  the  body.*1* 

Those  varieties  of  paddy  which  go  by  the  names  of  Hasti¬ 
ly  amaka,  Nivara,  Toyaparni,  Gavedhuka,  Pragatika,  aquatic - 
(^ySmaka,  Lohityanu,  Priyangu,  Mukunda,  Jhlntiga,  Muti,  Charuka, 
Baraka,  £ivira,  Utkata,  and  Jurnabha,,  all  resemble  the  £yamaka 
in  their  virtues.-f- 19-20 

Yava  (  Hordeum  kexastichum,  Linn.)  or  barley,  is  dry,  cool¬ 
ing,  heavy,  agreeable,  and  enhances  the  wind  and  the  faeces.  It 
makes  the  body  consistent  and  hard,  is  of  astringent  taste,  in¬ 
vigorating,  and  destructive  of  all  affections  due  to  phlegm.21 

Venuyava  (a  variety  of  the  above)  is  regarded  as  dry, 
astringent  as  regards  its  principal  taste  and  sweet  as  regards  its 
secondary  taste,  destructive  of  phlegm  and  bile,  as  also  of  abdo¬ 
minal  fat,  worms,  and  poisons,  and  invigorating.22 

Godhuma  (wheat)  unites  fractures,  is  destructive  of  wind, 
agreeable  in  taste,  cooling,  prolongs  life,  promotes  nutrition  and 
increases  corpulency,  enhances  the  semen,  is  oily,  makes  the  body 
consistent  and  hard,  and  is  heavy.23 


*  Cyamaka  is  Pftnicum  frumcntaceum,  Eoxb. 

t  The  varieties  here  mentioned  are  very  small  kinds  of  paddy.  Most  of  them  grow 
wild  and  are  gathered  when  ripe,  by  special  processes.  Many  of  these  do  not  really 
fall  within  the  genus  Oryza  Saliva,  but  the  Ris’nis  followed  the  popular  phraseology  in 
calling  them  all  as  paddy. — T. 


CHARAKA-S-AMHITA. 


333 


Nandimukhi  and  Madhuni  are  sweet,  oily,  and  cooling. 

Thus  ends  the  first  group  consisting  of  the  diverse  varieties  of 
the  grain  called  £uka-dhanya.*24 

Here  ends  the  Cuka-Dhanya  group. 

Mudga  ( Phaseolus  Mungo ,  Linn. )  is  astringent  sweet  in 
taste,  dry  and  cooling  ;  in  assimilation  it  is  pungent ;  it  is,  besides, 
light,  clear,  and  destructive  of  both  phlegm  and  bile.  It  is  the 
foremost  of  all  things  whose  soup  or  boiled  juice  is  taken.25 

Masha  ( Phaseolus  radiatus  Roxb.)  increases  the  semen,  is 
greatly  destructive  of  wind,  oily,  warm,  sweet,  heavy,  invigorating, 
increases  the  quantity  of  faeces,  and  if  weakness  or  loss  of  virile 
power  takes  place,  it  restores  that  power  quickly.28 

That  variety  of  this  article  which  is  called  Rajamasha  (  Vigna 
sinensis,  Savi,  syn.  Dolichos  sinensis,  Linn.)  has  consistency, 
creates  a  relish  for  food,  causes  phlegm,  semen,  acidity,  and  bile. 
It  is  agreeable,  provocative  of  wind,  dry,  astringent  in  taste,  is, 
clear,  and  heavy.27 

That  variety  of  Masha  which  is  known  by  the  name  of  Kulattha 
(. Dolichos  biflorus,  Roxb.)  is  warm  and  astringent;  in  assimilation  it 
is  sour;  isdestructive  of  phlegm,  semen,  and  wind.  It  isan inspissant, 
and  is  beneficial  in  consumption,  hiccup,  asthma,  and  piles.28 

Makushtaka  (  called  also  Van-Mudga,  Phaseolus  lobatus, )  is 
sweet  in  taste  and  assimilation,  an  inspissant,  dry,  and  cooling. 
It  is  beneficial  in  haemorrhages,  Fevers,  and  other  diseases.29 

Chanaka  (  Gicer  arietinum,  Linn),  Masura  ( Cicer  lens,  Roxb; 
syn.  Vicia  lens,  Benth  ),  Khandika  {Pisum  sativum,  Linn),  and 
other  kinds  of  pulses  and  pease  are  light,  cooling,  sweet,  as¬ 
tringent,  and  dry.  They  are  beneficial  in  affections  of  bilious, 


*  Both  Nandhmukhi  and  Madhuni  are  varieties  of  wheat  (  Triticum  vulgare , 
Linn.  ).  Dhanya,  as  previously  shown,  includes  grain  of  almost  every  species.  By 
Cuka-Dhanya  is  meant  all  bearded  grains. — T. 


334  CHA  RAKA-SA  M  HI  TA . 

phlegm.  They  are  also  regarded  as  praiseworthy  in  the  prepara¬ 
tion  of  soups  and’  plasters.  Amongst  them  all,  Masura  ( Gicer  lens, 
lioxb. )  is  an  inspissant  for  it  dries  up  the  fluids  of  the  body  ; 
while  Kalaya  ( or  Khandira,  Pisum  sativum,  Linn. ),  is  highly 
provocative  of  wind.30-31 

Tila  ( Sesatnum  Indicum,  Linn.)  is  oily,  heating,  sweet,  keen, 
astringent,  and  bitter.  It  keeps  the  skin  soft,  promotes  the  growth 
of  hair,  increases  strength,  is  destructive  of  wind,  and  creates 
phlegm  and  bile.32 

The  different  varieties  of  beans  are  heavy,  sweet,  cooling, 
destructive  of  strength,  and  possessed  of  drying  qualities.  When 
oilified,  they  are  fit  to  be  eaten  by  men  endued  with  strength.33 

The  particular  variety  of  beans  called  Cimvi  (  several  species 
of  Dolichos  are  known  by  it )  is  dry  and  astringent.  It  provokes 
the  wind  within  the  stomach.  It  does  not  benefit  the  semen.  It  is 
not  beneficial  to  the  eyes  also.  It  takes  a  longtime  for  digestion.34 

Adhaki(  Cytisus  Cajan,  Linn  ;  syn.  Cajanus  Indicus,  Spreng. ) 
is  destructive  of  phlegm  and  bile ;  provokes  wind ;  and  allays 
phlegm  and  wind  when  both  are  excited  together. 

Avalguja  (called  also  Somraja,  Vernonia anthelmintica,  Willd ; 
syn.  Senatula  anthelmintica,  Roxb.),  Edagaja  ( called  also  Chakra- 
mardda,  Cassia  Tora,  Linn.)  and  Nishpava  (called  in  Bengali, 
Barbati,  Vigna  catjang),  are  provocative  of  wind  and  bile. 

Kakanda  (  a  black  variety  of  the  beans  called  Cimvi ),  Uma 
(  called  also  Atasi,  Linum  usitatissimum,  Linn.),  and  Atmagupta 
(  called  also  Alkusi,  Mucuna  pruriens) produce  effects  similar  to 
those  of  Masha  ( Phaseolus  radiatus.) 

Thus  ends  the  second  group,  called  £ami  Dbanya;  as  expounded 
by  the  Rishi.38-38 

Here  ends  the  Cami-Dkdnya  Group. 

The  cow,  ass,  mule,  camel,  horse,  leopard,  lion,  bear,  ape,  wolf, 
tiger,  hyena,  the  hairy  dog  called  Babhru,  cat,  mouse,  fox,  jackal, 


CHARA  K4-SA  A/H  l  TA . 


335 


liavvk,  dog,  Chasha  (a),  crow,  Ca9aghjii  (b),  Madhuhan  (c),  Bhasa  (d), 
vulture,  owl,  Kulingalca  ( e ),  Dhunika  (/),  and  the  ospreys, — 
these  beasts  and  birds  are  called  Prasahas.* 

£weta  (g),  £yama  (h),  Chitra-pushta  (*),  Kalaka  (/),  Kakuni- 
mriga  ( k ),  Kurchika  (/),  Chillita  ( m ),  frogs,  Iguana,  £alwaka  (»), 
Gandaka  ( o ),  Kadali  (/>),  Nakula  (q),  and  £vvavit  (r),  these  animals 
are  classed  as  Bhumi^aya  (or  living  in  holes).37-10 


a.  Ordinarily  applied  to  the  blue  jay  (  Coradas  Indica)  ;  sometimes,  it  is  applied 
to  the  kingfisher. — T. 

b.  Literally,  the  animal  that  kills  rabbits.  It  is  applied  to  a  bird  of  prey.  The 
Commentator  is  content  with  telling  us  only  this, 

c.  Gangadhara  says  that  this  bird  is  commonly  called  Mahua  in  Bengal. 

d.  Bhasa  is  the  fish-eating  kite. 

e.  Otherwise  called  Vana-Chataka.  A  variety  of  the  sparrow, 

f.  Otherwise  called  Chataka.  The  ordinary  sparrow. 

*  Lower  down  in  this  Lesson  the  Rishi  explains  that  the  name  *  Prasaha  ’  is  applied 
to  those  beasts  and  birds  in  consequence  of  the  suddenness  and  force  with  which  they 
seize  their  food  and  devour  it. — T. 

g.  The  Commentator  Gangadhara,  without  explaining  what  is  implied  by  it,  con¬ 
tents  himself  with  observing  that  it  is  a  well-known  animal.  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether 
the  word  is  used  for  a  bird  or  a  beast. 

h.  Cyama  is  identified  by  Gangadhara  with  a  bird  of  a  darkish  hue. 

i.  “A  well-known  bird  known  by  this  name  in  a  particular  province”  observes 
Gangadhara.  Difficult  to  identify. 

j.  Some  texts  read  ‘  Kilaka  ’  and  some  ‘  Kanaka  ’.  It  is  believed  to  be  a  small 
variety  of  ‘chataka’  or  sparrow. 

k.  Some  texts  read  ‘  Kakuli-mriga  ’.  Gangadhara  observes  that  among  common 
people  it  is  known  by  the  name  of  ‘  Kauni-mriga  what  that  is,  is  not  well-known. 

l.  Some  texts  incorrectly  read'  ‘Kuchika’.  It  is  the  well-known  fish  called 
« Kunehia  ’  in  Bengal.  It  is  a  variety  of  eel. 

m.  Some  texts  incorrectly  read  ‘  Chillaka’.  It  is  commonly  called  ‘  Chiada,  ’ 
observes  Gangadhara.  It  is  probably  a  provincial  name. 

n.  Commonly  called  ‘  Sejada  ’  observes  Gangadhara.  Difficult  to  identify. 

o.  Otherwise  called  ‘  Swarna-Godha  \  A  variety  of  iguana,  of  golden  color. 

f.  A  small  variety  of  deer,  called  ‘  Kadali-patta 

q.  Mungoose. 

Literally,  ‘one  that  knows  the  dog.’  It  is  used  to  imply  the  porcupine. 


336 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA . 


Srimara  («),  Chamara,  (b),  Rhinoceros,  Buffalo,  Gavaya,  (c), 
Elephant,  Nanku  ( d ),  Boar,  and  Ruru  ( e ),  are  regarded  as  amphi¬ 
bious  animals. 

Tortoise,  crab,  fish,  porpoise,  whale,  oysters,  conchs,  otter, 
crocodile,  Chaluki  (large  variety  of  porpoise),  Makara  (/)  and 
others,  have  been  said  to  be  aquatic  animals. 

Those  that  live  and  move  on  the  surface  of  the  waters  are  now 
being  said.  They  are  swans  and  geese,  Krauncha  ( g ),  Valaka  ( h ), 
cranes,  Karandava(t),  Plava(/),  £arari  (£),  Pushkarari  (l),  Ke?ari  (m), 
Manatundika  («),  Mrinalakantha,  (o),Madgu  (/),  Kadamva^.Kaka- 
tundika  ( r ),  Utkro$a(.y),  Pundarikaksha  ( t ),  Megharava  ( u ),  Amvu- 

a.  The  Commentator  explains  that  Srimara  is  a  large  species  of  boar.  The  lexi¬ 
cons  also  give  ‘  Srimaro-mahacukarah  ’. 

b.  An  animal  of  the  deer  species,  having  a  fine  tail.  The  Yak  or  Bos  Gruniens. 

c.  A  species  of  ox  ;  the  Gayal ;  erroneously  classed  by  Hindu  writers  among  deer. 

d.  Any  ordinary  deer  of  two  horns. 

e.  A  large  species  of  deer,  having  many  horns. 

f.  Sharks  and  other  animals  of  the  kind  are  implied  by  it.  The  word  ‘  Makara  ’ 
as  used  in  Sanskrit  literature  is  a  fictitious  animal  like  the  griffin  and  others  of  the 

g.  The  Commentator  observes  that  it  is  a  kind  of  large  crane. 

Wilson  thinks  it  is  a  variety  of  the  heron,  viz.,  Ardea  jaculator. 

h.  Otherwise  called,  as  observed  by  the  Commentator,  ‘  Kanavaki  ’.  A  small  variety 
of  crane. 

i.  A  variety  of  duck. 

j.  Literally,  anything  that  goes  by  leaps  and  bounds.  A  small  species  of  water- 
fowl  is  implied.  The  word,  however,  sometimes  means  a  frog. 

k.  Spelt  variously.  Written  sometimes  as  1  Carali.  ’  A  species  of  water  fowl  that 
is  supposed  to  drive  away  all  other  fowl  from  the  tank  in  which  it  lives  and  to  eat  up  all 
the  fish  in  it. 

l.  The  Commentator  says  that  it  is  otherwise  called  ‘  Naralipaksha  ’ ;  evidently  a 
provincial  name. 

m.  Otherwise  called  *  Dirghali  ’  as  observed  by  the  Commentator. 

«.  Otherwise  called  *  Matundi  ’  as  observed  by  the  Commentator. 

o.  Difficult  to  identify. 

p.  The  shag. 

r.  A  gallinule  of  the  white  variety. 

s.  A  variety  of  osprey. 

t.  An  aquatic  fowl  with  large  red  eyes. 

u.  Otherwise  called  ‘Meghanada  ’. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


337 


Kukkuti  (a),  Ara  (6),  Nandimukhi  ( c ),  Vati  (d),  Sumukha  ( e ), 
Sahacharin  (_/),  Rohini  ( g ),  Kamakali  (k),  Sarasa  (z),  Raktafirshaka 
( j  ),  Chakravaka  (  k),  and  other  fowl. 

Prishata  (/),  Sarabha  ( m ),  Rama  (n),  Cwadangshtra  (o),  Mriga- 
matrika  (p),  Catja  (y),  Urana  (r),  Kuranga  (s),  Gokarna  (t ),  Kotta- 
karaka  (u),  Charushka  (v),  Harina  ( w ),  Ena  ( n ),  Camvara  (jy),  Kala- 
puchcchaka  (z),  Rishya  (a),  and  Tarapota  (b),  should  be  known 
as  animals  of  the  wilderness.47-48 


а.  Difficult  to  identify. 

б.  Ditto. 

c.  Ditto. 

d.  Ditto. 

e.  Ditto. 

/.  Ditto. 

g.  Ditto. 

h.  Ditto. 

i.  The  Indian  crane.  Ardea  Sibirica. 

j.  A  variety  of  the  above  with  a  red  head. 

k.  The  ruddy  goose,  commonly  called  in  India  the  Brahmani  duck  or  goose. 
Anas  casarca. 

l.  The  porcine  deer. 

m.  Not  the- fabulous  animal  that  is  stronger  than  the  lion,  but  a  species  of  deer. 
The  Commentator  describes  it  to  be  as  large  as  the  camel  and  having  large  horns  also. 

n.  A  variety  of  deer.  Probably,  the  large  wild  goat  of  the  Himalayas. 

o.  A  variety  of  deer  having  four  horns.  The  Commentator  describes  it  as  occurring 
at  Kartikapore 

p.  The  Commentator  describes  it  as  a  big-bellied  deer  of  the  vaccine  shape. 

q.  The  hare.  .The  name,  however,  is  sometimes  applied  to  a  species  of  deer. 

r.  A  species  of  hare. 

s.  The  antelope. 

t.  A  variety  of  deer.  Wilson  thinks  it  probably  means  the  Nilgau  which  abounds 
in  the  Himalayas.  The  Commentator  says  it  is  otherwise  called  the  Gomva  deer. 

u.  The  Commentator  describes  it  as  a  kind  of  deer. 

v.  A  variety  of  deer. 

w.  It  is  a  generic  name  applied  to  all  animals  of  the  deer  species.  Here  it  implies 
the  spotted  deer  of  the  N.  W.  Provinces. 

x.  Otherwise  called  ‘  Krishnashara.  ’  The  belack  antelope. 

y.  Otherwise  called  Gavaya.  A  variety  of  deer. 

z.  A  species  of  antelope  having  a  black  and  hairy  tail. 

a.  The  painted  or  white-footed  antelope. 

b.  A  variety  of  deer. 

43 


charaka-samhitA. 


Lava  (a),  Varttiraka  ( b ),  Vatika  (c),  Kapinjala  (</),  Chakora  (J% 
Upachakra  {/),  the  crimson  Kukkubha  (g)  ;19 

These,  beginning  with  Lava,  are  called  Vishkiras,  +  as  also 
those  named  below  and  beginning  with  Varttaka ;  viz,  Varttaka  {h), 
Varttika  (z‘),  Varhf  (/),  Tittiri  (k),  Kukkuta  (/),  Kanka  (wz),  Cara- 
padendrabha  (n),  Gonardda  (o),  Girivarttaka  (/>),  Krakara  (q),  Ava- 
kara  (r),  and  Varaha  (j). 60-51 

Catapatra  (t),  Bhingaraja  {u),  Koyashthi  (v),  Jivajivaka  (w), 


a.  A  sort  of  quail.  Perdix  chinensis. 

b.  The  Commentators  explain  it  as  a  species  of  francoline  partridge.  The  A yur- 
vcddrtha  Chandrika  states  that  this  is  called  in  Bengal  Babui,  and  in  Northern  India, 

c.  A  variety  of  the  above.  Called  also  Vattahi. 

d.  The  francoline  partridge.  Otherwise  called  Chatuka  in  Bengal  and  Northern 
India.  Its  cry  is  regarded  by  the  commnn  people  as  a  petition  to  the  clouds  for  a  shower, 
resembling  the  sound  of  Phatik-jal.  It  is  also  called  the  white  Tittira. 

e.  The  bartevelle  or  Greek  partridge.  Perdix  rufu  or  Tetrao  ru/us. 

f.  A  variety  of  the  ruddy  goose. 

g.  The  wild  cock.  Pkasianus  gallus.  ‘  Raktavarnaka,  ’  as  remarked  by  Chakrapani, 
is  an  adjective  of  Kukkubha. — T 

t  Those  animals  that  find  out  their  food  with  the  aid  of  their  claws  and  pick  them 
up  like  the  cock. — T 

h.  A  sort  of  qjiail.  Wilson  thinks  it  implies  the  variety  known  as  Perdix  olivacea. 

i.  Chakrapani  says  that  it  is  a  variety  of  the  above. 

j.  The  peacock. 

k.  The  francoline  partridge, 

l.  The  cock. 

m.  The  heron. 

».  The  Commentators  say  that  it  implies  the  fighting  heron,  or  Malla-kanka. 

o.  The  Sarasa  or  Indian  crane. 

p.  The  mountain  Varttaka. 

q.  A  variety  of  partridge.  Wilson  thinks  it  implies  the  Perdix  sylvaticus, 

r.  A  variety  of  partridge. 

s.  The  boar. 

t.  Otherwise  called  Kashthakubarika.  The  Indian  wood-pecker, 

u.  A  variety  of  the  shrike.  Probably,  the  Lanius  malabaricus. 

v.  The  lapwing. 

hi,  A  variety  of  pheasant. 


CI1A  RA  KA-SA  M  HIT  A . 


339 


Kairata  (a),  Kokila  (6),  Atyuha  (c),  Gopaputra  (d),  Priyatmaja  ( e ), 
Latwa  (/),  Latwashaka  (g),  Vabhru  (k),  Vataha  («'),  Dindimanaka 
(/),  Jati*,  Dundubhivashkara  (k),  Loliaprishta  (/),  Kulingaka  ( m ), 
Kapota  ( n ),  Cukla9§.ranga  ( o ),  Chiratika  ( p ),  Kuyashtika  (  q  ), 
Carika  ( r ),  Kalavinka  (  ^  ),  Chataka  (I),  Angarachudaka  (u), 
Paravata  (v),  and  Panavika  (jp), — these  birds  are  included  in  the 
class  called  Pratuda.ss~54, 

The  animals  (rrtentioned  above)  have  been  called  Prasahas  in 
consequence  of  the  suddenness  and  force  with  which  they  seize 
their  food  and  eat  it. 

Those  which  have  been  called  Bhu$ayas  are  so  called  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  their  living  in  holes ;  and  those  called  Anupas  have 
been  so  styled  in  consequence  of  their  living  in  marshy  tracts. 


a.  A  species  of  Kokila. 

b.  The  Indian  Koel  or  cuckoo. 

c.  Otherwise  called  Datyuta.  The  gallinule. 

d.  The  Commentators  are  content  with  saying  that  it  is  a  well  known  bird  of  the 

e.  Not  identifiable. 

f.  A  variety  of  sparrow. 

g.  Ditto. 

h.  Not  identifiable. 

*.  Ditto. 

j.  Ditto. 

k.  All  that  the  Commentators  say  about  it  is  that  its  cry  is  very  hoarse  and  loud. 

l.  A  variety  of  Kulinga. 

m.  A  fork-tailed  shrike. 

n.  Pigeon. 

o.  A  white  variety  of  the  Chataka.  The  cuculus  melanoleucos. 

p.  Not  identifiable. 

q.  Not  identifiable. 

r.  The  Provincial  names  of  this  bird  are  Calika,  Mayana,  and  Gang9alika.  These 
are  varieties.  The  species  is  known  by  the  name  of  Turdus  salica,  Buck, 

s.  The  domestic  Chataka  or  sparrow. 

t.  The  sparrow. 

a.  Not  identifiable. 

v.  The  name  is  applied  to  a  dove  or  pigeon. 
w.  Not  identifiable. 


340 


CHA  RA  K.A-SA  MH /  TA . 


Those  called  falaja  have  derived  their  name  from  the  circum¬ 
stance  of  their  living  in  water ;  and  the  animals  (named  above) 
have  been  called  Jalachara  owing  to  their  moving  and  living  on 
the  surface  of  the  water. 

Among  animals  living  and  moving  on  land,  those  that  live  in 
the  wilderness  are  called  jangala. 

Those  animals  that  scatter  (with  their  claws  or  hoofs  or  mouth, 
earth  or  dunghills  &c)  for  finding  their,  food,  are  called  Vishkiras. 
Those  that  peck  at  their  food  are  called  PratudaA 5-56 

Thus  there  are,  it  is  said,  eight  kinds  of  sources  from  which 
meat  may  be  drawn.  Amongst  these,  Prasaha,  Bhugaya,  Anupa, 
Varija  (Jalaja),  and  Varichara  (Jalachara),  are  heavy,  hot,  oily, 
sweet ;  enhance  the  growth  of  strength ;  increase  the  semen 
largely  ;  destroy  wind  ;  excite  phlegm  and  bile ;  and  are  beneficial 
to  such  men  as  are  habituated  to  physical  exercise  and  as  have 
blazing  digestive  fires.57-58 

The  physician  should  prescribe  the  meat,  or  in  especial,  of 
those  animals  among  Prashas  that  are  carnivorous,  for  such  men 
as  are  afflicted  with  chronic  piles,. diseased  Grahani,  or  pulmonary 
consumption.50 

Lava  and  others  included  within  the  class  called  Vishkira,  as 
also  those  called  Pratuda  and  those  others  styled  Jangala,  are  light, 
cooling,  and  sweet-astringent.  These  are  beneficial  for  human 
beings  in  such  excitements  of  all  the  faults  as  are  distinguished 
by  predominance  of  bile,  a  lesser  measure  of  wind,  and  a  still 
lesser  one  of  phlegm. 

Vishkiras,  in  respect  of  their  beneficial  effects,  are  slightly 
inferior  to  Prashas.60-61 

The  flesh  of  the  goat  is  neither  very  cool,  nor  very  heavy,  nor 
very  oily.  It  does  not  excite  any  of  the  faults.  In  consequence, 
again,  of  its  capacity  for  assimilation  with  the  elements  of  the 
human  body,  it  does  not  restrain  the  secretions  and  thereby 


CHARA KA-SAM M ITA.  - 


341 


produce  heaviness  and  fulness  of  the  body.  It  is  also,  on  that 
account,  nutritive.02 

The  flesh  of  sheep  is  sweet  and  cool.  It  is,  therefore,  heavy, 
but  nutritive.68 

Individual  animals  of  both  the  species,  viz.,  goats  and  sheep, 
differ  from  one  another  in  consequence  of  the  difference  of  their 
habits  (for  while  some  live  in  marshes,  others  live  on  dry  land,  and 
others  live  sometimes  in  marshy  and  sometimes  on  dry  land).  The 
properties  of  their  flesh,  therefore,  are  not  the  same  as  those  which 
have  been  indicated  above  of  the  flesh  of  the  species  in  general.*64 

In  consequence  of  especial  properties  residing  in  some  kinds 
of  flesh,  instructions  are  laid  down  in  detail. 

The  flesh  of  the  peacock  is  exceedingly  beneficial  for  the  eye, 
the  ear,  intelligence,  the  digestive  fire,  the  consequences  of  age, 
complexion,  voice,  and  period  of  life. 

It  is,  besides,  strength-giving  and  wind-destroying.  It  in¬ 
creases  also  the  semen.06 

The  flesh  of  swans  and  geese  is  heavy,  hot,  oily,  and  sweet ; 
it  improves  the  voice,  complexion,  and  strength. 

It  is  nutritive  and  increases  the  vital  seed. 

It  is  also  destructive  of  wind.60 

The  flesh  of  those  animals  which  have  claws  for  their  weapons 
{viz.,  the  cock)  is  oily  and  hot;  it  increases  the  semen  and  improves 
the  voice.  It  promotes  strength  highly.  It  is  destructive  of  wind 
and  produces  perspiration.f67 


*  The  sense  seems  to  be  this  :  the  properties,  that  have  been  stated  in  general  of  the 
species,  do  not  belong  to  every  individual  of  the  species,  for  the  habits  of  individual  ani¬ 
mals  differ. — T. 

+  *  Swedana  ’  is  that  whieh  produces  perspiration  and  thereby  removes  stiffness 
and  heaviness  of  the  body.  See  ante,  p.  244. — T. 


•  CHA  RA  KA -SA  ME! TA . 


342 

The  flesh  of  such  animals  as  live  in  regions  scantily  supplied 
with  water  or  in  regions  of  a  marshy  character  is  neither  very 
heavy,  nor  very  hot,  nor  very  sweet.88 

The  flesh  of  the  francoline  partridge  soon  subdues  such  ex¬ 
citement  of  the  three  faults  as  is  characterised  by  a  predominance 
of  wind.69 

The  flesh  of  the  Kapinjala,  in  consequence  of  its  properties 
of  coolness,  sweetness,  and  lightness,  is  applauded  (as  a  remedy) 
in  all  diseases  due  to  excitement  of  bile,  as  also  in  those  due 
to  excitement  of  phlegm  when  both  exist  with  hemorrhage  and 
a  mild  excitement  of  wind.*70 

The  flesh  of  the  Lava  is  astringent,  sweet,  and  light ;  it  in¬ 
creases  the  strength  of  the  digestive  fire.  It  alleviates  excitement 
of  all  the  faults.  On  assimilation,  it  becomes  bitter.71 

The  flesh  of  the  Iguana  is,  on  assimilation,  sweet.  In  taste, 
it  is  astringent-pungent.  It  alleviates  both  wind  and  bile.  It 
promotes  nutrition,  and  increases  strength.72 

The  flesh  of  the  porcupine  is  sweet-sour.  On  assimilation  it 
has  been  said  to  be  pungent.  It  is  destructive  of  wind  and  bile  ; 
and  alleviates  consumption  and  asthma.73 

The  flesh  of  domestic  pigeons  is  astringent-sweet  in  taste, 
and  cooling,  and  alleviates  hemorrhage  arising  from  excitement 
of  bile.  On  assimilation  it  is  sweet.  74 

Wild  pigeons  are  slightly  lighter  than  domestic  ones.  They 
are  cooling,  drying,  and  slightly  softer.-)-75 

The  flesh  of  the  parrot  is  astringent-sour  on  assimilation.  It 
is  dry  and  cooling.  It  is  beneficial  in  pulmonary  consumption  and 


*  ‘  Pitta-9leshma-vikareshu  ’  is  explained  as  ‘  Pitta-vikareshu  ’  and  ‘cleshma-vika- 

leshu  ‘sarakteshu  ’  and  ‘manda-vateshu  ’  have  reference  to  both.  It  may  also  mean 
‘  in  the  diseases  due  to  excitement  of  bile  and  phlegm,  existing  with  a  mild  excitement 
of  wind,  &c.’ — T. 

f  ‘  Sangrahi’  or  Grahi  ’  are  those  objects  which  dry  up  the  fluids  of  the  body— T 


CRARAKA-SAMHITA.  343 

phthisis.  It  is  capable  of  drying  up  the  fluids  of  the  body. 
Besides,  it  is  light  and  increases  the  digestive  fire.76 

The  hare  is  astringent,  soft,  dry,  and  cooling;  on  assimila¬ 
tion,  it  is  pungent.  It  is,  again,  light.  Agreeable  in  taste,  it  is  a 
well-known  remedy  in  diseases  due  to  such  excitement  of  all  the 
faults  in  which  the  wind  is  excited  only  partially.77 

Chatakas  (sparrows)  are  sweet  and  oily.  They  increase  the 
strength  and  the  vital  seed.  They  alleviate  diseases  due  to  ex¬ 
citement  of  all  the  faults.  They  are,  besides,  capable  of  alleviating 
the  wind  in  especial.  They  bring  on  vigour  and  energy  and  cure 
the  loss  of  virile  power.*78 

Those  animals  of  the  deer  species  which  are  known  as  Enas 
are  sweet  in  taste,  and  sweet  on  assimilation.  They  are  capable 
of  alleviating  excitement  of  all  the  faults  together.  Beneficial  to  the 
system,  they  are  light  and  restrain  both  stools  and  urine.  They 
are,  again,  known  to  be  cooling.70 

The  Rohita  fish,  in  consequence  of  its  feeding  on  moss  and 
of  its  never  sleeping,  increases  the  digestive  fire.  It  is  digested 
soon,  and  greatly  enhances  strength.80 

Fish  in  general  are  heavy,  hot,  and  sweet.  They  promote 
strength  and  nutrition,  and  are  destructive  of  wind.  They  are  oily 
and  capable  of  increasing  the  vital  seed.  They  have  been  said 
to  be  provocative  of  various  faults. 81 

The  flesh  of  the  boar  is  Snehana.  It  promotes  nutrition.  It 
increases  the  vital  seed.  It  is  capable  of  making  one  endure 
fatigue.  It  is  destructive  of  the  wind.  It  increases  the  strength, 
being  a  tonic ;  and  has  considerable  relish.  It  is  also  a  Swedana, 
and  heavy.t82 

The  tortoise  is  said  to  be  a  tonic.  It  alleviates  the  wind.  It  in¬ 
creases  the  semen,  improves  the  vision,  and  increases  the  strength. 
It  improves  both  intelligence  aud  memory.  It  is  a  good  regimen 
for  the  weak  stomach.  It  cures  consumption.83 

*  Some  texts  add  the  third  line  beginning  *  valavirya  &c.,  ’  and  make  of  this  a 
triplet,  as  rendered  here.  Others  omit  it. — T. 

f  For  ‘  Snehana  ’  and  1  Swedana  ’  Vide  ante ,  p.  244.— T, 


344 


CH  A  R  A  RA-SA  M  HIT A . 


Beef  is  beneficial  when  the  wind  only  has  been  excited.  It  is 
also  a  remedy  in  inflamations  of  the  Schneiderian  membrane,  as 
also  in  cases  of  chronic  fever.  It  is  good  also  in  dry  consumption, 
in  exhaustion  and  fatigue,  when  the  digestive  fire  is  keen,  and  in 
cases  of  loss  of  flesh.84 

The  flesh  of  the  buffalo  is  oily,  hot,  and  sweet.  It  is,  again,  heavy 
and  promotes  nutrition  and  corpulency.  It  causes  hardness  or 
firmness  of  the  body,  increases  its  dimensions,  improves  courage 
and  perseverance,  and  produces  sleep.85 

The  eggs  of  Dhritarashtras  and  Chakoras  and  Dakshas  and 
peacocks  and  Chatakas  are  beneficial  when  the  vital  seed  becomes 
scanty,  as  also  in  consumptions,  in  all  thoracic  diseases,  and  in 
wounds  and  sores.  They  are  sweet,  aid  digestion,  and  immediately 
promote  the  strength.86-87 

In  the  matter  of  promoting  the  nutrition  of  the  body  there  is 
no  food  that  is  superior  to  flesh. 

So  is  the  third  group  or  classification  of  food,  viz.,  flesh, 
treated  of.88 

Of  the  group  relating  to  Potherbs. 

Patha  ( a ),  Susha  ( b ),  Oathi  (c),  Vastuka  ( d ),  and  Sunishannaka 
( e ),  should  be  known  as  astringents  which  dry  the  fluids  of  the 
body.  They  alleviate  the  excitement  of  the  three  faults.  As  re¬ 
gards  Vastuka,  it  operates  as  a  Bhedana.*89 

Kakamachi  (f)  is  capable  of  allaying  excitement  of  the  three 
faults.  It  increases  the  vital  seed.  It  operates  as  a  Rasayana.f 


a.  Cissampelos  hernandifolia,  Linn.,  syn.  Stephania  hernandifolia,  Walp. 

b.  Otherwise  called  Kasamardda.  Beng.  Kalkasunda.  Cassia  Sophora,  Linn; 
syn.  Senna  Sophora,  Roxb. 

c.  Cricuma  zerumbet,  Roxb. 

d.  Chenopodium  album,  Linn. 

e.  Marsilea  quadrifolia,  Linn. 

f  Those  medicines  that  set  free  the  scybalae  and  other  contents  of  the  intestines, 
and  discharge  them  without  liquifying  them  at  all,  are  called  Bhedana.— T. 

/,  Called  Gurkamai  in  Bengali ;  Solanum  nigrum,  Linn. 


PART  XII. 


- ^ 

CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


PUBLISHED  BY 

A  YIN  ASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita  (in  original)  with 
Commentaries;  Bengali  and  Hindi  Translator  of  Charaka- 
Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita  ;  Editor  of  Chikitsa- 
Sammilani  (Medical  Journal  in  Bengali)  ;  Prac¬ 
titioner  of  the  Hindu  System  of 
Medicine*  &c.,  &c.,  &c. 


CALCUTTA: 

Printed  by  Girish  Chandra  Chakravarti, 
“Dev  a  Press”,  6i  Mirzapur  Street, 
and 

Published  at 

200,  Cornwallis’  Street. 


(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved . ) 


NOTICE. 


The  English  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  will  be  issued  in  successive 
fascicules  of  four  forms,  Royal  Octavo,  each  ;  1 2  fascicules  will  be  issued 
eveiy  year.  Under  favourable  circumstances,  the  number  of  fascicules  or 
the  number  of  forms  in  each  fascicule  may  be  increased.  For  subscribers 
in  India,  paying  in  advance,  the  charge  is  Rs.  32  for  the  whole  work.  For 
subscribers  in  Europe  and  America,  the  charge  is  £$  in  advance,  post  free. 
The  price  for  each  part  is  one  Rupee.  The  arrear  rate  is  Rs.  40  (in  India) 
]  ay  able  (if  subscribers  wish)  in  instalments  of  Rs.  10  each.  Remittances 
to  be  made  to  the  Publisher,  200,  Cornwallis’  Street,  Calcutta,  by  drafts  on 
Indian  Banks  or  Postal  money-orders. 

OPINIONS. 

“As  we  become  more  familliar  with  this  work  through  the  successive 
parts,  we  are  more  than  ever  impressed  with  the  fact  that  it  should  be  in 
the  hands  of  every  person  interested  in  the  subject  of  medicine  or  pharmacy. 
The  part  before  us  deals  with  a  number  of  interesting  subjects,  one  of 
them  being  the  attribute  of  taste,  which  is  divided  into  sweet,  sour,  saline, 
pungent,  bitter  and  astringent.  To  follow  the  reasoning  of  the  author  as 
portrayed  in  an  essay  on  the  subject  is  a  teal  pleasure  as-wvell  as  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  adding  to  our  knowledge  of  medicine.  Another  instructive  as 
well  as  interesting  portion  is  a  number  of  succinet'y-  expressed  aphorisms 
showing  that  the  ancient  physicians  fully  understood  many  hygienic  laws 
which  we  are  now  learning  as  something  new.’’ — Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist , 
December,  1894. 

“This  work  goes  on  and  we  have  received  the  ninth  fasciculus.  This 
part  embraces  lesson  xxiii.,  which  explains  the  incidents  relating  to  San- 
tarpana,  or  indulgence  in  food  and  acts  that  are  both  sedative '  and 
nutritive  ;  lesson  xxiv.,  treating  of  the  nature  and  characteristics  of  the 
blood  ;  and  lesson  xxv.,  devoted  to  the  discussion  of  the  various  theories 
of  the  creation  of  man. 

The  interest  attached  to  this  really  remarkable  book  increases  as  the 
work  of  the  translator  goes  on.  Each  new  fasciculus  brings  new  surprises  at 
the  knowledge  possessed  by  those  ancient  physicians.  It  possesses  a  fasci¬ 
nation  which, makes  one  read  on,  and  fills  him  with  wonder  and  admiration. 
The  explanatory  foot-notes  by  the  translator  are  indispensable  to  a  thorough 
understanding  of  the  text.” — North  Carolina  h.edical Journal,  Sept.  1894. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS. 

The  contents  of  this  fascicule  are  exceedingly  interesting.  The  properties 
have  been  fully  set  forth  of  the  different  vatieties  of  Ciika  (Potherbs),  Fruits, 
Wine,  Water,  Milk,  the  modifications  of  the  juice  of  the  Sugar-cane,  and 
Prepared  Food. 

To  every  one  living  in  India,  the  observations  of  the  Risliis  on  these  objects 
which  still  constitute  our  daily  food,  cannot  fail  to  excite  the  keenest  interest. 
Most  of  the  Potherbs  mentioned  are  still  used.  The  wines  used  in  ancient 
India  were  of  many  kinds.  That  old  wines  are  superior  in  every  respect  to 
new  ones  well  known  to  rhe  Rishis. 

The  observations  of  water  establish  certain  valuable  truths.  The  foremost 
of  all  waters  is  that  which  falls  from  the  clouds.  The  character  of  the  soil 
through  which  water  flows  tells  on  the  water.  The  peculiarities  of  the  waters 
of  some  of  the  Indian  rivers  have  been  mentioned. 

The  properties  of  milk — of  milk,  that  is,  of  different  animals — are  fraught 
with  a  practical  interest.  The  observations  on  prepared  food  are  of  interest 
to  every  one.  Some  varieties  of  prepared  food  have  ceased  to  be  current 
among  the  people  of  India.  The  student  of  history  will  be  delighted  to  find 
what  the  kinds  of  food  were  upon  which  the  ancient  Hindns  subsisted. 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SA  M HI  TA. 


345 


In  respect  of  energy,  it  is  neither  very  hot  or  very  cold.  It  is 
also  a  Bhedana  (purges  the  intestines  without  producing  watery 
motions).  It  cures  leprosy.!0 

Rajashkaraka(zz)  is  capable  ~oi '  allaying  excitement  of  all  the 
faults.  It  is  also  light.  It  operates  as  an  inspissant  which  dries 
up  the  fluids  of  the  body,  ft  is  especially  applauded  in  diseases 
of  the  Grahani  and  in  piles.91 

Kalafaka(iJ)  is  pungent  in  taste.  It  excites  the  digestive  fire. 
It  destroys  the  effects  of  poison  and  also  dropsical  swellings.  It 
is  light  and  hot,  excites  the  wind,  and  is  dry.  It  is  otherwise 
called  Kaliya9aka." 

Amlachangeri(c)  provokes  the  digestive  fire,  is  hot  in  energy, 
operates  as  an  inspissant,  is  applauded  in  phlegm  and  wind,  and 
is  beneficial  in  diseases  of  the  Grahani  and  the  piles.93 

Upodika(</)  is  sweet  in  taste,  sweet  in  assimilation,  operates  as 
a  Bhedana  (t.e.,  discharges  the  contents  of  the  intestines  without 
producing  watery  motions),  enhances  the  phlegm,  increases  the 
vital  seed,  is  oily,  and  alleviates  vertigo  and  inebriety  of  the  head.94 

Mandukaparni(^),  Vetagra(/),  Kuchela(^),  Vanatiktaka(/z), 
Karkkotaka(z'),  Avalguja(y'),  Patola(i),  £akunadani(/), 


a.  Identified  with  DugdhikS.or  Oxystelma  esculentum  ;  syn.  Asclepias  rosea,  Roxb. 

b.  Otherwise  called  Kaliya-cjaka.  Corchorus  capsularis,  Linn. 

c.  Called  in  Bengali  Amrul.  Oxalis  corniculata,  Linn. 

d.  Bassela  Rubra,  Linn. 

e.  Otherwise  called  Thulkuri.  Hydrocotyle  Asiatica,  Linn. 

/.  The  soft  sprouts  of  the  Calamus  Rotang,  Linn. 

g.  Chakrapani  says  it  is  otherwise  called  Akarnaviddhika.  Some  think  it  is 
identifiable  with  Akn&di  or  Patha.  This  is  evidently  a  mistake. 

h.  Chakrapani  says  this  is  Pathya-sundara  or  Haritaki.  Gangadhara  mistakes 
it  for  Cwetavahala.  The  fact  is.  Vanatiktaka  is  different  from  Vanatiktika.  Pathya- 
sundara  is  its  poetic  name.  Chebulic  myrobalans. 

i.  Otherwise  called  Kakrol.  Momordica  mixta,  Roxb. 

j.  Otherwise  called  Vaguchi  or  Somraja.  Vernonia  anthelmintica,  Roxb. 

k.  Trichosanthes  dioica,  Roxb. 

l.  Otherwise  called  Katurohini.  Picrorrkiza  Kurroa,  Roxb. 


44 


346 


CHAU  AKA -SAM HIT  A. 


Vrishapushpa(tz),  (^arngashtha(^),  Kevuka(c),  Katillaka(^),  Nadl^), 
Kalaya(/),  Gojihva(g'),  Varttaku(/z),  Tilaparnika(z ),  Kulaka(/), 
Karkka^a^),,  Nimva(/),  and  Parppataka(;;«),  alleviate  excitements 
of  phlegm  and  bile.  They  are  bitter  and  cooling.  They  are  pungent 
upon  assimilation. 55-36 

All  kinds  of  f^akas  known  by  the  name  of  Supya(ra),  Phanji(o), 
Chilli(y>),  Kutumvaka(y),  all  varieties  included  under  the  class 
Aluka(r),  Katinjara  with  its  leaves(j),  the  flowers  of  £ana(/), 


a.  The  flowers  of  V3saka,  i.e.,  Justicia  Adhatnda,  syn.  Adhatoda  vasica,  Nees. 

b.  This  is  Kakatikt3,  or  Kunch  in  Bengali.  Abrus  precatorius,  Linn. 

c.  Costus  speciosus,  Linn. 

d.  Chakrapani  says  it  is  otherwise  called  Punarnav3.  Boerhavia  diffusa ,  Linn. 

e.  The  stalk  or  culm  of  any  plant.  In  Bengali,  the  word  'D3nt3'  corresponds 
with  it. 

/.  The  common  pea.  Spisum  Sativum,  Linn. 

g.  Otherwise  called  D3rvipatrik3.  It  is  the  Elephantopus  scaber ,  Linn.,  and  not 
Darvi  or  Berberis  Asiaticus.  Linn. 

h.  Solanum  Melongena,  Linn. 

i.  Gang3dhara  identifies  it  with  Edagaja  or  Chakramardda,  i.e.,  Cassia  Tora, 
Linn.  Chakrapani  observes,  its  vernacular  name  is  Hulhule;  hence,  it  is  Sury3vart3, 
i.e.,  Cleome  pentaphylla. 

j.  Chakrapani  observes  that  some  take  it  for  a  variety  of  Patola.  He 
himself  is  for  identifying  it  with  K3ravelwaka  or  Karala,  i.e.,  Momordica  charantia, 
Linn. 

k.  A  smaller  variety  of  Momordica  mixta,  Roxb. 

l.  Melia  Azadirachta ,  Linn. 

m.  Oldenlandia  herbacea,  D.  C. ;  syn.  Oldenlandia  biflora.  Roxb. 

n.  Chakrapani  says  it  implies  all  kinds  of  C3kas  such  as  M3shaparni  or 
Glycine  debilis,  Roxb. ;  syn.  Teramus  labialis,  Spreng. 

o.  Otherwise  called  Br3hmana-yashtika,  or  B3manhati  in  Bengali.  Siphonantkus 
Indica,  Lamk.  ;  syn.  Clerodendron  Siphonantkus,  R.  Brovin. 

p.  Otherwise  called  Gandav3stuka.  A  small  variety  of  Chenopodium  album, 
Linn. 

q.  Otherwise  called  Dronapushpika.  Leucus  linifolia,  Spreng.  ;  syn.  Phlomis 
Zeylanica,  Roxb. 

r.  Pindalu  and  others  of  the  species.  Dioscorea  globosa,  Roxb. 

s.  Otherwise  called  Kutheraka.  The  holy  basil  or  Ocimum  sanctum,  Ocimum 
gratissimum,  &c. 

t.  The  Indian  hemp.  Crotalaria  juncea,  Linn. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHI TA. 


347 


and  of  ^Slmali(a),  Karvud5ra(3),  Suvarchala(c),  Nlshpava(af), 
Kovidara(^),  Pattura(/),  Chuchuparnika( g),  Kumarajiva(A),  Lot- 
taka^'),  PaIankya(y),Marisha(^),  Kalamva(/))Nalika(?«))  £aurya(«), 
Kusumbha(6>),  Vrikadhumaka(  p),  Laksmana(y),  Prapunnada(r), 


а.  Bombax  Malabaricum  ;  syn.  Bombax  heptaphylla. 

б.  Otherwise  called  Kanchana.  Biuhinla  acuminaia,  Linn. 

c.  Otherwise  called  Suyrabhaktika  or  SuryabhaktS.  The  name  is  applied  to 
Linseed  or  Linum  usitatissimum.  It  also  indicates  the  flower  Pentapetes  phcenicea. 
The  great  difficulty  in  such  cases  is  that  the  same  name  often  stands  for  different 
plants. 

d.  Dolichos  Sinensis,  Linn  ;  syn.  Vigna  catjang,  Endl. 

e.  Otherwise  called  Rakta- Kanchana  or  Kanchana.la.  Bauhinia  variegata,  Linn. 

f.  Otherwise  called  Calincha.  Acheranthes  triandra,  Roxb  ;  syn.  Alternanthera 
sessilis,  R.  Br. 

g.  ChakrapSni  says  it  is  a  variety  of  Nadicha ;  (vide  note  c.  in  page  346). 
Gangadhara  reads  ‘Chunchuparnika’  which,  he  observes,  is  provincially  called 
‘Cheua.’ 

h.  Otherwise  called  JivapSka.  Ccelogyne  ovalis,  Lindl. 

i.  ChakrapSni  says  it  is  otherwise  called  ‘LodSmSvisha.’  GangSdhara  observes 
that  its  provincial  name  is  ‘Lutiya.’  If  it  is  identifiable  with  the  ‘NatiyS-pSka’  of 
Bengal,  which  is  used  extensively,  especially  when  it  is  new,  its  medicinal  name 
would  be  ‘Marisha,’  i.e.,  Amaranthus  oleraceus,  Linn. 

j.  Beta  maritima,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Beta,  Bengalensis,  Roxb. 

k.  Ameranth.es  oleraceus,  Linn.  Gangadhara  says  it  is  a  variety  of  Natiy8.-paka, 
called  ‘DantS-natiya.’ 

l.  Called  in  Bengali  Kalmi.  Ipomasa  reptans,  Poir.  ;  syn.  Convolvulus  repens, 
Willd. 

m.  Hibiscus  canabinus,  Linn. 

n.  Chakrapani  reads  ‘Cauryya’  which  he  says  is  otherwise  called  ‘Masuraka  ;* 
*  e.,  Vicia  lens,  Benth.  ;  syn.  Cicer  lens,  Roxb.  Gangadhara’s  reading  seems  to  be 
incorrect. 

o.  Safflower.  Carthamus  tinctorius,  Linn. 

p.  Chakrap&ni  says  it  is  otherwise  called  ‘Bhumipirisha.’  GangSdhara  says 
that  it  is  otherwise  called ‘Bhumi-mSrisha.’  ‘Marisha’ is  very  probably  a  misprint 
for  ‘pirisha.’  Probably  a  variety  of  Cissampelos  hexandra. 

(J.  All  that  the  Commentators  say  is  that  it  is  a  well  known  plant.  Wilson  does 
not  give  the  name.  Apparently  unidentified.  The  Ayurveddrtha  Chandrika  does  not 
give  the  word. 

r.  Otherwise  called  Edagaja,  i.e.,  Cassia  Tora,  Linn. 


348 


CHA  RA  KA  -  S  A  Mff  l  TA. 


Nalinika(«),  Kutheraka(<5),  Lolika(c),  Yavagaka(^),  Kushman- 
daka'tf),  Avalguja(/),  Yatuka(^),  ^alakalyani(A),  Triparni(z),  and 
PiIuparnika(/‘, — these  varieties  of  £aka  are  heavy  and  dry.  They 
generally  lead  to  obstruction  of  faeces  and  urine  before  digestion. 
They  are  sweet  in  taste,  cooling  in  energy,  and  (after  digestion) 
purge  the  intestines  of  their  contents  without  producing  watery 
motions.  All  these  potherbs  should  be  first  boiled.  The  juice 
should  then  be  pressed  out.  It  should  be  then  mixed  with  medicin¬ 
al  oils  or  Ghee.  To  eat  them  in  this  way  is  praised.37-103 

The  flowers  of  £ana,  of  Kavidara,  of  Karvudara,  and  £almali 
are  inspissants  and  are  much  applauded  in  cases  of  bilious  hemorr¬ 
hage  in  especial.*104 

The  leaves  of  Nyagrodha(yfc),  Udumvara(Z),  Afwattha(^), 
Plaksha(ra),  Padma(o),  and  others,  are  astringent  in  taste,  operate 


a.  The  stalk  of  the  lotus.  If  the  reading  ‘NilinikS’  be  adopted,  it  would  mean 
^'either  Jndigofera  tinctoria,  or  a  species  of  ‘Teori’  or  Turpethum. 

b.  The  holy  basil.  The  different  varieties  of  Ocimum  Sanctum. 

c.  A  variety  of  sorrel  or  Rumex  msicarius. 

d.  Chakrapani  says  it  is  otherwise  called  Kshetravastuka.  A  variety  of  Cheno- 
podium  album. 

e.  Cucurbita  Pepo ,  Roxb. 

f.  Otherwise  called  Somraji.  Vernonia  anthelmintica ,  Willd. 

g.  Chakrapani  says  it  is  a  variety  of  Calaparni ;  in  fact,  Cukla  or  white  Cala- 
parni.  It  is,  therefore,  a  variety  of  Hedysarum  gangeticum,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Desmodium 
gangeticnm,  Burm. 

h.  A  variety  of  Caiinchi.  Achyranthes  triandra,  Roxb.  ;  syn.  Alternanthera 

i.  Chakrapani  says  it  is  otherwise  called  HansapSdika.  Wilson  thinks  it  is 
probably  Clitoria  ternatea.  If  Wilson  be  correct  in  his  surmise,  the  plant  then  would 
be  the  well-known  Apar&jita  Gangalhara  thinks  that  Triparni  is  Hansapadi, 
which,  according  to  Wilson,  is  Cissus  pedatus,  Lnmk.  ;  syn.  Vitis  pedata,  Vahl. 

■  The  latter  is  the  well-known  Godhapadi,  or  Goals  lata  as  called  in  Bengali. 

j.  Otherwise  called  Morataka.  Sanseviera  Zeylanica ,  Willd. 

*  Vide  notes  t  in  p.  346,  e,  l,  and  a  in  p.  347  above. — T. 

k.  Ficus  BengalensiSj  Linn.  ;  syn.  Ficus  Indica,  Roxb. 

l.  Ficus glomerata,  Willd.  ;  syn.  Covellia  glomerata.  Miq. 

m.  Ficus  religiosa,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Urostigma  religiosum ,  Gosp. 

n.  Ficus  infectoria ,  Willd. 

o.  Nelumbium  speciosum,  Linn. 


CHAR  A  KA -SA  MBIT  A. 


349 


as  Stambhanas,  are  cooling,  and  beneficial  for  persons  suffering 
under  diarrhoea  (with  fever)  caused  by  excitement  of  bile.*108 

Vatsadani(fl)  destroys  the  wind.  Gandira(^)  and  Chitraka(c) 
destroy  phlegm,  ^reyasi(^),  Vilwaparni(<?',  and  Vilwapatra(/), 
alleviate  the  wind.  The  potherbs  Bhandi(^)  and  ^atavari(4)j  and 
Vala(z),  and  Jivantika(/),  and  Parvani(i),  and  Parvapushpi(/),  are 
regarded  as  capable  of  alleviating  both  wind  and  bile.10£“107 

The  £aka  obtained  from  Langaliki(«z).and  Uruvuka(w)  is  light 
and  purges  the  contents  of  the  intestines  without  producing  watery 
stools.  It  is  bitter  in  taste. 

The  £aka  obtained  from  Tila(o)  and  Vetasa(y>),  as  also  that 
obtained  from  Panchangula(y),  is  productive  of  wind,  pungent, 
bitter,  and  sour  in  taste,  and  acts  as  a  purgative. 

*  “Stambhana  or  Constipators  are  medicines  which,  from  their  drying,  astringent 
and  cooling  qualities,  and  their  |easy  digestibility,  increase  the  air  and  retain  the 
secretions.” — U.  C.  Dutt’s  Mat.  Med.  of  the  Hindus. 

a.  Otherwise  called  Guduchi.  Tinospora  cordifolia,  Miers.  ;  syn.  Menispermum 
cordifolium,  WiUd. 

b.  Otherwise  called  Camatha.  A  kind  of  potherb  described  as  growing  in 
watery  regions. 

c.  Plumbago  Zeylanica,  Linn. 

d.  Gangadhara  remarks  that  it  is  otherwise  called  Gaja'pippali.  Pathos  officin¬ 
alis,  Roxb.  ;  syn.  Scindapsus  officinalis ,  Schott. 

e.  Otherwise  called  Vilwarjjaka.  A  variety  of  Ocimum  or  Basil. 

/.  Vilwapatra,  the  leaves  of  the  AEgle  marnielos. 

g.  Chakrapani  reads  Shindi,  which,  he  says,  is  a  well-known  potherb.  GangS- 
dhara  reads  Bhandi,  which,  he  says,  has  the  provincial  name  of  Bhanti.  The  name 
Bhandi  is  applied  to  various  trees.  Bhindi  is,  no  doubt,  the  correct  reading.  Not 
indentified. 

h.  Called  also  Catamuli.  Asparagus  racemosus. 

i.  Sida  cordifolia,  Linn. 

j.  Ccelogyne  ovalis,  Linn. 

k.  Otherwise  called  Parva-qaka.  Not  identified. 

l.  Wilson  says  it  is  otherwise  called  ‘Ramaduti.’  Not  identified. 

m.  Gloriosa  superba,  Linn.  The  name  is  spelt  sometimes  as  ‘L&ngalikS.’ 

».  Otherwise  called  Eranda.  Ricinus  communis,  Linn. 

o.  Sesamum  Indicum ,  Linn. 

p.  Calamus  rotang,  Linn. 

q.  Chakrapani  says  it  is  otherwise  called  'Chitrairanda'  or  a  variegated  species 
of  Eranda  or  Ricimis  communis,  Linn. 


35° 


CHA  RAKA-SA  M  HIT A. 


The  £aka  of  Kausumbha(a)  is  dry,  sour,  and  hot.  It  alleviates 
phlegm  and  enhances  bile.103-103 

Trapusha(^),  and  Ervvaruka(c),  are  agreeable  to  the  taste, 
heavy,  obstructive  of  urine  and  faeces,  and  cool.  As  regards 
Trapusha,  it  is  particularly  agreeable  to  the  mouth,  and  dry,  and 
increases  the  urine.  Ripe  Ervvaruka  alleviates  the  pain  caused 
by  a  burning  sensation  of  the  skin,  thirst,  and  fatigue.110 

Alavu(r/)  purges  the  contents  of  the  intestines,  is  dry,  cooling, 
and  heavy. 

Chirbhita(ff)  and  Ervvaruka(y)  are  beneficial,  after  the  same 
manner,  as  purgatives.111 

Kushmanda  has  been  said  to  be  possessed  of  Kshara.  It  is 
sweet  and  sour  and  light.  It  assists  the  discharge  of  both  urine 
and  faeces,  and  alleviates  all  the  faults  if  excited.*110 

Keluta(^),  Kadamva(/«),  Nadimashaka(z'),  and  Ainduka(y),  are 
smooth,  heavy,  and  cooling.  They  are  possessed,  in  particular,  of 
inspissant  qualities.113 

Utpalas(i)  are  astringent  in  taste  and  alleviate  bilious  hemorhage. 


a.  Safflower.  Carthamus  tinctorius,  Linn. 

b.  Cucumis  sativus,  Linn. 

c.  Cucumis  Melo,  Linn. 

d.  Cucurbita  lagenaria,  Willd.  ;  syn.  Lagenaria  vulgaris,  Sering. 

e.  A  variety  of  Cucumis  Melo ,  Linn. 

f.  Vide  note  c  above. 

*  By  Kshara  is  meant  alkaline  ashes. — T. 

g.  Chakrapani  says  the  word  is  applied  to  any  ‘swaduvitapa,’  i.e.,  any  twig  with 
a  new  sprout,  that  is  agreeable  to  the  taste. 

h.  Nauclea  cadamba ,  Roxb.  Some  read  Kalamvika,  i.e.,  Convolvulus  repens, 
Willd. 

i.  Chakrapani  says  it  is  otherwise  called  ‘Bhangi-manavaka.’  Gangadhara  is 
of  opinion  that  what  is  implied  is  otherwise  called  Vardhamanaka.  Not  identifiable. 

j.  Gangadhara  says  its  provincial  name  is  Nikhada.  Not  identifiable.  Chakra¬ 
pani  reads  Aidaka,  called  also  Nishkara. 

k.  Nymphcea,  stellata ,  Linn. 


CH  A  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


35’ 


[Paushkara  seeds(«)  are  alleviative  of  bilious  hemorhage  and 
sores  and  wounds].114 

Tala-pralamva(^)  alleviates  the  pain  caused  by  sores  on  the 
chest.  Kharjjura(c)  and  Tala-fasya^)  are  alleviative  of  bilious 
hemorrhage  and  phthisis.115 

Tarutha(<?),  Visa(/),  ^aluka(^),  Kraunchadana(/«),  KaferukaOQ, 
£ringataka(/),  and  Ankalodya(/f:),  are  heavy,  obstruct  urine  and 
faeces,  and  are  cooling.118 

The  stalks,  flowers,  and  fruits  of  both  Kumuda  and  Utpala  are 
cooling,  agreeable  in  taste  and  astringent,  and  capable  of  exciting 
phlegm  and  wind.*117 

Paushkara  seeds  are  astringent  in  taste,  partially  obstructive 
of  urine  and  faeces,  and  alleviative  of  bilious  hemorrhages.  They 
are,  again,  sweet  in  taste  and  assimilation. t118 

Yunjataka(7)  is  highly  strength-giving  and  cooling  and  heavy 
and  oily.  It  is,  besides,  an  excellent  Tarpana,  and  has  every 

а.  The  seeds  of  the  lotus. 

б.  Both  ChakrapSni  and  Gangadhara  observe  that  what  is  meant  by'this  is  the 
sprout  of  the  palmyra  seed. 

c.  The  fruits  of  the  wild  date  palm  are  meant. 

d.  This  does  not  mean  the  kernel  of  the  palmyra  fruits  or  even  seeds,  but  the  pith 
towards  the  head  of  the  palmyra  tree.  It  is  commonly  called  Tala-m5thi  or  Tala- 

he  id. 

e.  What  is  implied  is  the  Kalhara-kanda,  or  the  bulbous  root  of  the  KalhSra 
or  Nymphcea  lotus. 

f.  The  stalk  of  the  lotus. 

g.  The  bulbous  root  of  the  lotus  and  other  plants  of  the  same  species. 

h.  The  esculent  root  commonly  called  Ghenchu. 

i.  Scirpus  Kysoor,  Roxb. 

j.  Trapa  bispinosa,  Roxb. 

k.  The  bulbous  root  of  a  small  variety  of  lotus. 

*  Kumuda  is  the  Nymphcea  lotus.  Linn.,  and  Utpala  is  the  Nymphcea  stellata, 
L  inn. 

t  This  Verse  occurs  in  many  texts.  GangSihara,  however,  adds 'Paushkarantu- 
bhavedvijam  RaktapittakshatSpaham1  to  the  line  about  Utpalas,  numbered  114 
above.  It  will  be  seen  that  here  in  118,  some  more  attributes  are  added  to  what 
are  said  of  those  seeds  in  the  line  adopted  in  Gang3ihara’s  text. — T. 

l.  The  word  is  YunjStaka  and  not  Munjataka  or  Munja-grass.  The  latter  is 


352 


CH  A  RA  KA  -SA  M  HIT  A. 


capacity  to  be  used  as  a  Vring-hana.  It  is,  again,  alleviative  of 
wind  and  bile,  is  agreeable  to  the  taste,  and  increases  the  vital 
seed.*119 


The  bulbous  root  of  the  Vidari(tz)  prolongs  life  ;  promotes  nutri¬ 
tion  and  corpulency  ;  increases  the  vital  seed  ;  improves  the  voice, 
and  is  applauded  as  a  tonic  for  removing  the  effects  of  age,  increas¬ 
ing  the  vigor  of  healthy  persons,  and  curing  the  ailments  of  the 
sick.  It  also  promotes  the  strength  in  special,  increases  the  urine, 
is  agreeable  to  the  taste,  and  cooling.190 

The  bulbous  root  of  Amvlika(i5)  is  regarded  as  beneficial  in 
ailments  of  the  Grahani  and  in  piles.  It  is  light  and  not  very  hot. 
It  alleviates  phlegm  and  wind,  and  operates  as  an  inspissant.  It 
is  applauded  as  a  remedy  in  cases  of  delirium  tremens.121 

The  potherbs  supplied  by  the  mustard  plant  excite  the  three 
faults  and  obtruct  both  faeces  and  urine. 

Pindalu(c)  should  be  known  as  endued  with  the  same 
properties.  In  consequence,  however,  of  its  possessing  a  bulbous 
root,  it  is  agreeable  to  the  mouth.122 

Excluding  Sarpacchatra(t£),  all  plants  of  the  ^chatra(^)  species 
are  cooling,  provocative  of  inflammation  of  the  Schneiderian 
membrane,  sweet  in  taste,  and  heavy.128 

The  fourth  group  (division)  is  thus  ended  of  Potherbs  including 
both  leaves  and  bulbous  roots. 

never  eaten  by  human  beings  and  does  not  yield  any  bulbous  root.  Chakrapani 
says,  it  is  an  ‘Auttarapathika  root,’  i.e.,  some  bulbous  root  brought  from  the  north, 
probably  Nepal  or  Morung.  As  regards  Tarpana  and  Vring-hana,  vide  pp.  244  45 
arid  250  ante. — T. 

*  Convolvulus  paniculatus,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Bdtatus  paniculata. 

a.  Convolvulous  paniculatus ,  Linn. 

b.  Chakrapani  says  that  Amvlika  is  a  little  shrubby  tree  growing  in  Kamrupa 
and  its  neighbourhood.  Ganga  ihara  believes  that  the  plant  implied  by  AmvliUS  is 
otherwise  called  Amiairaka,  a  sour  variety  of  Ginger.  The  plant  is  difficult  to 
identify. — T. 

c.  Called  in  Bengali  Chubri-Slu.  Dioscorea  globosa,  Rojcb. 

d.  A  particular  variety  of  mushroom. 

e.  Fennels  and  mushrooms. 


'CHAR  A  KA-  SAM  HI  TA.  353 

The  Group  about  Fruits. 

Mridvika(7z)  alleviates  thirst,  burning  sensation  -of  the  skin, 
fever,  asthma,  hemorrhages  caused  by  excitement  of  the  bile, 
sores  and  wounds,  phthisis,  excitement  of  the  wind  and  the  bile, 
Epistasis  or  suppression  of  urine,  harshness  of  voice,  delirium 
tremens,  bitterness  of  the  mouth,  dryness  of  the  mouth,  and.  con¬ 
sumption.  It  promotes  nutrition  and  increases  corpulency ;  it 
enhances  the  vital  seed ;  it  is  sweet  in  taste,  oily,  and  cooling. m-12S 

Kharj j ura(i§)  is  sweet  in  taste.  It  promotes  nutrition  and 
increases  corpulency.  It  enhances  the  .vital  seed.  It  is  heavy  and 
cooling.  It  is  beneficial  in  phthisis,  in  .wounds  caused  by  violence, 
in  burning  pains,  and  in  excitements  of  wind  and  bile.'26 

Phalgu(e)  operates  as  a  Tarpana.  It  promotes  nutrition  and 
.increases  corpulency.  It  is  heavy.  It  obstructs  the  faeces  .and 
urine.  It  is,  again,  cooling. 

Parushaka  and  Madhuka(a?)  are  applauded  in  cases  of  wind 
and  bile.127 

A-mrata(d?)  is  sweet  in  taste.  It  promotes  nutrition  and  increases 
corpulency.  It  operates  as  a  tonic  by  increasing  strength,  it  is 
a  Tarpana.  It  is  heavy.  It  is  endued  with  oily  matter.  It  provokes 
the  phlegm,  is  cooling,  increases  the  vital  seed,  and  becomes 
digested  after  causing  a  sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  stomach  and 
obstructing  faeces  and  urine.123 

The  kernel  of  the  ripe  Tala(/“)  and  the  fruits  of  the  Narikela(^) 

a.  XJvcb  passed,  syn.  Vitis  vinifera. 

5.  Phoenix  sylvestris ,  Roxb.  Wild  date  plam. 

c.  Otherwise  called  Kaka-dumvura.  Ficus  hispida,  Linn.fil  ;  syn.  Ficus  oppositi- 
folict,  Roxb. 

d.  Grewia  Asiatica,  Linn,  and  Bassia  iatifolia,  Roxb. 

e.  Spondias  mangifera ,  Pers.  The  Hog  plum. 

f.  Borassus  flabelliformis,  Linn.  By  ‘Tala-fasya’  is  not  meant  the  article 
called  in  Bengali  ‘Tala^ansa,’  i.e.,  the  soft  pulp  that  grows  into  the  hard  seed  when 
the  fruit  becomes  ripe.  Gangadhara  observes  it  means  T ala-phalani’  i.e.,  the  fruit 
itself.  ‘Siddhani’  indicates  the  ripe  fruits.  When  ripe,  a  reddish  pulp  is  afforded  by 
the  fruit  which  is  much  eaten  in  Bengal. 

g.  Cocos  nucifera,  Linn.  The  cocoa-nut  palm. 


45 


354 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


promote  nutrition  and  increase  corpulency.  They  are  oily  and 
cool,  and  operate  as  tonics  for  increasing  the  strength,  and  are 
sweet  in  taste.129 

Bhavya(flt)  is  sweet-sour-astringent  in  taste.  It  causes  a  heavi¬ 
ness  in  the  stomach  before  digestion,  and  obstructs  feces  and 
urine.  It  is  heavy  and  cooling.  It  alleviates  bile  and  phlegm. 
It  operates  as  air  inspissant  and  dries  up  the  fluids  of  the  body.  It 
corrects  the  taste  of  the  mouth  (removes  flatness  or  dulness  of  the 
tongue).180 

Such  varieties  of  Parushaka(3),  Draksha(c),  Vadara rd),  Aruka(e), 
Karkkandu(/),  and  Likucha(^),  as  are  sour,  provoke  bile  and 
phlegm.181 

ArukaVz),  when  ripe,  is  not  very  hot.  It  is  heavy  and  sweet 
and  generally  agreeable  to  the  mouth.  It  promotes  nutrition  and 
increases  corpulency.  It  is  soon  digested.  It  does  not  excite  any 
of  the  three  faults  much.182 

The  Paravata  fruit(z)  is  of  two  varieties.  One  is  hot  and  the 
other  cooling.  One  is  sweet  and  the  other  is  sour,  (The  hot 
variety  is  sour,  and  the  cooling  variety  is  sweet).  Both  varieties 
are  heavy,  produce  disgust  for  food,  and  extinguish  the  digestive 
fire.188 

The  fruits  of  Ka$maryya(/)  are  said  to  be  slightly  different  in 


a.  Dillenia  Indica,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Dillenia  speciosa,  Thunb. 

b.  Grewia  Asiatica,  Linn. 

c.  Otherwise  called  Midvika.  Vitis  vinifera. 

d.  Zizyphus  Jujiiba,  Linn. 

e.  Wilson  says  it  is  a  drug  brought  from  the  hills.  Chakrapani  observes  it  is 
a  fruit  well-known  in  Kartikapura. 

/.  Chakrapani  observes  it  is  otherwise  ealled  ‘Crigala-vadari.’  It  is  also  called 
‘Crigala-koli.’  Zizyphus  ahoplia,  Mill. 

g.  Otherwise  called  Ma  'ara.  Artocarpus  Lakuch,  Roxb. 

h.  Gangadhara  thinks  that  the  Aluvakhra  is  intended. 

i.  All  that  the  Commentator  says  is  that  this  fruit  is  well-known  in  Kamarupa. 
Wilson  thinks  it  implies  the  fruit  of  the  Annona  reticulata. 

j.  Called  also  Gambhari  Gmelina  arborea,  Linn. 


CHAR  AKA -SAM  HIT  A. 


355 


their  properties  from  Bhavya(a).  Similarly,  the  fruits  of  Tuda(3), 
which  are  sour,  are  slightly  different  in  properties  from  Paru- 
shaka.(c/34 

Tanka(af)  is  astringent-sweet,  excites  the  wind,  is  heavy  and 
cooling.  The  unripe  Kapittha(^)  is  destructive  of  poison  and  also 
of  the  voice  ;  it  is  an  inspissant  that  dries  up  the  fluids  of  the  body. 
It  excites  the  wind.  In  consequence  of  its  being  sweet,  sour,  and 
astringent  in  taste,  and  also  of  its  agreeable  smell,  it  creates  a 
relish  for  food.  If  ripe,  it  alleviates  all  the  faults,  is  destructive 
of  poison,  operates  as  an  inspissant  by  drying  the  fluids  of  the 
body,  and  is  heavy.135-36 

The  ripe  Vilwaf/")  is  difficult  of  digestion.  It  excites  all  the 
faults,  and  generates  wind  of  foul  smell. 

When  unripe,  it  is  oily,  heating,  and  keen.  It  excites  the 
appetite,  and  subdues  both  phlegm  and  wind.137 

The  l.mra(  g ),  when  undeveloped,  produces  hemorrhage  due  to 
excitement  of  the  bile,  and  enhances  the  bile. 

When  ripe,  it  subdues  the  wind,  and  conduces  to  flesh,  vital 
seed,  and  strength.138 

The  Tamvava(/z)  is  generally  astringent-sweet,  heavy,  obstructs 
the  secretions,  and  is  cooling.  It  is  obstructive  of  both  phlegm 
and  bile,  operates  as  an  inspissant  by  drying  up  the  fluids  of  the 
body,  and  creates  wind  largely.139 

Vadara(z')  is  sweet,  oily,  operates  as  a  Bhedana,  and  subdues 


a.  Dillenia  Indies,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Dillenia  speciosa,  Thunb. 

b.  Morus  Indica,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Moms  parwifolia,  Roxb. 

c.  Gre-mia  Asiatica,  Linn. 

d.  Otherwise  called  Nila-kapittha.  A  variety  of  the  elephant  or  wood  apple  ; 
the  Commentators  say  that  it  is  a  native  of  Kashmira. 

e.  The  ordinary  woods  apple.  Feronia  Elcphantum. 

f.  JEgle  Marmelos ,  Linn. 

g.  Mangifera  Indica,  Linn. 

h.  Engenia  j ambolana ,  Lanik. 

i.  Zisyphus  Ju-juba,  Lamk. 


356 


CHAR  AKA -SA  M  HIT  A. 


both' wind  and  biR.  When  dried  up;  it  is  destructive  of  phlegm  and 
wind",  and  is  not  hostile  to  bile.140 

The  fruits  of  the  Simvitika(«)  are  astringent-sweet,  and  cooling, 
and  operate  as  inspissants  by  drying  up  the  fluids  of  the  body.111 

Gangeruka(^),  Karira(c),  Vimbi  d),  Todana(e),  and  Dhanvana(/), 
are  sweet  and  astringent,  cooling,  and  destructive  of  bile  and 
phlegm.142 

Ripe  Panasa(  g),  Mocha  (/z),  and  the  fruits  of  Rajadani(z').,.  are 
agreeable  to  the  taste  though  astringent,,  and.  oily,,  cool,  and-  heavy. 

In  consequence  of  their  astringent  taste  and'  softness  and 
fragrance,  they  add  relish  to  the  taste. 

Lavani(y)  is  capable  of  being  used  as  a  sauce  for  creating 
relish.  It  is  dry  and  creates  winch145-44 

Nipa(^),  £atahvaka(/),  Pilu(»z),  Trihagunyaf^)',  Vi k ank  at  a(o) , an d 
Prachina-amlaka(/),.  alleviate  all  the  faults  and-  destroy  poison.145 


a.  Probably  grains  within  pods.  A  general  name  for  pulses. 

b.  The  fruits  of  the  Nagavala,  as  observed' by  the  Commentators.  The  A  yur- 
vedartha  Chandrikd  explains  Gangeruka  as  the  seeds  called  Goraksha-tandula ; 
while  Gangeruki  is  explained  as  Nagavala  If  it  is  the  latter  that  is  indicated,,  it  is 
then  Hedysatum  I'agopodioides,  Linn. 

c.  Capparis  appytta,  Roxb.  It  is1  described  as  a'  thorny  plant,  growing  in  deserts 
and  fed  upon  by  camels.  The  shoot  of  the  bamboo; is  not  implied’ by  the  word,  here; 

d.  Coccinea  Indica  ;  syn.  Momordica  monodelpha,  Roxb. 

e.  A  variety  of  Dharmana  or  Dhanvana,  i.e.,  Grewia  eldstica,  Roxb. 

f.  Grewia  elastica,  Roxb. 

g.  The  fruits  of  the  Artocarpus  integrifolia,  Linn. 

h.  Plantains. 

4.  Mimusops  Indica ,  D’.  C.  ;  syn.  Mimusops  hexandra ,  Roxb. 

j.  Called  also  Lavali ;  Anona  reticulata ,  Linn. 

k.  Called  also  Kadamva.  Nauclea  cadaniba,  Roxb. 

l.  Chakrapani  reads  ‘Catahva,’  meaning  that  variety  of  fennel  calTed:  Aruthum 
Sown.  Otherwise  called  Mifreya,  Sulpha,  &c. 

m.  Solvadora  Persica ,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Solvadora  Indica ,  Wight. 

n.  Otherwise  called  Ketaki.  The  fruits  of  Pandanus  odoratissimus,  Linn.  fit. 

o.  The  ordinary  Bainch.  Flacourtia  sapida,  Rox.  ;  syn.  Flacourtia  Ramoutchi , 
L’Hurt. 

p.  Otherwise  called  Pa.ii-amlaka.  Flavour tia  cataphracta ,  Roxb. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


357 


Ingudi(«)  is  bitter  and.  sweet;,  oily,  and  hot,  and  subdues  both 
phlegm  and  wind. 

Tinduka(^)  is  obstructive  of  both  phlegm  and  bile,  astringent 
and  sweet,  and'  light.146 

It  should  be  known  that  there  is  every  taste  in  Smlaka(c.). 
except  the  saline.  It  cures  perspiration,  fatty  growth,  phlegm, 
nausea,  and  bile.147 

Vibhitaki(tZ)  is  dry,  agreeable  in  taste,  astringent-sour,  and 
highly  destructive  of  phlegm  and  bile.  It  also  destroys  the’ 
diseases  born  of  the  juicy  elements  in  the  body,  of  blood,  of  flesh, 
and  of  fat.148 

Dadima(^)"is  sour-astringent-sweet,  destructive  of  wind,  operates 
as  aix  inspissant  and  dries  up  the  fluids  of  the  body,  promotes  the 
appetite,  is  oily,  heating,  promotes  cheerfulness  and  brings  about 
relish  for  food,  and;  prevents  phlegm  and  bile..149' 

That  Dadima  which  is  sour  and  dry,  excites  bil'e  and'  wind. 
Those  that  are  sweet,  are  destructive  of  bile.  The  fast  variety  is 
regarded  as  the  best.150' 

Vrikshamlaf  f)  operates  as  an  inspissant,  is  dry  and  heating, 
and  is  applauded  in  (diseases  due  to)  wind  and  phlegm. 

The  fruits  of  Amlika(^),  when  ripe,  are  slightly  different  from 
the  above  in  attributes.151 

Amlavetasa(A).  is  endued  with  similar  properties,  and  operates, 
besides,  as  a  Bhedana  .  by  purging  the  contents  of  the  intestiness 
without  producing  liquid!  stools).152 


a.  Ximenia  AZgyptiaca,  Roxb. 

b.  Diospyros  Rmbryopteris.  Pers.  ;  syn.  Diospyros  glutinosa,  Koenig. 

c.  Phyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn. 

d.  Termindlia  Bellerica,  Roxb. 

e.  Punica,  Granatwm,  Linn. 

f.  The  word  is  used  to  imply  various  things. 

g.  Tamarindus  Indica,  Linn. 

h.  Rumex  Vesica/ius,  Linn.  The  country  sorrel: 


35§ 


CHA  RA  KA  -SA  MHI TA. 


In  ^ula(a'),  disgust  for  food,  constipation  in  respect  of  both 
stools  and  urine,  weakness  of  the  digestive  fire,  delirium  tremens 
(due  to  drink),  hiccup,  consumption,  asthma,  vomiting  and  nausea, 
and  diseases  relating  to  stools,  when  these  arise  from  excitement 
of  wind  and  phlegm,  the  Ke9ara  of  Matulunga(3),  which  is  light, 
is  prescribed. 

As  regards  its  other  parts,  it  is  otherwise.*153-54 

Devoid  of  skin,  the  Karchchura  fruit(c)  creates  relish  for  food, 
promotes  the  appetite,  brings  about  cheerfulness,  and  is  endued 
with  fragrance.  It  is,  besides,  destructive  of  phlegm  and  wind, 
and  is  beneficial  in  asthma,  hiccup,  and  piles.155 

The  fruit  of  Nagaranga(af)  is  sweet  and  slightly  sour.  It 
promotes  cheerfulness  and  adds  relish  to  food.  It  is  difficult  of 
digestion,  alleviates  wind,  and  is  heavy.158 

Batama(tf',  Abhishuka(/),  Akshota'^-),  Mukulaka(A),  and 
Nikochaka(0,  are  heavy,  hot,  oily,  sweet.  Taken  with  the  fruits  of 
Urumana(/),  they  are  strength-giving  and  wind-destroying,  promote 
nutrition  and  corpulency,  enhance  the  vital  seed  and  also  phlegm 
and  bile.157 

Piyala(^)  should  be  known  to  be  similar  to  the  above  in  properties, 
except  as  regards  its  heating  quality. 


а.  Sharp,  shooting  pain  in  the  Thoracic  and  abdominal  regions. 

б.  Citrus  medico, ,  Linn.  The  Ke£ara  implies  the  filaments. 

*  ‘Ceshamatoanyatha:’  i.e.,  parts  other  than  Ke9ara  are  not  light,  being  either 
heavy  or,  applied  to  the  diseases  mentioned,  produce  opposite  consequences. — T. 

c.  Gangadhara  omits  the  verse,  for  good  reasons.  It  is  a  bulbous  root  and  not 
a  fruit.  Otherwise  called  Amraharidra,  or  Circuma  reclinata,  Roxb. 

d.  Citrus  Auranticum,  Linn. 

e.  Amygdalus  Communis ,  Linn, 
f  Called  Pesta. 

g.  Juglans  regia,  Linn. 

h.  Called  also  Danti.  Croton  polyandrum ,  Roxb.  ;  syn.  Baliosperum  montanum. 

i.  A  variety  of  e  above. 

j.  Called  also  Urumala.  Not  identified. 

k.  Buchanania  latifolia,  Roxb. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


359 


The  fruit  of  £leshmataka(«)  excites  phlegm,  is  sweet,  cooling, 
and  heavy.153 

The  fruit  of  Ankota(3),  creates  phlegm,  is  heavy,  obstructs 
urine  and  stools,  and  destroys  the  digestive  fire. 

The  fruit  of  the  (^amii<?)  is  heavy,  hot,  sweet,  dry,  and  des¬ 
tructive  of  pain.159 

Karanja(aO  obstructs  the  passage  of  urine,  and  stools,  and  is 
hostile  to  bile  and  plielgm. 

Amrataka((?),  Danta£atha(/),  Karamarddakaf  ^),  and  Airavata(72), 
should  be  known  as  productive  of  hemorrhages  in  consequence  of 
the  excitement  of  bile.160 

Vartaka(?')  is  destructive  of  wind,  promotes  appetite,  and  is 
pungent-bitter  in  taste. 

The  fruit  of  the  Parkati(y')  should  be  known  as  creative  of 
wind  and  destructive  of  phlegm  and  bile.161 

The  fruit  of  Akshiki(^)  is  destructive  of  bile  and  phlegm,  sour 
in  taste,  sweet-sour  on  assimilation,  and  destroys  also  wind  and 
bile.163 

The  fruits  of  Afwattha(Z),  Udumvara  »«),  Plaksha(ra)  and 

a.  Called  also  Selu.  Cordia  Myxa,  Linn. 

b.  Alangium.  Lamarkii,  Thwaites  ;  syn.  A.  Hexapetalum,  Roxb. 

c.  Some  texts  read  Sami.  Accacia  Suma,  Ham.  ;  syn.  Mimosa  Suma,  Roxb. 

d.  Pongamia  glabra  ;  syn.  Galedupa  Indica,  Lanik. 

e.  The  sour  variety  of  the  Hog  plum  or  Spondias  mangifera,  Pers. 

f.  Chakrapani  thinks  that  Jamvira  is  meant,  i.e.,  Citrus  medica,  Linn.  The 
“Ayurvedartha  Chandrika"  says  that  the  word  implies  both  Kapittha  (Feronia 
Elephanta  or  wood-apple),  or  Karmaranga  i.e.,  Averrhoa  Carambola,  Linn. 

g.  Carissa  Carandas,  Linn. ;  syn.  Carissa  Congesta,  Wight. 

h.  A  sour  variety  of  Nagranga.  Vide  note  d,  p.  358. 

i.  Solanum  Melongena,  Linn. 

j.  Ficus  infectoria,  Willd. 

h.  Chakrapani  observes  that  it  is  a  kind  of  creeper.  The  name,  however,  is  applied 
to  the  tree  called  Dalhergia  Oojeinensis,  Roxb. 

l.  Ficus  religiosa,  Linn. 

m.  Ficus  glomerata,  Willd. 

n.  See  note  j  above. 


360 


CHAR  AKA -SAMHITA. 


Nyagrodha(«)  are  astringent-sweet-sour,  create  wind,  and  are 
heavy.163 

The  kernel  .about  the  skin  ofithe  fruit  of  Bhallataka(i),  is  fiery. 
(In  energy)  it  is  agreeable  and  cooling. 

The  group  in  respect  of  Fruits,  numbering  the  fifth,  is  thus 
spoken  of.  Most  of  these  fruits  are  used  as  food.164 

The  Group  of  Greens. 

Ardraka(tr),  as  also  Vigwabheshaja^),  creates  relish  (for  food), 
promotes  .the  .appetite,  and  increases  the  semen.  Its  juice  is 
directed  to  be  .used  in  retention  -of  urine  and  stools  caused  by 
excitement  of  wind  and  phlegm.165 

Jamvira(^)  .corrects  relish,  promotes  the  ;appetite,  .is  keen, 
possessed  of  fragrance,  and  corrects  the  mouth.  :It  is  destructive 
of  phlegm  and  wind,  operates  as  a  vermifuge,  and  is  a  Pachana 
with  respect  to  food  previously  taken.166 

Mulaka(/),  when  young,  is  destructive  of  all  the  faults.  When 
ripe,  it  excites  all  the  faults.  When  boiled  in  oil,  it  becomes 
destructive  of  the  wind.  Dried  in  the  sun,  it  subdues  both  phlegm 
and  wind.167 


a.  Ficus  Bengelensis,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Ficus  Indica,  Roxb. 

b.  The  correct  reading  is  “Bhallatakanam  &c.”  Hence ‘phalani’  is  understood 
after  ‘Bhallatakanam.’  ‘Tangmansam’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  ‘Taggatam 
mansam,’  i.e.,  the  kernel  about  the  skin.  That  kernel  is  like  fire,  for  it  burns  the 
skin  and  flesh  of  any  one  who  touches  it.  Chakrapani  explains  'Agni-samam’  as 
indicating  ‘Sphotadi-janakatwam,’  i.e.,  capability  to  produce  inflammations  and 
boils,  &c.  'Agreeable  and  cooling’  refer  to  the  energy  or  ‘Viryya’  of  the  kernel. 
Bhallataka  is  Semecarpus  Anacardium,  Linn.  Some  texts  read  incorrectly  ‘Bhalla- 
takasthyagnicamam  &c,’  implying  .that  the  ‘Asthi’  or  seed  of  Bhallataka  is  ,&c. 
This  reading  is  incorrect. — T. 

c.  Ginger.  Zengiber  officinale,  Rose. 

d.  Dry  ginger  is  so  called  because  of  its  extensive  use  as  a  medicament.  Literally, 
the  word  implies  ‘universal  medicine.’ 

e.  Called  ‘Gonda-nebu’  in  Bengal.  Citrus  medica,  Linn. ;  syn.  Citrus  acid, 
Roxb.  Pachana  are  medicines  which  assist  in  the  digestion  of  undigested  food. 

f.  The  garden  radish.  Raphanus  Sativus,  Linn. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


361 


Surasa(«)  alleviates  hiccup,  consumption,  poison,  asthma,  and 
shooting  pains  in  the  sides,  It  excites  the  bile,  destroys  phlegm 
and  wind,  and  corrects  foetid  smell.168 

Yamani(^),  Arjjaka(r),  Sigru(^),  (^aleya(^),  and  Bhrishtaka(y) 
cause  cheerfulness,  create  relish  for  food,  and  induce  the  ejectment 
of  bile.169 

Jalapippali(^),  Gandira(^),  £ringavera(z'),  and  Tumvuru(y'),  are 
keen,  hot,  pungent,  dry,  and  destructive  of  phlegm  and  wind.170 

Bhustrina(£)  is  destructive  of  the  virile  power,  pungent,  dry, 
and  hot,  and  corrects  the  mouth.  Khara£wa(/)  is  destructive  of 
phlegm  and  wind,  and  alleviates  pain  and  diseases  of  the  anal 
duct.171 

Dhanyaka(w),  likewise  Agwagandha(^),  and  Sumukha(y)  create 
relish,  and  are  fragrant.  They  are  not  very  pungent,  and  operate 

a.  A  variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum,  Linn. 

5.  Ptychotis  Ajowan,  D.  C.  ;  syn.  Liqusticum  Ajowan,  Flem. 

c.  A  variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum ,  Linn. 

d.  Moringa  pterygosperma,  Gaertn.  ;  syn.  Hyperdnthera  moringa,  Willd.  The 
fruits,  called  Khada  in  Bengal,  are  used. 

e.  Chakrapani  observes  that  what  is  implied  is  ‘Ch§.nakya-mulam’  which  is 
evidently  the  root  of  Chanak  or  Cicer  arietinum,  Linn. 

f.  Otherwise  called  Rajika,  as  observed  by  Chakrapani.  Black  mustard,  or 
Sinapis  racemosa ,  Roxb. 

g.  Commelyna  salicifolia,  Kunth. 

h.  Chakrapani  observes  that  this  is  of  two  kinds,  vis.,  red  and  white.  The 
white  variety  is  included  in  the  group  of  potherbs.  The  red,  therefore,  is  to  be 
understood  here.  Wilson  says  it  is  a  kind  of  kidney  bean.  The  “Ayurvedartha 
Chandrika"  says  that  it  is  otherwise  known  by  the  name  of  Camatha.  'Gandira1 
implies  a  few  other  vegetables.— T 

i.  Cringavera  is  Ardraka  or  Ginger,  Cringaveri  is  a  root  resembling  the  former. 

j.  Chakrapani  observes  that  this  resembles  Kustumvuru.  It  is  called  in  Bengali 
‘Nepali  Dhaniya.’  Zanthoxylum  alatum ,  Roxb.  ;  syn.  Zanthoxylum  hostile,  Wall. 

h.  Andropogon  Schcenanthus,  Linn. 

l.  A  variety  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan  coming  from  Khorasan.  Chakrapani  says  it 
means  Krishnajiraka  or  Nigella  Sativa ,  Linn. 

m.  Coriandrum  sativum ,  Linn. 

n.  Called  also  Yamani.  Ptychotis  Ajowan,  D.  C. ;  syn.  Ligusticum  Ajowan, 
Flem. 

o.  A  variety  of  Parnasa  or  Tulasi,  i.e.,  Ocimum  sanctum,  Linn. 

46 


362 


CHA  JR  A  KA -SAM  HIT  A. 


as  expectorants,  by  causing  the  evacuation  of  the  faults  (wind, 
bile,  and  phlegm).172 

Grinjanaka(fl:)  operates  as  an  inspissant  (by  drying  up  the 
fluids  of  the  body),  is  keen,  and  beneficial  in  excitements  of  wind 
and  phlegm,  and  piles. 

It  is  also  used  in  producing  perspiration. 

It  should  be  prescribed  for  constitutions  in  which  the  element 
of  bile  is  less  than  usual.173 

Palandu(^)  excites  phlegm,  is  destructive  of  wind,  and  does  not 
alleviate  bile. 

It  is  very  suitable  for  food,  adds  strength,  is  heavy,  enhances 
the  vital  seed,  and  adds  relish  to  food.174 

La9una(c)  is  destructive  of  worms,  the  minor  varieties  of 
leprosy,  and  blotches  or  scabs. 

It  allays  also  the  wind,  and  glandular  enlargements. 

It  is  oily  and  hot,  enhances  the  vital  seed,  and  is  pungent  and 
heavy.175 

The  fruits  of  these,  when  dry,  are  destructive  of  phlegm.* 

Thus  is  completed  this,  the  sixth  Group,  consisting  of  the  Greens. 

Of  the  Group  of  Wines. 

By  nature  all  wine  is  generally  sour  (in  taste)  and  hot,  and  has 
been  said  to  be  sour  on  assimilation. 

It  has  especial  properties.  These  are  being  declared.177 

а.  The  word  is  used  to  imply  turnips  as  also  a  small  variety  of  garlics.  Here 
the  former  is  intended. 

б.  Onions.  Allium  cepa,  Linn. 

c.  Garlics.  Allium  sativum,  Linn. 

*  What  is  stated  of  the  group  called  the  Greens,  should  be  understood  as  apply¬ 
ing  to  the  green  or  fresh  fruits  of  the  same.  Those  very  fruits,  when  dried,  are 
productive  of  other  consequences.  The  words  ‘esham’  and  'et£ni’  (of  these — these) 
refer, as  some  take  them,  to  Grinjanaba.^landu,  and  Laquna.  Chakrapani  takes  them 
in  a  more  comprehensive  sense,  that  is,  as  including  all  the  ‘Haritas’  or  Greens. — T. 


CHAR  A  KA  -SA  MHITl. 


363 


Wines,  being  destructive  of  wind,  are  applauded  in  the  case 
of  persons  that  are  emaciated,  of  those  that  are  afflicted  with 
strangury  or  difficulty  of  micturition,  and  of  those  that  are  afflicted 
with  diseases  of  the  Grahani  and  piles. 

They  are  also  applauded  in  loss  of  milk  and  in  anaemia  or 
loss  of  blood.178 

Wines,  being  destructive  of  wind,  are  beneficial  in  hiccup, 
asthma,  catarrh  or  cold  in  nose,  consumption,  constipation  of  the 
bowels,  disgust  for  food,  vomitting,  and  epistasis  or  suppression 
of  urine.173 

The  wine  called  Jagala,  which  operates  as  an  inspissant,  and  is 
dry  and  hot,  is  beneficial  in  cases  of  sharp  pains,  diarrhoea, 
flatulence,  excitements  of  phlegm  and  wind,  and  in  piles. 

It  cures  intumescence,  and  digests  the  food  that  has  been 
eaten.*180 

The  wine  called  Arishta  is  destructive  of  diseases  caused  by 
excitement  of  phlegm,  such  as  intumescence,  piles,  ailments  of 
the  Grahani,  chlorosis,  anaemia,  and  jaundice,  disgust  for  food, 
and  fevers. 

It  creates  a  liking  for  food  and  increases  the  appetite.f18' 

Wine  manufactured  from  sugar  is  agreeable  to  the  mouth,  is 
a  slight  intoxicant,  fragrant,  destructive  of  all  diseases  of  the  anal 
canal,  aids  digestion,  and  when  old,  promotes  cheerfulness  or 
relish,  and  improves  the  complexion.188 

The  juice  of  the  sugar-cane  when  old  is  regarded  as  possessed 
of  these  virtues  :  it  creates  a  liking  or  relish  for  food  ;  it  promotes 


*  Cula  implies  sharp  pains,  generally  in  the  abdomen,  of  a  cholic  character. 
There  are  many  kinds  of  Cula.  Pravahika  implies  diarrhoea.  ‘Atopa’  is  flatulence  in 
general. — T. 

t  Arishta  cures  the  diseases  mentioned  when  they  are  caused  by  excitements  of 
the  phlegm.  ‘Rochana’  is  that  which  simply  creates  a  liking  for  food.  ‘Dipana’  is 
that  which  promotes  or  increases  the  appetite  without  helping  the  digestion  of 
undigested  food. — T. 


364 


CM  A  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


the  appetite  ;  it  causes  cheerfulness  ;  and  is  beneficial  in  swellings 
and  intumescences  and  piles.*188 

The  cool  (fresh)  juice  of  the  sugar-cane  digests  the  food  that 
is  eaten  ;  it  is  destructive  of  constipation,  improves  the  voice  and 
complexion  ;  operates  as  an  attenuant  by  removing  bad  humours, 
and  is  beneficial  in  swellings  and  intumescences  and  also  piles.t131 

The  wine  called  Gauda  (manufactured  from  molasses),  when 
cleaned,  purges  the  contents  of  the  intestines  (without  producing 
watery  motions)  ;  clears  the  stomach  of  the  wind  ;  operates  as  a 
Tarpana  and  promotes  the  appetite.135 

The  wine  called  Akshiki  (manufactured  from  the  fruits  called 
Terminalia  Bellerica,  Roxb.)  are  beneficial  in  cases  of  chlorosis, 
anaemia,  and  jaundice,  as  well  as  of  boils  and  wounds.  It  operates 
also  for  promoting  appetite.185 

The  wine  called  5.sava  is  very  intoxicating,  destructive  of  wind, 
and  agreeable  to  the  mouth.187 

The  wine  called  Madhwasava  is  very  keen  in  energy  and 
purges  the  contents  of  the  intestines. 

The  wine  called  Maireya  is  sweet  and  heavy.183 

The  wine  manufactured  from  Dhataki  ( Woodfordia  floribunda, 
Salisb ;  syn.  Grislea  tomentosa,  Roxb.)  promotes  cheerfulness  and 
relish,  is  dry,  creates  taste  for  food,  and  promotes  the  appetite.189 

Like  the  wine  called  Madhwika  (manufactured  from  honey) 
is  that  manufactured  from  Uvae passos  and  the  juice  of  the  sugar¬ 
cane.  The  latter,  again,  is  not  very  hot.190 

The  wine  manufactured  from  honey  promotes  relish  for  food, 
increases  the  appetite,  creates  cheerfulness,  adds  to  strength,  and 
is  destructive  of  bile.  Further,  it  cures  constipation,  is  destructive 
of  phlegm,  and  slightly  excites  the  wind.191 

*  Pakkarasa  is  a  technical  term,  by  which  the  juice  of  the  sugar-cane,  when  old 
or  properly  fermented  for  a  long  period,  is  known. — T. 

+  “Lekhana  or  attenuants  remove  bad  humours  and  altered  constituents  of  the 
body  by  thinning  them  gradually  and  clearing  the  system  of  them.”  U,  C.  Dutt’s 
Mat.  Med.  of  the  Hindus, 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  M  HIT  A, 


365 


The  wine  manufactured  from  the  diverse  varieties  of  Yava 
( Hordeum  hexastichum,  Linn.),  with  their  Manda  or  barm,  is  dry 
and  hot;  and  provocative  of  wind  and  bile.  It  is,  again,  heavy, 
and  is  not  digested  without  producing  sensation  of  heaviness 
in  the  stomach  and  temporarily  suppressing  both  faeces  and  urine. 
That  called  Madhulaka  (viz.,  manufactured  from  a  particular 
variety  of  Yava  which  is  so  called)  is  provocative  of  phlegm.193 

The  wines  called  Sauviraka  and  Tushodaka  promote  the 
appetite,  assist  the  digestion,  are  destructive  of  thoracic  diseases 
as  also  chlorosis,  anaemia,  and  jaundice,  and  of  worms.  They  are, 
again,  beneficial  in  diseases  of  the  Grahani  and  in  piles.  They, 
further,  operate  as  Bhedanas  (by  purging  the  intestines  without 
producing  watery  motions).193 

The  sour  gruel  of  rice,  by  touch,  is  alleviative  of  such  fevers  as 
are  characterised  by  a  burning  sensation  of  the  skin.  If  drunk,  it 
alleviates  wind  and  phlegm,  cures  constipation,  operates  as  a 
purgative,  and  promotes  the  appetite.194 

Generally,  all  new  wines  are  heavy  and  excite  the  faults. 

When  old,  they  are  corrective  of  the  ducts,  promote  the 
appetite,  are  light,  and  correct  relish.195 

In  such  a  state  they  induce  cheerfulness  and  joy,  are  nourish¬ 
ing,  increase  the  strength  ( by  operating  as  tonics  )  and  are 
alleviative  of  fear,  grief,  and  fatigue. 

They  also  induce  self-reliance,  energy,  brilliancy  of  intellect, 
satisfaction,  nourishment,  and  strength.196 

Wines,  used  duly  and  reasonably  by  good  men,  become  bene¬ 
ficial  as  nectar.197 

Thus  has  been  declared  the  seventh  Group  on  the  subject  of 
Wines. 


The  Group  on  Waters. 

The  water  that  falls. from  the  sky,i.e.,  from  the  clouds,  is  of  one 
kind.  Falling  and  fallen,  it  takes  the  qualities  of  time  and  place.198 


366 


CHA  RAKA  -SA  M HIT  A. 


While  falling  from  the  sky,  coming  in  contact  with  the  sun,  the 
moon,  and  the  atmosphere,  eacli  of  which  is  dependent  upon 
season  (for  its  own  virtues),  water  becomes  possessed  of  the 
attributes  of  being  cool  or  hot,  or  oily,  or  dry,  &c.,  all  of  which 
appertain  to  the  earth.199 

By  nature,  the  water  that  falls  from  the  sky  is  possessed  of 
these  six  attributes,  viz.,  cool,  pure,  beneficial  (to  the  body),  clear, 
without  any  filth  (or  transparent),  and  light. 

Fallen  from  the  sky,  it  depends  for  its  properties  upon  the 
vessel  or  receptacle  which  holds  it.200 

The  water  that  falls  on  a  soil  that  is  white  becomes  possessed 
of  astringent  taste. 

That  which  falls  on  soil  of  a  pale  yellowish  hue  becomes 
possessed  of  a  bitter  taste. 

That  which  falls  on  soil  of  a  tawny  color  becomes  endued  with 
alkaline  ashes. 

That  which  falls  on  saline  soil  becomes  possessed  of  saline 
taste.  201 

That  which  falls  on  mountainous  beds  becomes  possessed  of  a 
pungent  taste. 

That  which  falls  on  a  soil  made  of  black  earth,  becomes  sweet. 

These  are  the  six  properties  of  water  as  dependant  on  the  kind 
of  soil  on  which  it  falls.202 

The  water  that  is  poured  by  the  deity  of  the  clouds,  that  which 
is  obtained  from  (dissolved)  hail,  and  that  from  (dissolved)  snow, 
have  an  unmanifest  taste.1*208 

That  water  which,  created  by  the  deity  of  the  clouds,  falls  from 
the  sky  and  is  held  in  such  vessels  as  have  been  directed  to  be 


No  particular  taste  attaches  to  such  water. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  367 

used  for  the  purpose,  is  called  Amdra  water  by  the  wise.  That  is 
the  foremost  of  all  waters  and  deserves  to  be  drunk  by  kings.204 

All  the  properties  of  water,  in  season  and  out  of  season,  are 
now  being  mentioned. 

That  water  which  is  slightly  astringent-sweet,  exceedingly 
subtle,  clear,  and  light,  not  dry,  and  which  never  deposits  anything 
at  the  bottom,  is  regarded  as  the  best.205 

The  water  that  belongs  to  the  season  of  rains  is  heavy,  leaves 
a  deposit  below,  is  sweet,  and  new.208 

The  water  that  falls  in  autumn  is  generally  subtle  (thin),  light, 
and  never  deposits  anything  at  the  bottom.  That  water  is  applaud¬ 
ed  for  use,  in  the  four  kinds  of  food,  by  those  persons  that  are 
very  delicate,  and  those  also  that  take  oily  food  or  food  in  copious 
measure.*207 

That  which  falls  in  the  season  of  dews  is  slightly  lighter  than 
the  above.  That  water,  again,  is  alleviative  of  phlegm  and  wind. 

The  water  that  falls  in  spring  should  be  known  to  be  astringent- 
sweet  and  dry.209 

The  water  of  summer  leaves  no  deposit.  This  is  certain. 

At  times  when  indications  of  more  than  one  season  appear, 
the  water  that  is  poured  by  the  clouds  becomes  productive  of  faults. 
There  is  no  doubt  in  this.210 

By  kings  and  those  that  are  equal  to  kings,  as  also  by  men  of 
delicate  constitutions,  the  water  carefully  collected  at  autumn 
should  be  used.f211 

Rivers  whose  waters  are  obstructed  in  their  course  by  rocks, 
by  constant  beating  against  them,  become  clear  and  transparent. 

*  The  four  kinds  of  food  are  food  that  is  swallowed,  that  is  chewed,  that  is 
lapped,  and  that  is  drunk. — T. 

f  Verses  201  to  211  do  not  occur  in  all  texts.  Chakrapani  regards  them  as 
interpolations.  Gangadhara,  though  doubting  their  genuineness,  includes  them  in 
his  text  and  comments  upon  them.  As,  however,  these. verses  enunciate  some  quaint 
propositions,  I  have  thought  it  proper  not  to  reject  them. — T. 


3&8 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


Rivers  that  have  their  sources  in  the  Himavat  mountains  are 
sacred  and  resorted  to  by  the  deities  and  the  Rishis.  Their  waters 
are  worthy  of  being  used.212 

Rivers  that  flow  over  rocks  and  sands,  have  clear  and  trans¬ 
parent  waters.  Rivers  that  have  their  source  in  the  Malaya 
mountains  have  waters  that  resemble  nectar  itself.218 

Those  rivers  that  flow  westwards  are  full  of  waters  that  are 
clear  and  transparent  and  worthy  of  being  used. 

Those  that  fall  on  the  eastern  ocean  have  generally  slow 
currents.  Their  waters  are  heavy.214 

The  waters  of  those  rivers  that  have  their  rise  in  the  Paripatra 
mountains,  as  also  those  that  have  their  source  in  the  Vindhya  and 
Sahya  mountains,  cause  diseases  of  the  head  and  thorax,  the 
different  kinds  of  leprosy,  and  elephantaisis.215 

Rivers,  when  they  carry  the  waters  of  the  rainy  season,  become 
stained  with  mud  and  worms  and  the  filth  of  snakes  and  rats. 
Hence  they  are  capable  of  exciting  all  the  faults.218 

The  waters  obtainable  from  tanks,  wells,  ponds,  springs,  large 
tanks  or  lakes,  and  rillets  escaping  from  fountains,  should  be 
regarded  as  possessed  of  the  virtues  and  faults  that  attach  to 
marshy  soil,  or  rocky  land,  or  arid  deserts.217 

Water  that  is  slimy,  or  full  of  worms,  or  foetid  in  consequence 
of  (putrified)  leaves  and  and  moss  and  mire,  that  has  lost  its  color 
and  taste,  and  that  has  become  thick  and  stinking,  is  not 
beneficial.218 

The  water  obtainable  from  the  ocean  is  saline.  It  is  provoca¬ 
tive  of  the  three  faults,  and  possesses  a  bad  odor.219 

Thus  has  been  declared  the  eighth  Group,  viz.,  that  about  Waters. 

The  Group  about  Milk. 

The  milk  of  the  cow  has  these  ten  properties,  viz.,  it  is  sweet, 
cool,  mild,  oily,  copious,  fine,  slimy,  heavy,  not  pungent,  and  free 
from  impurities,220 


CHAR  A  KA -SAMHITA.  369 

In  consequence  of  the  possession  of  these  properties  and  of  their 
parity  with  the  element  called  ojas,  vaccine  milk  enhances  ojas. 
Vaccine  milk  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  prolong  life.  It 
has  also  been  said  to  operate  as  a  Rasayana.221 

The  milk  of  buffaloes  is  heavier  than  vaccine  milk  and  cooler. 
Being  excessively  oily,  such  milk  produces  sleeplessness.  It  is 
beneficial  for  those  persons  whose  digestive  fire  is  keen.222 

The  milk  of  camels  is  dry  and  hot.  It  is  slightly  saline  and 
light.  It  has  been  recommended  for  alleviating  excitements  of  the 
wind  and  the  phlegm,  in  cases  of  retention  of  urine,  worms,  intu¬ 
mescence,  stomachic  and  abdominal  disesases,  and  piles.228 

The  milk  of  animals  that  are  of  undivided  hoofs  operates  as  a 
tonic,  strengthens  the  muscles,  is  hot,  and  sour,  with  a  saline  taste, 
and  dry,  and  alleviates  wind  generated  in  the  blood  and  other 
elements  of  the  body.*224 

The  milk  of  the  goat  is  astringent-sweet,  cool,  operates  as  an 
inspissant,  and  is  light.  It  alleviates  hemorrhage  due  to  excite¬ 
ments  of  the  bile,  and  diarrhoea.  It  cures  also  phthisis  and  fever.22* 

The  milk  of  sheep  is  very  hot.  It  causes  hiccup  and  asthma, 
and  excites  the  bile  and  the  phlegm. 

The  milk  of  the  elephant  is  a  tonic.  It  is  also  heavy,  and 
great!}7  strengthens  the  muscles.226 

Human  milk  prolongs  life,  promotes  nutrition  and  corpulency, 
is  capable  of  being  properly  assimilated  by  the  human  system, 
operates  as  an  emollient,  is  used  as  a  cerebral  purgative  in  hemorr¬ 
hages  due  to  excitements  of  the  bile,  and  acts  as  a  sedative  in  the 
cases  of  persons  suffering  from  inflammation  of  the  eye.222 

Curds  create  relish  for  food,  promote  the  appetite,  increase 
the  semen,  operate  as  emollients,  and  increase  strength.  On 
assimilation  they  become  sour  and  hot.  They  are  destructive  of 
the  wind,  and  regarded  as  an  auspicious  object.  They  also  promote 
nutrition,  adding  to  the  bulk  of  the  body.228 

*  CakhS  is  explained  by  the  Commentators  as  implying  blood  and  other  con¬ 
stituents  of  a  like  nature. — T. 


74 


370 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  MHITA. 


Curds  are  applauded  as  remedies  in  inflammations  of  the  Schnei¬ 
derian  membrane  with  loss  of  smell,  in  diarrhoea,  in  fits  of  cold,  in 
obstinate  fevers,  in  disgust  for  food,  in  difficulty  of  micturition,  and 
in  emaciation.2*9 

Curds  are  generally  harmful  in  autumn,  summer,  and  spring. 

They  are  also  harmful  in  all  ailments  that  arise  from  bilious 
hemorrhage  and  phlegm.230 

Those  curds  that  are  not  properly  formed  (congealed)  are  pro¬ 
vocative  of  the  three  faults. 

When,  however,  properly  formed,  they  are  destructive  of  wind 
and  increase  the  semen. 

The  cream  of  curds  is  destructive  of  phlegm  and  wind. 

The  barm  of  curds  cleanses  all  the  ducts  of  the  body.231 

Butter-milk  should  be  administered  in  cases  of  intumescence, 
piles,  ailments  of  the  Grahani,  difficulty  of  micturition,  stomachic 
and  abdominal  diseases,  disgust  for  food,  in  maladies  brought 
about  by  excessive  oiling,  chlorosis,  anaemia,  and  jaundice,  and  in 
vomiting.232 

Cheese,  newly  extracted,  operates  as  an  inspissant,  promotes 
the  appetite,  induces  cheerfulness  and  relish,  and  alleviates 
diseases  of  the  Grahani,  piles,  facial  paralysis,  and  disgust  for 
food.233 

Ghee  strengthens  the  memory  and  the  understanding,  the 
digestive  fire,  the  element  called  ojas,  phlegm,  and  serum.  It  is 
destructive  of  wind,  bile,  poisons,  intoxication  and  insanity,  waste, 
ill-luck,  and  fever.  It  is  the  foremost  of  oily  substances,  cool,  and 
sweet  in  both  taste  and  assimilation.  When  mixed,  agreeably  to 
the  ordinance,  with  the  proper  substances,  it  becomes  endued  with 
a  thousand  kinds  of  energy,  and  operates  in  a  thousand  ways.234-3* 

Old  Ghee  alleviates  vertigo,  delusions,  epilesy,  intumescence, 
insanity,  ailments  due  to  poisons,  fevers,  and  sharp  pains  in  the 
genital  organs  (of  women),  the  ears,  and  the  head.23' 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHITA. 


37: 


The  Ghee  prepared  from  the  milk  of  goats,  sheep,  and  buffaloes 
should  be  regarded  as  possessing  the  same  virtues  as  the  milk 
from  which  it  is  prepared- 

Piyusha(a),  Morata(^),  and  Kilata(c),  and  such  other  varieties, 
are  very  beneficial  for  such  persons  as  have  a  keen  digestive  fire 
or  as  sleep  very  little. 

These  are  heavy,  operate  as  emollients,  increase  the  semen, 
promote  nutrition  and  corpulency,  and  are  destructive  of  wind.®37-38 

Inspissated  butter-milk  is  clear,  heavy,  and  dry.  It  dries  up  the 
humours  or  fluids  of  the  body. 

Thus  has  been  declared  the  ninth  Group  consisting  of  the 
different  kinds  of  Milk.839 

The  Group  about  Sugar-cane. 

The  juice  of  the  sugar-cane,  if  the  stalk  is  chewed  with,  the  aid 
of  the  teeth,  increases  the  semen,  is  cool,  purges  the  intestines,  is 
oily,  promotes  nutrition  and  corpulency,  is  sweet,  and  excites  the 
phlegm. 

If  the  juice  is  taken  after  extraction  with  the  aid  of  some 
machine,  it  leads  to  a  burning  sensation  of  the  skin.840 

That  variety  of  sugar-cane  which  is  known  by  the  name  of 
Vansaka  is  superior  to  that  which  is  called  Paundra,  in  properties 
of  coolness,  purity,  and  sweetness. 

Treacle  is  aboundantly  productive  of  worms,  marrow,  blood, 
serum,  and  flesh.841 

Thick  black  treacle,  called  Kshudra,  that  in  which  only  a 
fourth  part  of  the  juice  of  sugar-cane  remains,  that  in  which  a 
third  thereof  remains,  and  that  in  which  only  half  remains,  possess 
the  property  of  heaviness  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  mentioned, 
{i.e.j  the  first  is  heavier  than  the  second,  the  second  than  the  third, 
and  the  third  than  the  fourth). 

a.  The  milk  of  a  cow  during  the  first  seven  days  after  calving. — T. 

b.  Milk  of  seven  days’  standing,  that  is,  when  it  has  lost  its  milky  nature. _ T. 

c.  Inspissated  milk,  i.e.,  coagulated  with  the  aid  of  some  sour  substance. — T. 


372 


CM  A  RA  KA  -SA  MHI TA. 


Treacle  that  has  been  washed  creates  less  impurities  than  the 
others.*242 

Clearer  than  treacle  are  Matsyandika,  and  Khanda  and  Sarkara 
(so  that  the  second  is  superior  in  clearness  to  the  first,  and  the 
third  to  the  second).  The  coolness,  again,  of  these  is  proportionate 
to  their  clearness.f243 

All  varieties  of  sugar  manufactured  from  treacle,  are  oily, 
increase  the  semen,  and  are  beneficial  for  persons  that  are  weak  or 
that  have  sustained  injuries. 

The  sugar  that  is  called  Yasha  is  bitter  in  taste,  as  also 
astringent-sweet,  and  possessed  of  cooling  properties.:]:244 

The  sugar  made  from  honey  is  dry,  alleviates  vomitting  and 
diarrhoea,  and  operates  as  a  Cchedana.§ 

AH  kinds  of  sugar  are  beneficial  in  thirst,  hemorrhages  due  to 
excitements  of  the  bile,  and  in  all  diseases  characterised  by  a 
burping  sensation  of  the  skin.215 

Makshika,  Bhramara,  Kshaudra,  and  Pauttika  are  the  four 
varieties  of  honey. 

Among  them  all,  Makshika  is  the  foremost.  In  consequence  of 
its  speciality,  Bhramara  is  heavy.||245 

The  honey  called  Makshika  is  of  the  color  of  oil. 

*  Impurities,  that  is,  in  the  form  of  faeces  and  other  excreta  that  escape  from  the 
body. — T. 

t  MatsyandikS  is  coarse  sugar.  When  refined  a  little,  it  is  called  Khanda.  The 
latter,  when  further  refined,  is  called  Sarkara  or  sugar. — T. 

t  YSsha  is  sugar  manufactured  from  the  decoction  of  DurSlabhS.  or  Hedysarum 
Alhagi,  Linn. ;  syn.  Hedysarum  Maurorum,  D.  C. 

§  ‘‘Cchedana  are  medicines  which  remove  by  force,  as  it  were,  and  discharge 
from  the  body,  adherent  phlegm  or  other  humours.  Emetics,  expectorants,  errbines, 
caustics,  &c.  would  probably  come  under  this  head.” — U.  C.  Dutt’s  Mat.  Mad.  of  the 
Hindus. 

I!  Chakrapani  observes  that  Makshika  honey  is  that  which  is  gathered  by  the 
ordinary  bee  of  a  pale  color.  BhrSmara  is  that  gathered  by  those  bees  which  are 
called  Bhramara.  Kshaudra  is  gathered  by  bees  of  a  very  small  variety.  Pauttika 
is  gathered  by_that  variety  of  pale  bees  which  are  large  in  size. — T. 


CHAU  AKA -SA  MHITA. 


373 


The  honey  that  is  of  a  white  color  is  called  Bhramara. 

That  which  is  called  Kshaudra  should  be  known  to  be  of  a 
tawny  hue. 

That  called  Pauttika  is  of  the  color  of  Ghee.247 

The  general  properties  of  honey  are  these  — it  is  provocative 
of  the  wind  ;  heavy  and  cooling  ;  alleviates  phlegm  and  hemorr¬ 
hages  caused  by  excitement  of  the  bile  ;  it  unites  fractures ;  it 
operates  as  a  Cchedana  ;  it  is  dry,  and  astringent-sweet  in  taste.248 

Honey,  if  taken  in  a  heated  state,  kills  the  person  taking  it.  If 
taken  also  by  one  who  has  been  afflicted  by  heat  or  who  is  of  a 
hot  constitution  by  nature,  it  brings  about  death.  This  is  due  to 
the  presence  of  poison  in  it. 

In  consequence  of  its  being  heavy  and  dry  and  astringent 
and  cooling,  honey,  if  taken  in  a  very  small  measure,  becomes 
beneficial.249 

There  is  nothing  more  painful  and  difficult  of  treatment  than 
mucus  generated  in  the  stomach  through  (excessive  use  of)  honey. 
That  disease  soon  kills  the  patient,  like  poison,  in  consequence  the 
conflicting  nature  of  the  treatment  to  be  followed. 

When  mqcus  is  generated,  heating  operations  should  be 
followed.  Such  operations,  however,  in  the  case  of  mucus  generated 
by  (excessive  use  of)  honey,  become  hostile.  Mucus,  therefore, 
due  to  honey,  is  a  very  serious  disease,  and  soon  brings  about  death 
like  poison.*250-51 

In  consequence  of  the  presence  of  diverse  essences  in  honey,  it 
is  exceedingly  assimilable  (with  other  objects).t 

*  The  sense  is  this  :  Honey  is  heavy.  If  taken  in  copious  measure,  it  generates 
mucus  in  the  stomach.  The  treatment  is  very  difficult,  for  all  medicines  that  are 
destructive  of  mucus  must  be  of  heading  virtues.  Honey,  however,  is  heating.  The 
ordinary  medicines,  therefore,  aggravate  the  disease  brought  about  by  honey.  If 
cooling  medicines  are  administered,  they  become  hostile  to  the  mucus  generated  by 
the  copious  use  of  honey.  Hence,  the  treatment  of  such  a  disease  is  exceedingly 
difficult ;  while  its  progress  is  so  rapid  that  it  brings  about  death  before  it  can  be 
stayed. — T. 

t  Some  texts  incorrectly,  read  ‘himam  madhu.’  The  correct  reading  is 
‘param’. — T. 


374 


CHA  RAKA -SA  MH I TA. 


Thus  is  declared  the  tenth  Group  which  consists  of  the  diverse 
modifications  of  the  Sugar-cane  or  substances  that  resemble  it  in 
nature.*52 

The  Group  about  Prepared  (cooked)  Food. 

Liquid  food,  vie.,  that  which  is  drunk,  alleviates  hunger,  thirst, 
fatigue,  weakness,  and  diseases  of  the  stomach. 

It  generates  sweat  and  excites  the  digestive  fire. 

It  makes  the  wind  and  the  faeces  move  downwards  in  their 
natural  direction.*55* 

Vilepika  operates  as  a  Tarpana,  and  Grahi.  It  is,  besides,  light 
and  promotes  cheerfulness.f 

The  barm  (of  barley  or  rice)  excites  the  digestive  fire,  and 
induces  the  wind  to  move  (downwards)  in  its  natural  course.*51 

It  softens  all  the  ducts,  and  generates  sweat. 

In  the  case  of  persons  who  have  fasted  or  who  have  been 
purged,  or  of  those  who  are  thirsty  after  the  oils  drunk  by  them 
have  been  digested,  barm,  in  consequence  of  its  power  of  exciting 
the  digestive  fire  and  of  its  being  light,  becomes  the  support  of  life. 

It  alleviates  thirst  and  diarrhoea,  and  restores  the  diverse  ele¬ 
ments  of  the  physical  organism  to  harmony.*55-56 

The  Manda  of  fried  paddy  excites  the  digestive  fire,  and  alle¬ 
viates  burning  of  the  skin,  and  swoons. 

The  Manda  of  fried  paddy,  properly  prepared  and  purified, 
should  be  given  to  persons  whose  digestive  fire  is  mild,  or  whose 
digestive  fire  is  excited  unequally,  or  to  children,  and  aged, 
persons,  and  women,  and  persons  that  are  of  delicate  constitutions. 

It  alleviates  hunger  and  thirst  quickly.  It  is  a  good  regimen. 

for  ‘himam.’  ‘Yogavahi’  is  explained  by  GangSdhara  as  assimilable.  The  fact  is, 
honey  takes  the  properties  of  those  substances  with  which  it  is  mixed. — T. 

*  Gangadhara  observes  that  ‘ptya’  indicates  thin  gruel  of  barley. — T. 
t  ‘Vilepika’  is  understood  in  the  sense  of  rice-gruel.  Tarpana  is  that  which 
soothes  and  promotes  nourishment.  Grahi  is  something  that  dries  up  the  fluids  of 
the  body. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


375 


It  expels  the  impurities  of  such  persons  as  have  undergone  a 
course  of  corrective  treatment.**57-53 

Rice,  well  boiled,  properly  divested  of  the  water  in  which  it  has 
been  boiled,  and  then  adequately  washed,  and  while  still  warm,  is 
regarded  as  food  that  is  light. 

In  constitutions  injured  by  poison  or  characterised  by  excess  of 
phlegm,  fried  rice  is  much  desired.*53 

Rice,  boiled,  not  divested  of  the  water  in  which  it  has  been 
boiled,  unwashed,  and  cold,  is  regarded  as  food  that  is  heavy.*60 

Rice  boiled  with  meat,  potherbs,  fat,  oil,  Ghee,  marrow,  and 
fruits,  forms  food  that  operates  as  a  tonic,  acts  as  Santarpana, 
promotes  cheerfulness  and  relish,  is  heavy,  and  increases  the  vital 
seed.*61 

Rice  cooked  with  Masha  ( Phaseolus  radiatus,  Roxb.J,  sesame, 
milk,  Mudga  (Phaseolus  Mungo,  Linn.),  is  endued  with  the  same 
attributes. 

Kulmashas(a)  are  heavy,  and  dry,  excite  the  wind,  and  purge 
the  intestines  without  producing  watery  motions.*6* 

As  regards  those  kinds  of  prepared  food  that  are  made  from 
Saupya(3),  or  wheat,  or  barley,  the  physician  should  declare  their 
heaviness  and  lightness  according  to  (the  properties  of)  their 
constituent  ingredients.*56 

Of  unprepared  soup,  prepared  soup,  thin  (well-cooked)  juice  of 
flesh,  sour  supa,  and  supa  that  is  not  sour,  it  should  be  known  that 
each  is  heavier  than  that  which  precedes.*64t 

*  Some  texts  read  ‘Kshutpip&rSsahah’  which  is  incorrect.  The  correct  reading, 
of  course,  is  'KshutpipasSpahah  ‘9uddhan5m’  implies  such  persons  as  have  been 
properly  purged  and  as  have  undergone  the  treatment  called  Corrective.  Vide  Section 
XV,  ante.—T. 

3.  Powdered  barley,  half  boiled  in  warm  water,  and  then  made  into  calces  is 
called  ‘KulmSsha.’ — T. 

b.  By  ‘prepared  food’  is  meant  such  food  as  cakes,  &c.  ‘Supya’  means  all  varieties 
of  ‘D51,’  such  as  Phaseolus  radiatus,  Roxb.  ;  Phaseolus  Mungo,  Linn.  ;  &c. —  T. 

t  'Unprepared  soup’  means  such  soup  as  has  been  prepared  with  only  oil  or  Ghee 
and  salt,  but  in  which  no  spices  occur.  ‘Prepared  soup’  is  that  in  which  occur 


37& 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITl. 


Water  mixed  with  powder  of  fried  barley,  if  drunk,  excites  the 
wind,  is  dry,  increases  the  quantity  of  faeces,  and  makes  all  the 
faults  (i.e.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm)  move  in  their  natural  courses. 
It  acts  also  as  a  Tarpana  (by  exercising  a  soothing  and  sedative 
effect  on  the  constitution).  This  drink  immediately  promotes 
strength  also.5,65 

£ali  rice,  fried  and  reduced  to  powder,  is  sweet  in  taste;  dry, 
and  cooling.  It  operates  as  an  inspissant  (by  drying  up  the  fluids 
of  the  body),  alleviates  hemorrhage  caused  by  excitement  of  the 
blood,  thirst,  vomiting,  and  fever.265 

Cakes  made  of  barley,  Yavaka(tf),,  and  Vatya(i5),  alleviate  the 
diseases  known  as  Udava.rtta(c),  Pratifyaya^',,  consumption, 
diabetes,  and  Galagraha.268 

All  these  kinds  of  food  which  go  by  the  name  of  DhSnas(V) 
generally  operate  as  attenuants.  In  consequence  of  being  dry, 
they  carete  thirst,  and  owing  to  their  causing  flatulence,  tfley  are 
difficult  of  digestion.268 

Such  grains  of  barley  as  have  put  forth  sprouts,  £ashkoli 
(cakes  made  of  sesame),  cakes  fried  in  Ghee  and  steeped  in  honey, 
Sapindika  (cakes  made  of  diverse  ingredients  and  of  the  form  of 
round  balls),  cakes  made  of  Phaseolus  radiatus  and  other  varieties 
of  supa,  and  also  those  called  Pupulika,  are  exceedingly  heavy.*268 

oil  or  Ghee,  salt,  and  also  spices  of  every  kind.  Thin  juice  of  flesh  implies  the 
decoction  of  flesh  with  or  without  salt.  It  is  generally  taken  without  oil  or  Ghee, 
having  been  boiled  along  with  it.  ‘Supa,’  as  explained  before,  is  Dal,  i.e.,  the  juice 
of  Phaseolus  radiatus,  P.  Mungo,  $fc.  To  this  day,  certain  varieties  of  Dal  ate 
taken  with  some  kind  of  sour  fruit,  such  as  tamarind,  Dillenia  Indica,  Linn.,  &c. 
Such  sour  Dal  is  lighter  than  Dal  otherwise  prepared. — T. 

a.  Yavaka  is  barley  boiled  in  water  and  then  strained  through  a  fine  cloth. 

5.  Vatya  is  fried  barley  boiled  and  strained. — T. 

c.  Diseases  due  to  suppression  or  retention  of  wind  ;  such  suppression  leads  to 
retention  of  urine  and  fasces,  &c. — T. 

d.  Catarrh  of  the  noise. 

'e.  Food  made  from  fried  barley. — T. 

*  It  is  difficult  to  say  how  Pindika  and  Pupulika  were  made.  The  words  are 
no  longer  current.  All  that  is  known  of  them  is  that  they  were  certain  kinds  of 
cakes. — T. 


The  fol’ owing  publications  relating  to  Hindu  Medical  Science 
may  be  had  at  No.  200,  Cornwallis’  Street, 
Calcutta,  India. 


1.  Charaka-Samhiia  in  original,  with  Chakrapanidatta’s  Com¬ 
mentary  ;  edited  by  Pandit  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna 
(published  in  Devanagara  character  in  successive  fascicules). 
Price  Rs.  20  in  advance. 

2.  Susruta-Samhita  (in  original)  with  Uahlanacharya’s  com¬ 
mentary,  edited  by  Pandit  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna 
(published  in  Devanagara  character  in  successive  fasci¬ 
cules).  Price  Rs.  19  in  advance. 

Bengali  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  with  the  original 
xt  (complete)  in  the  Bengali  character.  Price  Rs.  12. 

Iindi  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive  fasci- 
'  Price  Rs.  16  in  advance. 

translation  of  Susruta-Samhita  (published  in  suc- 
'  fascicules).  Price  Rs.  10  in  advance. 

’i  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive  fasci. 

. s) .  price  Rs.  .15  in  advance. 

7.  C h Hits  A -Sammilan i,  (a  monthly  medical  journal  in  Ben¬ 
gali).  Subscription  in  advance  for  one  year  Rs.  3-6  ;  for 
the  poorer  classes,  Rs.  2-6.  (Back  volumes  for  seven  years 
may  be  had  for  Rs.  21,  'or  Rs.  3  for  each  volume  embracing 
12  numbers.)  : 


NOTICE. 


The  English  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  will  be  issued  in  successive 
fascicules  of  four  forms,  Royal  Octavo,  each  ;  1 2  fascicules  will  be  issued 
every  year.  Under  favourable  circumstances,  the  number  of  fascicules  or 
the  number  of  forms  in  each  fascicule  may  be  increased.  For  subscribers 
in  India,  paying  in  advance,  the  charge  is  Rs.  32  for  the  whole  work.  For 
subscribers  in  Europe  and  America,  the  charge  is  ^3  in  advance,  post  free. 
The  price  for  each  part  is  one  Rupee.  The  arrear  rate  is  Rs.  40  (in  India) 
payable  (if  subscribers  wish)  in  instalments  of  Rs.  10  each.  Remittances 
to  be  made  to  the  Publisher,  200,  Cornwallis’  Street,  Calcutta,  by  drafts  on 
Indian  Banks  or  Postal  money-orders. 


OPINIONS. 

(  From  Dr.  D.  Hooper,  F.  I.  C.,  Government  Quinologist ,  Mussuri ). 

W4.LNUT  Grove,  Mussuri,  N.  W.  P. 

"  My  dear  Sir, — I  have  received  the  English  translation  of  Charaka,  arid 
I  must  apologize  for  not  acknowledging  it  before.  I  have  pleasure  in  sending 
you  a  Currency  Note  for  Rs.  *  *  *  towards  the  expenses  connected 

with  the  undertaking  of  translating  and  publishing  this  ancient  Sanskrit  work. 
I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  portions  of  the  book  already  received,  and 
it  is  very  interesting  to  know  how  the  Hindus  studied  and  practised  Medicine  in 
the  olden  time.  The  plants,  mentioned  in  the  book,  are  most  of  them  known  to 
me,  and  I  have  been  engaged  for  the  last  five  years  in  examining  some  of  them 
chemically  *  *  * 

“  Your  work  will  ever  be  a  monument  of  industry  and  research  and  appre¬ 
ciated  by  all.  who  study  the  history  of  Medicine. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  faithfully, 

D.  Hooper,  F.  I.  C.,  ■' 

Government  Quinologist. ” 

(  From  Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson,  the  great  Sanskrit  and  Zend 
Scholar,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A. ) 

"Dear  Sir, — Part  XII  of  your  'Charaka  Samhita’  I  have  heartily  welcomed. 

and  I  watch  with  pleasure  the  steady  advance  your  work  is  making.  1  can  well 

imagine  the  heavy  labour  such  a  task  must  entail.  Believe  me,  you  have  my 
hearty  encouragement  and  best  wishes  as  well  as  always  my  thanks  for  your  very 
kind  thought  of  me.  It. is  cordially  appreciated. 

Yours  very  sincerely, 

A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.” 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS 

OF 

FASCICUL  US  XIII 


The  concluding  portion  of  Lesson  XXVII  completes  the  twelve  groups, 
of  food  and  drink.  Articles  used  as  Anupana  (*.  e.,  as  vehicles  for  medi¬ 
cines  and  as  drinks  with  which  a  dinner  or  act  of  eating  is  to  be  concluded), 
and  the  heaviness  and  lightness  of  food  and  drink  in  brief,  have  also  been 
treated  of  in  this  Lesson. 

Lesson  XXVIII  is  very  important.  It  deals  with  food  and  drink  more 
particularly  and  shows  what  purposes  are  served  by  the  juice  or  fluid 
into  which  food  is  changed  in  the  stomach  and  what  by  the  refuse  of  food. 

How  the  body  has  food. for  the  source  of  its  growth  is  also  explained. 

Health  and  disease  are  due  to. wholesome  and  unwholesome  food  and 
drink,  as  also  to  causes  unconnected  with  food  and  drink. 

Those  bodies  which  are  particularly  liable  to  disease,  and  those  which 
are  capable  of  resisting  disease  are  indicated. 

Then  are  mentioned  the  different  diseases  which  arise  in  different' 
parts  of  the  body  owing  to  the  excitement  of  Wind,  Bile,  and  Phlegm, 
individually,  or  in  two’s,  or  all  together. 

The  treatment  fs  indicated  in  bricf  of  these  different  diseases.  « 

The  difference  is  set  forth  between  men  that 'are  wise  and  those  that 
are  foolish  or  ignorant. 

Things  which  are  beneficial  for  some  are  not  so  for  others. 

Lesson  XXIX  deals  principally  with  who  are  good  physicians  and  who 
bad  ones.  A  summary  is  given  of  the  contents  of  the  previous  Lessons. 
The  whole  of  this  Lesson  is  exceedingly  important. 

The  observations  on  bad  physicians  or  killers  of  Life  and  helpers  of 
disease  are  very  curious.  Many  of  them  apply  to  the  quacks  of  the 
present  day. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


377 


Those  varieties  of  food  that  are  prepared  by  being  mixed  with 
fruit,  flesh,  fat,  potherbs,  powdered  sesame.-  and  honey,  increase 
the  semen,  improve  strength,  are  heavy,  and  operate  as  tonics.*270 

Vesavara(«)  is  heavy,  cooling,  and  increases  one’s  stock  of 
strength. 

Cakes  prepared  with  milk  and  the  juice  of  the  sugar-cane  are 
heavy,  soothing  and  sedative,  and  increase  the  vital  seed.271 

Those  kinds  of  food  that  are  prepared  with  treacle,  sesame, 
milk,  honey,  and  sugar,  increase  the  vital  seed,  act  as  tonics,  and 
are  exceedingly  heavy.272 

Food  made  of  wheat  and  prepared  with  oil  and  Ghee,  or  boiled 
or  fried  in  oil  and  Ghee,  is  possessed  of  diverse  virtues.  It  is 
heavy,  soothing  and  sedative,  increases  the  vital  seed,  and 
promotes  cheerfulness. 

Cakes  made  of  wheat,  if  prepared  in  a  particular  way,  become 
light  of  digestion-t 

Dhana,  Parpata,  and  Pupa  and  other  food  of  the  same  kind, 
should  be  prescribed  after  ascertainment  (of  their  virtues). J273-7* 

Prithuka(5)  is  heavy.  A  little  of  it  may  be  taken,  after  frying 
it  first. 

That  variety  of  it  which  is  made  of  barley  causes  heaviness  of 
the  stomach  and  suppresses  urine  and  faeces  before  it  can  be 
digested. 

If  mixed  with  husk  or  chaff,  it  purges  the  intestines  (without 
producing  watery  motions). §27S 


*  ‘Palala’  is  powdered  sesame. — T. 

a.  A  kind  of  food  made  of  rice  or  barley  or  wheat  and  flesh  and  spices  of  diverse 
kinds.— T. 

f  'If  prepared  in  a  particular  way,’  i.e ,  if  properly  corrected.  The  Commentators 
observe  that  if  wheat  cakes  are  cooked  with  heat  applied  on  every  side,  they  become 
light. — T. 

f  These,  though  ordinarily  heavy,  may  become  light  in  consequence  of  especial 
methods  of  preparation.  Hence,  in  prescribing  them,  the  physician  should  be  guided 
by  the  method  of  their  preparation. — T. 

f  ‘Prithuka’  is  ordinarily  known  by  the  name  of  Chida.  Paddy  is  first  boiled. 
It  is  then  fried  a  little  and  then  flattened  with  the  aid  of  the  husking  apparatus. 
Sometimes,  again,  unripe  paddy  is  brought  from  the  fields  and  then  flattened  into 
Chida.  The  latter  variety  is  regarded  lighter,  and  is  very  agreeable. — T. 

48 


378 


CHA  RA  KA  -SA  MHI TA. 


Food  prepared  from  the  different  varieties  of  Supya  {i.e., 
Phaseolus  radiatus,  Phaseolus  Mungo,  and  other  Dais),  changed 
from  their  natural  state  {i.e.,  fried,  &c.),  and  food  prepared  from 
£uka  paddy  changed  from  its  natural  state,  excite  the  wind,  and 
are  dry,  and  cooling. 

Mixed  with  pungent  things,  and  oil,  and  salt,  a  little  only  of 
such  food  should  be  taken.*276 

The  above  varieties  of  food,  when  they  happen  to  be  gross  and 
hard  and  are  cooked  in  mild  heat  (or,  not  cooked  properly),  become 
heavy  of  digestion. 

When  cooked  in  strong  heat,  they  conduce  to  growth  of  body 
and  strength. f277 

The  admixture  of  articles,  their  correction,  their  measure,  and 
dissociation  or  separateness,  in  respect  of  food,  should  be  prescrib¬ 
ed  after  ascertainment  of  the  heaviness  or  lightness  of  each.J278 

The  curds  called  Rasala(#)  promote  nutrition  and  corpulency, 
increase  the  vital  seed,  are  oily,  act  as  tonics,  and  cause  relish 
for  food. 

Curds  mixed  with  raw  sugar  oilify  the  system,  are  soothing  and 
sedative,  promote  cheerfulness  and  relish,  and  alleviate  wind.279 

Sherbets  prepared  from  Draksha(3),  Kharjjura(c),  and  Kola(af), 
are  heavy  and  cause  a  sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  .  stomach  and 
lead  to  supression  of  urine  and  faeces. 

*  ‘SupySnnavikritah’  means  ‘Supya-vikritaV  and  ‘Anna-vikritS.’  The  former 
implies'the  different  varieties  of  Phaseoli,  oats,  &c.,  in  a  fried  state  ;  the  latter,  Cuka 
paddy  in  a  fried  state.  To  this  day,  these  are  taken  with  salt,  oil,  and  red  pepper. — T. 

t  I  follow  GangSdhara  in  rendering  this  verse.  He  takes  it  as  applying  to 
‘SupyftnnavikritSh.’  It  would  not  be  wrong  to  take  it,  however,  as  applying  to  other 
articles  that  are  gross  and  hard.  If  mildly  cooked,  they  become  heavy.  If  cooked 
in  strong  heat,  they  become  beneficial. — T. 

|  What  is  stated  here  is  this :  Food  frequently  consists  of  diverse  articles. 
What  articles  should  be  combined,  how  they  should  be  corrected  or  neutralised,  what 
should  be  the  measure  of  each,  and,  lastly,  what  articles  should  be  taken  separately  or 
without  admixture,  should  all  be  prescribed  after  a  careful  ascertainment  of  the 
heaviness  or  lightness  of  each  article. — T. 

a.  Curds  made  fragrant  by  admixture  are  called  RasalS. — T. 

b.  Vitis  Vinifera,  Linn.;  Uvce  passes. 

c.  Phcenix  Sylvestris,  Koxb.  ;  the  wild  date  palm. 

d.  Zieyphus  jujuba,  LamTi. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


379 


Sherbets  made  also  of  Parushakas(tf),  of  honey,  and  of  every 
variety  of  article  manufactured  from  modification  of  the  (juice  of 
the)  sugar-cane,  are  possessed  of  the  same  virtues.280 

By  admixture  with  articles  that  are  pungent  or  sour,  these 
sherbets  come  to  be  regarded  as  entirely  different  objects. 

Ascertaining  the  measure  of  the  articles  used,  the  virtues  and 
effects  of  these  (diverse)  sherbets  are  to  be  declared.281 

The  drink  called  Ragash?dava(3),  being  mixed  with  what  is 
pungent,  sour,  sweet,  and  saline,  is  light,  becomes  agreeable  to  the 
taste,  promotes  cheerfulness,  excites  the  appetite,  and  causes  a 
relish  for  food.282 

Semi-liquid  pickles  made  of  Amra  ( Mangifera  Indica,  Linn ) 
and  Amalaka  (Phyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn.)  promote  nutrition 
and  corpulency,  increase  strength,  create  relish  for  food,  and  are 
soothing  and  sedative.  They  are  so,  it  is  said,  because  of  their 
oiliness,  sweetness  in  taste,  and  heaviness.283 

Ascertaining  their  admixture,  correction,  and  measure  of  the  in¬ 
gredients  used,  should  the  virtues  and  effects  of  each  variety  of 
pickles  be  declared.584 

£ukta(c),  alleviates  hemorrhage  caused  by  excitement  of  bile, 
and  causes  the  expectoration  of  phlegm.  It  makes  the  wind  move 
in  its  natural  course.  When  bulbous  roots,  roots,  and  fruits  are 
soaked  in  it,  it  takes  the  virtues  of  what  is  thus  soaked  in  it.. 
Thus  prepared,  it  should  be  known  by  the  name  of  Asuta.285 

£indaki(«Q,  other  kinds  of  I_suta(,?),  and  that  which  he- 


a.  Gremia  Asiatica,  Linn. 

5.  Gangadhara  cites  the  following  verse  for  explaining  the  ingredients  of  R&ga- 
shadava  : — “ Khathitanlu  gudopelam  sahdkaraphalam  navam,  Tilanagara  samyuktam 
vijneyo  Ragashadavah.  The  meaning  is,  a  drink  made  of  frayed  treacle,  raw 
mangoes,  sesame  seeds,  and  Cyperus  partenuis  of  Roxburgh. — T. 

c.  An  acid  preparation  made  from  fruits  and  roots. — T. 

d.  Cindaki  is  defined  to  be  Rajiha  yuktaih  syan  muldkadaladravaih,  Sarshapa. 
sw  dr  as a irv [ip i  falipishtdkasamyaktaih.  This  implies  that  the  food  so  called  is 
prepared  with  the  larger  variety  of  mustard  seeds  called  Rajika,  and  garden  radish, 
and  plaintains  liquified  by  some  means,  or  with  mustard  oil.  The  principal  in¬ 
gredient  must  be  cakes  of  Cali  rice. — T. 

e.  As  explained  in  the  previous  Verse,  Asuta  is  KSnji  or  sour  gruel  of  rice  in 
which  has  been  cast  fruits  and  roots. — T. 


380 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHI TA. 


comes  sour  through  age,  create  a  relish  for  food  and  are 
light  * 

The  physician  should  thus  know  that  these  eleven  (separate) 
kinds  (of  food)  are  included  in  the  Group  of  Prepared  food.283 

Thus  ends  the  Group  of  Prepared  food. 

The  Group  of  Oils. 

In  subsidiary  taste,  the  oil  (of  sesame)  is  astringent.  It  is 
sweet,  capable  of  penetrating  into  even  the  minute  nerves  of  the 
body,  and  hot.  It  operates  as  an  aphrodisiac,  enhances  the  bile, 
retains  both  faeces  and  urine,  and  does  not  increase  the  phlegm.28' 

It  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  are  destructive  of  the  wind.  It 
is  a  tonic  ;  it  improves  the  skin,  memory  and  intelligence,  and  the 
digestive  fire. 

If  improved  by  admixture  with  other  articles,  the  oil  of  sesame 
is  regarded  as  capable  of  alleviating  all  diseases. t283 

Through  use  of  oil,  Daitya  chiefs,  in  days  of  old,  transcended 
decrepitude  and  change,  and  became  capable  of  bearing  great 
fatigue  and  putting  forth  great  might  in  battle.283 

The  oil  of  Eranda  (Ricinus  communis ,  Linn.)  is  sweet  in  taste, 
heavy,  and  increases  phlegm,  and  is  highly  efficacious  in  alleviat¬ 
ing:  leprosy,  abdominal  tumours,  thoracic  diseases,  and  chronic 
fevers.- 

The  oil  of  mustard  seeds  is  pungent  and  hot  and  injures  blood 
and  bile  ;  and  destroys  phlegm,  the  vital  seed,  and  the  wind,  and 
alleviates  itches  and  urticaria  evanida.231 

The  oil  of  Piyala  seeds  (Buchanania  latifolia ,  Roxb)  is  sweet, 
heavy,  and  increases  phlegm.  In  consequence  of  its  not  being 
very  hot,  it  is  beneficial  in  excitements  of  wind  and  bile.232 

The  oil  of  Atasi  (Linnm  usitatissimum,  Linn.)  is  sweet  and 
sour  j  it  is  pungent  in  assimilation.  In  energy  it  is  hot.  It  is 

*  ‘Kalamla’  is  something  that  has  become  sour  through  age  and  not  anything 
that  is  naturally  sour,  or  sour  in  a  state  of  freshness.— T. 

f  Like  Ghee,  the  oil  of  sesame  has  the  capacity  of  receiving  the  virtues  of 
articles  steeped  in  it  for  sometime.  The  steeping  of  articles  for  this  purpose  is 
the  principal  kind  of  'Samskara'  (correction  or  improvement)  to  which  oil  is 
subjected. — T. 


CH A  R  A  KA  -SAM  HIT  A.  381 

beneficial  in  ( excitements  of  )  wind  and  it  excites  bilious 
hemorrhage.298 

The  oil  of  Kusumbha  (Carthamus  tinctorius,  Linn.)  is  hot. 
In  assimilation  it  is  pungent.  It  is  heavy  and  produces,  in 
especial,  a  burning  sensation  of  the  skin.  It  is  capable  of  exciting 
all  diseases.294 

The  other  oils  made  from  ftuits,  which  are  used  in  connection 
with  food,  should,  in  respect  of  their  qualities  and  effects,  be 
declared  as  similar  to  the  fruits  from  which  they  are  made.295 

Serum  and  marrow  are  sweet,  promote  nutrition,  increase  the 
vital  seed,  and  act  as  tonics.  In  respect,  again,  of  their  cooling 
and  heating  qualities,  serum  and  marrow  should  be  declared  as 
conformable  to  the  animals  to  which  they  belong.*298 

Vi?wabhesaja  (or  dry  ginger)  is  oily,  excites  the  appetite,  in¬ 
creases  the  vital  seed,  is  hot,  and  destructive  of  wind  and  phlegm, 
and  sweet  in  assimilation,  and  promotes  cheerfulness  and  adds 
relish  to  food.297 

Pippali  (Piper  longutn ,  Linn. ;  syn.  Chavica  Roxburghii,) 
when  juicy,  provokes  the  phlegm,  is  sweet  in  taste,  heavy,  and  oily. 

When  dry,  it  is  regarded  as  destructive  of  phlegm  and  wind, 
pungent  and  hot,  and  capable  of  increasing  the  vital  seed.293 

Maricha  ( Piper  nigrum,  Linn.)  is  not  much  hot.  It  does  not 
increase  the  vital  seed.  It  is  light  and  adds  relish  to  food.  In 
consequence  of  its  capacity  to  remove  adherent  phlegm  and  other 
matters,  and  of  drying  them,  it  promotes  the  appetite  and  subdues 
phlegm  and  wind.f299 

Hingu  (Ferula  Assafcedita,  Linn.)  is  destructive  of  wind  and 
phlegm  and  retention  of  faeces,  pungent  and  hot,  provocative  of 
the  appetite,  and  light.  It  should  also  be  known  as  capable  of 
alleviating  sharp  deep-seated  pains  and  operating  as  a  Pachana 
and  adding  relish  to  food.300 


*  The  sense  is  that  serum  and  marrow,  in  respect  of  these  two  qualities,  follow 
the  meat  of  the  animals  from  which  they  are  taken.  If  the  meat  be  heating,  the 
serum  and  marrow  also  will  be  so.  If  it  be  cool,  these  also  will  be  cool. — T. 

t  Chhedanas  are  medicines  which  remove  by  force  adherent  phlegm  and  bad 
humours  ;  emetics,  expectorants,  caustics,  errhines,  &c.,  probably  come  under  it. — T. 


382 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  M HIT  A. 


Saindhava  (rock)  salt  is  the  foremost  of  all  salts.  It  adds  relish 
to  food  and  excites  the  appetite.  It  promotes  cheerfulness, 
strengthens  the  vision,  is  not  pungent,  is  destructive  of  all  the  three 
faults,  and  endued  with  a  sweet  taste.301 

Sauvarchala  salt,  in  consequence  of  the  fineness  of  its  grains, 
its  heat-producing  capacity,  its  lightness,  and  its  aromatic  quality, 
is  capable  of  adding  relish  to  food,  and  alleviating  cases  of  reten¬ 
tion  of  faeces.  It  further  promotes  cheerfulness  and  alleviates 
nausea  and  vomiting.*802 

Vit  salt,  in  consequence  of  its  keenness  and  heat-producing 
and  aphorodisiac  qualities,  promotes  the  appetite,  alleviates  sharp, 
deep-seated  pains,  and  causes  the  wind  in  both  the  upper  and  the 
lower  parts  of  the  body  to  move  in  its  usual  or  ordinary  course.f308 

Audbhid  salt  is  bitter  and  pungent  and  alkaline.  It  is  keen, 
and  operates  as  an  expectorant. J  804 

t  The  following  extract  Irom  Li.  C.  Dutt's  Materia  Medico,  of  the  Hindus,  p.  85, 
may  be  read  with  interest.  "Souvarchala  called  Souchala  or  Ka.lanim.dk  in  Hindu¬ 
stan  is  said  to  be  aromatic,  agreeable  and  digestive,  and  useful  in  the  same  sort  of 
cases  as  Vit-lavana.  It  is  described  in  the  report  on  the  Punjab  Products  as  a  dark- 
colored  salt  said  to  be  made  by  dissolving  common  salt  in  a  solution  of  ‘SSjimati’ 
(crude  soda)  and  evaporating  it ;  this  salt  contains  Chloride  of  sodium,  sulphate  of 
soda,  caustic  soda,  and  a  little  sulphate  of  sodium,  but  no  carbonate  of  soda.’  Sonchal 
salt  is  not  available  in  the  drug  shops  of  Calcutta.  Some  Bengali  physicians  give 
this  name  to  a  crystalline  form  of  rock  salt,  but  Up-country  physicians  always 
translate  Sauvarchala  as  Sonchal  or  Kalanimak." — 7'. 

t  "Vit-lavan  occurs  in  dark-red  shining  granules  somewhat  resembling  coarsely 
powdered  lac  in  appearance.  It  has  a  mild,  saline  and  somewhat  nauseous  taste. 
Dr.  Fleming  says  that  ‘the  following  process  for  making  this  salt  was  communicated 
by  a  native  druggist  to  Mr.  Turnbull  at  Mirzapore  and  was  actually  performed  in  his 
presence.  Fifty-six  pounds  of  Sambar  salt  are  mixed  with  twenty  ounces  of  dried 
aonlas  (Emblic  myrobalans).  One  fourth  of  these  materials  is  put  into  a  round 
earthen  pot  with  a  narrow  mouth,  which  is  put  in  a  fire-place  made  of  clay.  The 
fire-place  has  a  hole  at  the  bottom  for  introducing  the  fire-wood.  After  the  fire  has 
been  lighted  about  an  hour,  and  the  materials,  in  the  pot,  appear  to  be  heated,  the 
rest  of  the  materials  is  added  by  degrees.  The  whole  is  then  exposed  to  a  strong  red 
heat  for  about  six  hours.  The  fire  is  then  allowed  ty  die  away,  and  the  pot  to  cool, 
which,  upon  being  broken,  is  found  to  contain  about  forty-eight  pounds  of  cala-nimak 
or  hit-lavan.'  ’’ — U.  C.  Dutt's  Mat.  Med.  of  the  Hindus,  p.p.  84-85. 

£  “ Audbhid ,  that  is,  produced  of  itself  from  the  earth,  is  the  name  applied  to  a 

salt  produced  as  an  efflorescence  on  reh  lands.  The  salt  is  called  reh  or  kalar  in 
the  vernacular.  It  consists  principally  of  sulphate  of  soda  with  a  little  choride  of 
sodium,  and  is  described  as  alkaline,  bitter,  pungent,  and  nauseating.  It  is  said  to 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  383 

Kala  salt  has  no  smell.  Its  qualities  are  exactly  those  that 
belong  to  Sauvarchala.805 

Samudraka  salt  is  sweet.*  Panfuja  is  bitter  and  pungent: t306 

All  varieties  of  salt  add  relish  to  food,  aid  in  digestion,  cause 
secretions,  and  alleviate  the  wind.807 

Yava9uka  (alkaline  ashes  of  the  stalks  of  barley)  cures  diseases 
of  the  thorax,  anaemia  and  jaundice,  disorders  of  the  Grahani, 
enlargement  of  the  spleen,  epistasis  or  suppression  of  urine,  inflam¬ 
mation  of  the  throat  leading  to  hoarseness  or  suspension  of  the 
voice,  and  consumption  due  to  excitement  of  phlegm,  and  piles.808 

All  varieties  of  alkaline  ashes  are  keen,  hot,  light,  dry,  produc¬ 
tive  of  secretions,  capable  of  aiding  digestion,  boring,  and  caustic. 
They  are,  besides,  capable  of  provoking  the  appetite,  and  of 
separating  by  force  all  kinds  of  adherent  matter  and  bad  humours. 
They  are  like  fire  in  energy.809 

Karavi>),  Kunchika(£),  Ajaji(c),  Kavari(^),  Dhanya(^),  and 
Tumvuru(y),  add  relish  to  food,  excite  the  appetite,  and  destroy 
wind,  phlegm,  and  bad  odours. 

Nothing  can  be  laid  down  regarding  the  measure  in  which 
articles  that  are  regarded  fit  for  eating  should  be  mixed.310 

Thus  ends  the  twelfth  Group  of  objects  used  as  food. 


be  so  abundant  in  some  parts  of  the  Punjab  as  to  render  the  soil  quite  barren.  Some 
physicians  or  rather  writers  substitute  this  article  for  Sambar  salt  in  the  composition 
of  Pancha-lavana  or  the  five  salts.” — U.  C.  Dutl’s  Mat.  Med.  of  the  Hindus,  p.  84. 

*  “Samudra  literally  means  produced  from  the  sea.  The  term  is  applied  to 
sun-dried  sea-salt,  manufactured  in  the  Madras  Presidency.  It  is  called  Karkach  in 
the  vernacular.  Orthodox  natives  who  consfder  common  salt  as  impure  from  the 
circumstance  of  its  having  undergone  the  process  of  boiling,  and  who  take  only  rock 
salt,  substitute  Karkach  for  rock  salt,  if  the  latter  is  not  available.” — U.  C.  Dutt’s 
Mat.  Med.  of  the  Hindus,  p.  84: 

t  “Pansuja  or  Ushasuta  literally  means  salt  manufactured  from  saline  earth. 
Panga  or  common  salt,  manufactured  from  earth  impregnated  with  salt  water,  would 
come  under  this  head.” — U.  C.  Dutt’s  Mad.  Met.  of  the  Hindus. 

a.  A  variety  of  Nigella  Saliva,  Linn.  It  is  very  fine. 

5.  A  variety  of  Nigella  Sativa.  It  is  thick  and  gross. 

c.  A  variety  of  Cuminum  Cyminum,  Linn.  It  is  very  fine. 

d.  A  variety  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan. 

e.  Coriandrum  Sativum,  Linn. 

f.  Zanthoxylum  alatum,  Roxb. 


3^4 


CIJ A  RA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


£uka  paddy  and  £ami  paddy,  when  one  year  old,  is  praised. 
When  very  old,  they  generally  become  dry ;  when  new,  they 
generally  become  heavy.811 

Amongst  all  grain  of  the  paddy  species,  those  varieties  which 
grow  or  ripen  quickly,  are  regarded  very  light. 

Freed  from  husk  and  fried  under  proper  regulations,  all  grain 
which  falls  under  the  class  called  Supya  is  light  and  easily 
digestible.81® 

The  flesh  of  animals  that  are  dead,  or  emaciated,  or  unclean,  or 
old,  or  too  young,  or  slain  with  poison,  or  which  have  been  brought 
up  in  habitats  other  than  their  own,  or  which  have  been  assailed  by 
beasts  of  prey  or  snakes,  should  be  avoided.*813 

Flesh  that  is  otherwise  is  beneficial,  promotes  nutrition  and 
bulk  of  body,  and  increases  strength.814 

The  juice  of  (good)  meat  is  gratifying  to  all  creatures,  and 
highly  conducive  to  cheerfulness. 

In  the  case  of  those  that  are  being  emaciated,  or  that  are  con- 
valascent,  or  that  are  weak  and  wasted,  or  whose  vital  seed  is 
weak,  or  that  are  desirous  of  strength  and  complexion,  the  juice 
of  meat  should  be  regarded  as  Nectar. 

Such  juice,  prescribed  according  to  the  requirements  of  each 
individual  disease,  is  capable  of  alleviating  every  disease.  It 
improves  the  voice  and  conduces  to  the  strength  of  the  aged  and 
of  the  intellect  as  well  as  of  the  senses,  and  lengthens  one’s  period 
of  life. 

Those  that  undergo  physical  exercise  every  day,  or  indulge  in 
sexual  association  every  day,  or  drink  alcoholic  spirits  every  day, 
by  taking  meat  every  day,  will  not  feel  either  weak  or  afflicted.615-317 

*  The  correct  reading  of  the  first  line  of  313  is  ‘Krifamamedhyam’  and  not 
‘Kecatimedhyam.’  The  flesh  of  dead  animals  must,  of  course,  be  eschewed  ;  dead 
implies  dead  in  course  of  nature,  of  disease,  &c.  ‘Amedhyam’  is  ‘not  allowable  for 
sacrifice’  ;  hence,  unclean.  ‘Slain  with  poison,’  i.e.,  by  the  aid  of  poisoned  food  or 
envenomed  arrows.  ‘Agocharabhritam’  is  reared  in  elements  or  places  which  are 
not  their  own  by  nature ;  such  as  amphibious  animals  reared  on  land  exclusively. 
‘Assailed  by  beasts  of  prey  or  snakes  ;’  beasts  of  prey  are  believed  to  have  poison. 
Hence,  when  a  goat  or  sheep  or  hare  has  escaped,  with  wounds,  from  the  clutches 
of  a  tiger  or  panther  or  jackal  or  dog, or  from  the  fangs  of  a  snake,  its  meat  should 
be  eschewed. — T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


3S5 


Such  potherbs  as  are  afflicted  by  worms  and  wind  and  the  sun, 
as  are  dry  or  faded,  as  do  not  belong  to  the  season,  as  are  boiled 
without  using  oil  or  Ghee,  and  as  have  not  the  moisture  extracted 
from  them  after  boiling,  should  be  avoided.318 

Flesh  that  is  old,  or  that  is  stained  by  worms,  or  beasts  of  prey, 
or  cold  or  heat,  or  that  is  obtained  from  animals  slain  untimely 
or  in  countries'  which  are  not  their  habitat,  or  that  is  putrid, 
produces  consequences  that  are  baneful.813 

As  regards  Greens,  the  directions  are  the  same  as  in  the  case 
of  Potherbs.  The  operations  of  correction,  however,  do  not  apply 
to  them.* 

As. regards  the  kinds  of  wines,  water,  milk,  and  others  (that 
should  or  should  not  be  taken),  the  conclusions  occur  under  their 
respective  heads.810 

That  fluid  food  or  drink  should  be  taken  subsequently  which  in 
■qualities  is  the  reverse  of  the  food  taken  previously.  It  should  be 
remembered,  however,  that  the  subsequent  fluid  food  should  not  be 
hostile  to  the  upholding  ingredients  of  the  body.f821 

Four  and  eighty  varieties  of  wines  have  been  laid  down  before. 

As  regards  water,  one  should  first  examine  whether  it  is  drink-, 
■able  or  otherwise.  If  drunk  after  such  examination,  then  only  it 
proves  beneficial. 322 


*  In  318  it  is  laid  down  that  potherbs,  when  they  happen  to  be  afflicted  by  worms, 
■&c.,  should  be  avoided.  Further,  they  should  never  be  taken  unless  the  juice  has 
■been  pressed  out  of  them  after  boiling,  and  then  fried  in  oil  or  Ghee.  What  is  said 
here  is  that  Greens  must  be  avoided  when  they  happen  to  be  of  the  same  kind.  They 
should  not,  however,  be  subjected  to  the  same  operation  as  potherbs,  i.e..  their  juice 
should  not  be  pressed  out. — T.  ;  v 

t  The  sense  is  this  <  having  taken  food  possessed  of  hot  qualities,  one  should;  {jtl 
take  fluid  food  or  drink  that  is  cooling;  having  taken  what  is  sour,  one  should  takfe  ■>& 
what  is  sweet.  In  thus  adjusting  one's  courses  of  eating  and  drinks,  one.  should,: 
however,  take  care  that  one  does  not  take  what  is  hostile  to  one’s  constitution.  The 
choice,  therefore,  of  flui,d  food  or  drink  is  regulated  by  two  rules.  The  first  is 
that  it  should  be  the  reverse  in  qualities  to  that  taken  .before,  and  tnendtishould 
not  be  hostile  to  the  upholding  ingredients  of  the  constitution.  The  word  ‘Anupana,’ 
it  should  be  noted,  implies  not  only  fluid  food  or  drink  that  is  taken  subsequently, 

— that  is,  at  the  conclusion  of  a  course  of  eating, — but  also  such  fluids  as  are  used  as 
vehicles  of  medicines. — T.  . 

49 


386 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  MH1 TA. 


As  regards  such  subsequent  fluid  food  or  drink,  that  which  is  oily 
and  hot  is  praised  in  excitements  of  the  wind  ;  that  which  is  sweet 
and  cooling  is  praised  in  excitements  of  the  bile  ;  that  which  is 
dry  and  hot  is  praised  in  excitements  of  the  phlegm  ;  while  ire 
emaciation  and  waste,  the  juice  of  meat  is  highly  beneficial.*28 

Unto  men  exhausted  by  fast,  or  walking,  or  loud  talking,  or 
.sexual  indulgence,  or  exposure  to  wind,  or  the  sun,  or  exercise,  milk 
is  the  proper  drink  as  Anupana.  It  operates  as  nectar  itself.821 

Wine  as  an  Anupana  is  praised  for  the  nourishment  of  ema¬ 
ciated  or  wasted  persons. 

For  reducing  the  bulk  of  overgrown  persons,  honey  mixed  with 
water  is  regarded  as  a  beneficial  Anupana. m 

For  persons  whose  digestive  fire  is  weak,  or  who  are  afflicted 
with  insomnia,  or  who  are  afflicted  by  lassitude  or  grief  or  fear  or 
exhaustion,  as  also  for  those  who  are  addicted  to  wine  and  meat, 
wine  is  applauded  as  a  proper  Anupana.328 

I  shall  now  speak  of  the  effects  of  Anupana .* 

Anupanas- exercise  a  sedative  and  nutritive  influence. 

They  make  the  mind  cheerful.  They  conduce  to  increase  of 
energy. 

They  produce  the  sensation  of  gratification  after  one  has  eaten. f 

They  moisten  what  is  eaten  (and  thereby  assist  at  digestion). 

They  disjoin  united  food.J 

They  soften  the  food  in  the  stomach. 

They  cause  the  impurities  to  separate  themselves  from  the  food 
in  the  stomach.  They  cause  the  food  to  be  digested. 

They  contribute  to  that  sensation  of  pleasure  which  arises  after 
eating. 

*  The  word  'AnupHna,’  as  already  explained,  is  used  in  two  senses  in  Hindi* 
medicine.  It  implies  a  fluid  or  semi-fluid  vehicle  in  which  medicine  is  administered, 
or  it  means  any  fluid  food  or  drink  taken  at  the  conclusion  of  a  course  of  eating. 
What  should  be  particularly  remembered  is  that  the  context  determines  the  sense  in 
which  it  ts4x»  be  taken. — T. 

t  Ga.nglidhara  explains  that  the  original  means  that  these  drinks  cause  the  food 
to  be  assimilated  with  the  body. — T. 

f  Probably,  melt  or  dissolve  solidified  food,  or  food  existing  in  a  united  mass 
within  the  stomach. — T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA.  387 


They  cause  the  food  to  extend  its  effects  to  all  parts  of  the 
body,*™ 


(  Here  occur  some  verses. ) 

An  Anup*na  that  is  suitable  is  certainly  beneficial.  It  soon 
exercises  a  sedative  and  nutritive  influence  on  the  body.  It  causes 
easy  digestion  of  the  food  that  has  been  eaten.  It  conduces  to 
strength  and  long  life.328 

Those  persons  the  upper  parts  of  whose  bodies  are  afflicted  with 
wind,  those  persons  who  are  afflicted  with  asthma  and  consumption-, 
those  persons  who  are  generally  engaged  in  singing  or  speaking 
aloud  or  reading  aloud,  and  those  who  have  sores  or  wounds  on 
the  chest,  should  not  drink  water  after  having  taken  their  food, 
for,  if  they  drink,  that  water,  remaining  in  their  throat  or  chest, 
will  destroy  the  oily  secretions  of  the  food  previously  taken,  and 
generate  many  faults.323-20 

It  is  not  possible  to  mention  all  objects  in  their  entirety  by 
their  names.  Hence,  a  portion  only  of  such  Anupanas  as  are 
ordinarily  used  (may  be  named). 

As,  of  medicinal  objects  a  few  only  are  capable  of  being  men¬ 
tioned  by  names,  as  of  words  belonging  to  the  languages  of 
different  countries  a  few  only  are  capable  of  being. mentioned,  so 
of  objects  a  few  only  are  capable  of  being  mentioned.  Hence, 
those  objects  (or  Anupanas)  which  are  not  spoken  of  here  should 
be  regarded  as  such  (that  is,  as  inconvenient  to  mention,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  their  multudinous  tale).381-32 

In  the  matter  of  Anupanas,  the  following  things  touching  the 
food  that  has  been  eaten  are  taken  into  consideration,  viz.,  habitat 
or  place  of  living,  the  different  limbs  of  the  body,  the  nature  or 
habits  of  the  animal,  the  ingredients  that  compose  it,  its  acts,  sex, 
size,  the  manner  of. cooking,  and  quantity. f 


*  The  correct  reading  is  'SukhaparinSmitStm  vyav&yitSncha  janayati.’  Some 
texts  have  ‘S.fu'  before  ‘Vyav5.yit3.ncha.’  It  may  or  may  not  be  retained.  ‘VyavSyitSm.’ 
is  explained  by  GangSdhara  as  equivalent  to  ‘AkhiladehavySpitSm.’ — T. 

+  The  sense  is  this  :  in  selecting  the  AnupS.ua  one  should  be  guided  by  the  points- 
noted  in  respect  of  the  animal  whose  flesh  one  has  eaten. — I V. 


charaka-samhitA. 


As  regards  place  of  living,  that  includes  the  circumstance  of 
residence  in  marshy  regions,  in  water,  in  the  sky,  in  arid  deserts, 
and  other  places.  These  should  be  considered  in  respect  of  those 
animals  that  may  be  selected  for  food. 

Those  which  are  born  in  water,  or  in  marshy  regions,  or  those 
which  move  about  in  both  water  and  marshy  regions,  and  all  those 
animals  which  subsist  on  heavy  food,  have  been  regarded  as 
heavy. 

Those  animals  which  subsist  on  light  food,  those  which  are 
born  in  arid  deserts,  and  which  move  about  in  arid  deserts,  are 
regarded  as  light. 883-35 

Among  parts  of  the  body  should  be  reckoned  haunches,  head, 
neck,  and  others.  Heavier  than  the  flesh  of  the  haunch  is  the 
neck.  Heavier  than  the  neck  is  the  flesh  about  the  belly.  Heavier 
than  the  belly  is  the  head.  And  heavier  than  the  head  is  the  flesh 
of  the  feet.886 

The  testes,  the  skin,  the  male  organ  of  generation,  the  hips, 
the  two  divisions  of  the  heart,  the  liver,  the  anus,  are  heavier  (in 
the  order  stated)  than  the  flesh  of  other  parts.  The  marrow  that 
is  within  the  bones  is  heavier  than  these  all.337 

By  nature,  Mudga  (Phaseolus  Mungo,  Linn.)  is  light,  and 
Lavas  and  Kapinjalas  also  are  so.  By  nature,  Masha  ( Phaseolus 
radiatus,  Roxb .)  is  heavy,  and  the  flesh  of  the  boar  and  the 
buffalo  is  so.*338 

Of  the  constituent  ingredients  of  the  body  beginning  with 
blood,  that  which  comes  after  should  be  known  as  heavier  than  that 
which  precedes. f 

From  those  animals  that  are  not  of  active  habits,  those  that  are 
of  active  habits  are  distinguished  (in  point  of  lightness)4389 

*  Lava  is  the  Perdix  ckinensis.  Kapinjala  is  the  Francoline  partridge. 

f  The  order  oE  enumeration  of  the  Dhatus  or  upholding  ingredients  of  the  body 
is  fluids,  blood,  flesh,  fat,  bone,  marrow,  vital  seed,  and  Ojas. — T. 

+  The  second  line  is  complete  by  itself.  It  does  not  run  into  the  next  Verse. 
The  original  'V^ishyante’  simply  implies  'are  distinguished.’  Chakrapani  explains 
that  this  means  that  animals  of  active  habits  are  lighter  than  those  that  are  not  of 

active  habits. — T. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  M  HI  TA. 


389 


When  there  is  community  of  species,- heaviness  attaches  to 
animals  of  the  male  sex,  and  lightness  to  those  of  the  female  sex. 

In  the  same  species,  again,  those  that  are  large-sized  are  heavy  ; 
while  those  that  are  otherwise  are  light.*810 

Through  the  necessary  operations  (of  admixture  'or  cooking),  of 
things  that  are  heavy,  lightness  may  be  brought  about ;  the  reverse 
of  this  may  also  be  induced.  For  example,  the  cases  may  be 
quoted  of  Laja  from  paddy  and  Siddha-p in dika  from  flour  of  fried 
barley. t31t 

When  a  little  is  taken  of  things  that  are  heavy,  that  becomes 
light.  When  much  is  taken  of  things  that  are- light,  that  becomes 
heavy.  In  the  matter  of  the  heaviness  or  lightness  of  things,  it  has 
been  already  pointed  out  that  measure  is  the  cause. if342 

Of  things  that  are  heavy  a  little  should  be  taken.  Of  things  that 
are  light,  as  much  may  be  taken  as  produces  gratification.  Things, 
in  respect  of  their  use  (as  food)  depend  upon  measure.  Measure, 
again,  depends  upon  the  digestive  fire.§843 

Strength,  health,  and  period  of  life,  and  the  life-winds,  are  all 
established  on  the  digestive  fire. 

*  The  correct  reading  is.  ‘Gauravam’  and  not  the  locative  form  'Gaurave.’ 
'Linga'  means-'Jati’  or  species.  Chakrapani  observes  that  this  remark  about  the 
heaviness  of  males  and  the  lightness  of  females  should  be  understood  in  respect  of 
only  quadrupeds  and  not  of  birds  or  fowl.  He  quotes  Harita  in  support.  Chutush- 
padeshu  laghwistri  vihageshu  laghu  pitman.  Further,  Striyagchatushpade  grahyah 
pumdnso  vihageshu  cha. 

It  seems  to  be  unaccountable  why,  when  the  Rishis  declared  the  males  of  quadru¬ 
peds  to  be  heavier  than  females,  the  practice  among  Hindus  has  always  been  to 
prefer  male  animals  to  female  ones  for  slaughter.  The  Mahomedans  slaughter  both 
females  and  males  although  they  prefer  the  former.  Probably,  in  selecting  the. 
male  the  Hindus  were  guided  by  the  desire  of  preserving  the  species.  Destruction 
of  female  animals  may  soon  make  the  species  extinct. — T. 

t  ‘Samskara’  implies  the  processes  of  admixture  or  cooking.  What  is  stated 
here  is  this  :  by  such  processes  things  heavy  may  be  made  light,  as  laja  from  paddy. 
(Laja  is  fried  paddy;  frying  is  the  Samskara  here).  So  things  light  may  be  made 
heavy,  as  flour  of  fried  barley  may  be  converted  into  Siddha-pindikS.— T. 

t  The  reference  is  to  the  lesson  called  “Mara^itiya”  (vide  p.  49  ante)  where 
it  has  been  said  that  articles  of  food  depend  upon  their  measure  for  their  quality  of 
heaviness  or  lightness  as  food. — T. 

§  ‘Tripti’ is  gratification.  One  should  eat  ‘tripti-matram,’  that  is,  to  that  point 
which  produces  ‘gratification’  without  bringing  about  satiety  or  inability  to  act  or 
move  about. — T. 


39° 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHITA. 


With  AnupSnas  as  fuel,  that  fire  blazes  up.  Without  them,  it 
becomes  extinguished.*344 

Generally,  it  is  with  respect  to  those  persons  that  are  of  little 
strength,  that  are  not  of  active  habits,  that  are  in  ill  health,  that 
are  delicate,  or  that  are  nurtured  in  happiness,  that  heaviness  or 
lightness  (in  the  matter  of  food)  is  necessary  to  be  ascertained.845 

With  regard  to  those  that  are  of  blazing  digestive  fires,  that 
are  habituated  to  hard  and  heavy  food,  that  are  devoted  to  active 
work,  that  are  of  large  stomach,  it  is  not  at  all  necessary  to  look 
into  the  question  of  heaviness  or  lightness  (of  food).846 

Man,  reflecting  on  measure  and  time,  with  concentrated  atten¬ 
tion,  should  every  day  pour  beneficial  food  as  libations  on  the 
internal  fire  fed  by  the  fuel  of  Anupana.f847 

That  man  who,  having  established  his  sacrificial  fire,  silently 
recites  every  day  the  syllable  OM,  makes  gifts  (according  to  the 
best  of  his  power),  and  pours  beneficial  food  on  his  internal  fire,848 
unto  that  man  who  is  thus  engaged  in  (achieving)  what  is  for  his 
highest  good  and  who  in  the  matter  of  food  and  drink  is  well 
acquainted  with  the  laws  of  assimilation,  no  diseases  ever  attach 
themselves,  not  even  in  his  future  lives,  for  want  of  cause. t949 

The  man  who  is  habituated  to  beneficial  food  lives  for  six  and 
thirty  thousand  nights  in  perfect  health,  with  soul  under  his  control 
and  winning  the  esteem  of  those  that  are  good  and  pious.850 

(  Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary.  ) 

The  qualities  of  food  and  drink,  and  twelve  principal  Groups 
(of  food  and  drink),  have  thus  been  laid  down. 

*  ‘Ayus’  is  period  of  life.  By  ‘prS.n5h’  is  meant  the  life-winds  called  PiSna, 
Apana,  SamSna,  Udana,  and  Vvana.  These  life-winds  support  the  physical  organism, 
and  when  they  move  in  harmony,  the  result  is  perfect  health  and  vigour. — T. 

f  The  figure  here  is  borrowed  from  the  ritual  of  sacrifice.  Every  good  man 
should  perform  the  daily  sacrifice  of  Homa,  that  is,  pour  libations  of  clean  Ghee  on 
his  sacred  fire  which  is  fed  by  sacred  fuel.  The  digestive  fire  is  the  sacrificial  fire 
within  the  body.  Anupanas  are  the  fuel  which  feed  that  fire.  Upon  that  fire  should 
every  day  be  poured  libations  of  good  food. — T. 

+  ‘AntarSdrite’  is  'in  the  absence  of  cause’ ;  that  is,  of  those  causes  that  bring 
about  diseases.  ‘Bhavinah’  simply  implies  future  (diseases).  Hence  the  meaning  is, 
as  Chakrap5.ni  explains,  that  so  great  is  the  merit  achieved  by  such  a  man  that  not 
even  in  his  future  births  (in  course  of  his  transmigrations)  diseases  ever  eome 
to  him. — T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


39 ! 


(Articles  used  for)  Anupana,  with  their  qualities,  and  heaviness 
and  lightness  (of  food  and  drink)  in  brief,  have  been  spoken  of  in 
this  Lesson  on  the  Ordinances  about  Food  and  Drink. 

The  instructions  laid  down-  should  be  particularly  observed. 

Food  is  said  to  be  the  very  Life  of  all  living  creatures.  The 
whole  world  (of  living  creatures)  pursues  food. 

Clearness  of  complexion,  melodiousness  of  voice,  prolongation 
of  existence,  lustre  of  intelligence,  happiness,  contentment,  growth, 
strength,  memory,  are  all  established  in  Food. 

Whatever  worldly  acts  have  to  be  done  for  the  support  of  life, 
and  whatever  Vedic  (religious)  acts  for  attaining  to  Heaven,  and 
whatever  acts  have  been  laid  down  for  achieving  Empancipation, 
are  all  established  in  Food.*1-1 

Thus  ends  the  seven  and  twentieth  Lesson,  called  the  Ordi¬ 
nances  about  Food  and  Drink,  forming  one  of  the  four  Lessons  on 
Food  and  Drink,  in  the  treatise  of  Agnivefa  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


