LESSON  XXV. 

We  shall  next  expound  the  Lesson  called  ‘Yajjah-purushiya.* 
Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.f1 


Mahashatpala  is  a  variety  of  Ghee. 

The  triple  fruit?  are  the  three  myrobalans,  chebulic,  emblic,  and  belleric. 

.  For  Cilajatu  vide  note  h  in  p.  237  ante. 

Pippaii  means  the  different  varieties  of  Piper  longum.  Linn;  syn.  Chavia 
Roxburghii. 

Chitraka  is  Plumbago  Zeylaniea,  Linn. 

*  Rasayanas  are  drugs  prepared  with  the  three  myrobalans. 

‘Kaumbhagrita’  is  very  old  ghee,  taken  out  from  a  kumbha  or  earthen  vessel 
in  which  it  is  kept  for  years  together. 

*  ‘Castra’  literally  implies  any  treatise  that  governs  or  rules  the  conduct  of  men. 
Generally,  the  word  is  employed  to  signify  the  scriptures  or  holy  writings.  The  Vedas 
-  are  ‘Castras’  as  well,  though  not  originally  reduced  to  writing.  All  the  treatises  of  ths 
Rishis  are  ‘Castras.’  Then,  again,  the  sciences  of  Vedanta,  Nyaya,  and  the  other 
schools  of  philosophy,  are  all.  ‘Castras,’  in  the  sense  of  being  branches  of  knowledge. 
‘Satwavatam’  may  imply,  besides,  persons  of  understanding,  and  not  the  good  or 
righteous  alone. — T. 

t  The  meaning  of  the  title  will  sufficiently  appear  from  what  follows.— T i 


OH  A  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


267 


In  days  of  yore,  the  great  Rishis  (on  a  certain  occasion), 
while  seated-befpre  the  illustrious  Punarvasu  who  had  direct  and, 
positive  knowledge  of  the  attributes  of  all  things,  raised  this  dis¬ 
course,*2  having  reference  to  the  first  origin  of  the  diseases  of 
this  aggregate,  called  Purusha,  of  soul,  senses,  mind,  and  the 
objects  of  the  senses.-)5 

Just  after  the  topic  had  been  propounded,  the  king  of  Kagi, 
Vamaka  by  name,  approaching  that  conclave  of  Rishis  and  saluting 
them,  uttered  these  words  of  grave  import  :4 

Is  it  fhe  case,  ye  Rishis,  that  diseases  are  regarded  as  born  of 
that  (substance)  whence  man  himself  is  born  ?  Or,  is  it  otherwise  ?’ 

After  the  king  had  said  this,  Punarvasu  said  unto  the  Rishis  :s 

All  of  you  are  persons  whose  doubts  have  been  dispelled  by 
immeasurable  learning  and  knowledge  !  It  behoveth  you  to  remove 
the  doubt  of  the  king  of  Kagi  1J5 

(The  Rishi  named)  Parikshi-Maudgalya,  having  reflected,  first 
said  these  words  :  Purusha  has  his  origin  in  the  Soul.  The  diseases 
also  have  their  origin  in  the  Soul.  The  Soul  is  the  cause.7  The 

#  ‘Pratyakshadharmanam’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  -one  who  has,  through 
penances,  obtained  a  sight  of  Dharma,  the  deity  of  Righteousness.  ’  Dharma  is  the 
great  judge  who  rewards  and  punishes.  This  can  hardly  be  the  meaning  here. — T. 

t  The  literal  meaning  of  the  word  ‘Purusha’  is  he  who  lies  or  dwells  in  a  (material) 
case,  i.e.,  the  body  ;  ordinarily,  it  implies  Person.  That  which  is  called  Person  is  an 
aggregate  of  Soul,  the  senses,  mind,  and  the  objects  of  the  senses.  ‘Mind,’  as  under¬ 
stood  in  Hindu  philosophy,  is  regarded  as  the  sixth  sense.  The  objects  of  the  senses 
are,  of  course,  the  five  primal  elements  of  earth,  water,  light  or  heat,  wind,  and  space 
or  ether.  The  Soul  is  the  owner  of  the  senses,  the  mind,  and  the  material  case  to. 
which  the  senses  and  the  mind  inhere,  There  are  two  opposite  doctrines  regarding  the 
Soul.  One  of  these  is  that  the  Soul  acts  and  suffers  ;  the  other  is  that  it  is  inactive  and 
does  not  suffer,  its  connection  with  the  senses,  the  mind,  and  the  material  case  being  like 
that  of  the  lotus  leaf  with  water.  The  lotus  leaf,  even  if  immersed  in  water,  would  not 
still  be  soaked  nr  drenched  by  it.— T. 

J  The  words  of  the  question  asked  by  the  King,  viz.,  ‘Purusho  Yajjah’  in  Verse  5, 
have  been  taken  for  naming  this  Lesson.  ‘Yaj-jah  Purushah’  literally  implies  ‘that  from 
which  man  hath  sprung.’  Hence,  the  meaning  of  the  name  applied  to  the  Lesson  is 
? About  that  whence  man  hath  sprung.’ 

‘Jnana’ is  ordinary  knowledge  or  learning.  ‘Vijnana’  is  a  deep  knowledge  of  al 
things,  the  result  both  of  study  and  that  spiritual  insight  which  springs  from  penances. 
!Cchettum’  is  literally  ‘to  cut’  ;  hence,  to  remove  or  dispel,  — 7’.;  - 


268 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA. 


Soul  earns  acts,  and  enjoys  (or  endures)  their  fruits  ;  since  pleasure 
and  pain  cannot  arise  without  the  substance  that  is  conscious.*8 

(^araloman  said, — This  is  not  so  ;  for  the  Soul,  which  has  an 
aversion  for  sorrow  or  pain,  would  never  Qf  itself  attach  diseases  to 
itself.9  It  is  the  Mind,  (otherwise)  called  Sattwa,  which,  overwhelm¬ 
ed  with  Rajas  and  Tamas,  is  the  cause  in  the  (matter  of  the)  origin 
of  the  body  and  the  diseases.-]'10 

Varyovida  said, — This  is  not  so.  Verily,  Mind  alone  cannot 
be  the  cause.  Without  the  body  the  very  existence  becomes  impos¬ 
sible  of  bodily  diseases  and  of  Mind.11 

All  creatures  have  sprung  from  Rasa.  The  diverse  diseases 
also  have  sprung  from  it.  And  since  the  Waters  have  Rasa  in 
them,  the  Waters  have  been  said  to  be  the  final  (or  original) 
cause.:]13 

*  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  Purusha  or  man  lias  the  Soul  for  his  cause  ;  i.e. ,  it  is 
the  Soul  that,  with  certain  attributes,  becomes  the  man  or  person.  The  Soul  being  the 
original  cause  of  the  person,  diseases  also  spring  from  or  have  their  birth  in  the  Soul. 
The  Soul  earns  acts,  i.e.,  it  is  the  Soul  that  exerts  and  acts,  and  actions,  therefore,  are 
the  results  of  the  Soul’s  activity.  The  fruits  of  acts,  therefore,  i.e.,  pleasure  and  pain, 
must  be  the  Soul’s  ;  i.e. ,  the  Soul  being  the  actor,  must  enjoy  and  endure  the  con¬ 
sequences  of  his  acts.  Pleasure  and  pain,  again,  are  enjoyed  and  endured  by  a  feeling 
or  conscious  substance.  They  cannot  inhere  to  any  inert  substance. 

‘Pravritti’  literally  means  flow  ;  hence  rise  or  origin. — T. 

t  According  to  this  theory,  the  Soul  is  inactive.  It  is  the  Mind  that  acts, 
through  the  senses  or  organs  of  knowledge  and  action.  The  results  of  acts,  therefore, 
viz.,  pleasure  and  pain,  must  attach  to  the  Mind  and  not  to  the  Soul  which  transcends 
the  Mind  and  is  oniy  the  onlooker.  One  of  the  primal  attributes  of  the  Soul  is  its  aversion 
for  pain.  Rajas  (or  Passion)  and  Tamas  (or  Darkness)  overwhelm  the  Mind,  and 
cause  it  to  act.  The  fruits  of  acts  attach  to  the  Mind  and  dispose  it  to  attract  matter. 
The  shape  or  form  of  the  material  case  depends  upon  the  results  of  acts,  so  that  one 
becomes  a  worm  or  a  bird,  a  horse  or  a  man,  in  consequence  of  one’s  acts.  The  Soul  is 
always  pure  and  stainless.  The  consequences  of  acts  done  must  have  to  be  enjoyed  and 
endured  before  they  can  be  exhausted.  Hence,  abstention  from  acts  is  the  only  means 
by  which  the  Soul  can  gradually  free  itself  from  its  material  case,  the  Linga  or  finer  case, 
and  lastly  the  Karana  Carira  or  its  potentiality  to  attract  a  case.  For  a  fuller  exposir 
tion  of  this  doctrine,  see  the  sections  on  the  Soul,  birth,  body,  &c.,  in  the  Canti  Parva 
of  the  Mahabharata. — T. 

J  By  ‘Rasa’  is  understood  the  liquid  substance  inhering  apparently  to  most  of  the 
pbjects  of  the  world.  Blood  is  the  Rasa  in  the  human  system  :  so  also  the  vital  seed. 


CM  A  RA  KA-SA  M  HIT A. 


Hiranyakhya  said, — This  is  not  so.  The  Soul  has  never  been 
said  to  have  sprung  from  Rasa.  Nor  can  Mind  be  said  to  have 
sprung  from  it,  being  what  it  is,  viz.,  something  that  transcends 
.the  senses.  Some  diseases,  again,  are  due  to  sound.13 

As  regards  Purusha,  he  has  sprung  from  the  combination  of 
the  six  {viz.,  the  five  primal  elements  and  the  Soul).  Hence, 
diseases  also  i  as  inhering  to  Purusha)  must  be  regarded  to  spring 
from  these  six  elements.  The  Sankhyas  of  former  times  ascertain¬ 
ed  (by  observation  and  meditation)  that  this  (which  is  called 
Purusha)  is  a  compound  sprung  from  the  six  elements.*1 

Unto  Kucpka  who  said  so,  (Jaunaka  said, — This  is  not  so.  How 
can  Purusha  spring  into  life  from  only  the  six  elements,  without 
the  intervention  of  the  father  and  the  mother  ?13 

Man  is  seen  to  spring  from  man  ;  a  cow  from  cow  ;  a  horse 
from  horse.  Certain  diseases,  such  as  diabetes  and  others,  are 
derived  from  parents.  Hence,  parents  are  the  causes  of  disease.16 

Bhadrakapya  said,— This  is  not  so;  since  from  a  blind  father 
a  blind  son  does  not  spring.  Your  initial  origin  cannot  be  reason¬ 
ably  ascribed  to  the  father  and  the  mother.  (For  these  had  father 
and  mother,  and  they  too  had  theirs,  and  so  on).  The  living  crea¬ 
ture  should  be  regarded  as  born  of  acts.  His  diseases  also  have 
their  origin  in  acts.  Without  acts,  neither  Purusha  nor  diseases 
can  have  their  origin.18 

Bharadwaja  said, — It  is  not  so  ;  since  the  agent  must  precede 
the  action.  Then,  again,  no  such  action,  undone  by  an  agent,  is 
seen  whose  effect  is  Man.19  The  cause  of  the  origin  or  appear¬ 
ance  of  diseases,  as  of  man  is  Nature,  even  as  Nature  is  the  cause 
of  the  sharpness,  fluidity,  mobility,  and  heat  which  are  the  attributes 
of  Earth,  Water,  Wind  and  Light.*20 

The  sap  which  feeds  them  is  the  Rasa  of  the  vegetables.  Rasa,  however,  is  ultimately 
resolvable  into  Water.  If  Rasa,  therefore,  be  the  cause  of  both  birth  and  the  diseases  to 
which  creatures  are  subject,  the  ultimate  cause  of  birth  and  diseases '  would  then  be 
water. —  T. 

*  Bharadwaja’s  argument  is  this  :  action  cannot  be  the  cause  of  birth  ;  action 
follows  the  agent,  for  without  an  agent  preceding  or  pre-existing,  there  can  be  no  action. 
Then,  again,  as  action  pre-supposes.an  agent,  no  action  can  be  met  with  that  has  not  been 


27Q 


CM  A  RA  KA  -  Sa  Mil  1 TA . 


Kankayana  said, — This  is  not  so  ;  since,  if  it  were  so,  action 
would  not  have  produced  fruits.  As  regards  Nature,  the  accom¬ 
plishment  of  existent  objects  may  or  may  not  flow  from  it.21  But 
Prajapati  (the  Primeval  Patriarch)  the  offspring  of  Brahman, 
possessed  of  immeasurable  will,  is  the  creator  of  this  universe  of 
animate  and  inanimate  objects,  as  also  of  happiness  and  misery*22 

He  of  Atri’s  race  who  had  betaken  himself  to  the  mendicant 
order  said, — This  is  not  so  ;  since  the  primeval  Patriarch,  who 
always  desires  the  good  of  creatures,  cannot,  like  a  wicked  per¬ 
son,  always  attach  misery  to  his  own  progeny.?®  Man  is  the  off¬ 
spring  of  Tjme.  His  diseases  also  are  born  of  Time.  The  whole 
universe  is  subject  to  the  sway  of  Time.  Time  is  everywhere  the 
cause. f24 

While  the  Rishis  were  thus  wrangling  with  one  another, 
Punarvasu  said  unto  them, — Do  not  dispute  !  Truth  becomes  un¬ 
attainable  in  consequence  of  the  taking  of  sides  (by  enquirers).25 
When  assertions  and  contradictions  are  urged  and  advanced  in 
the  guise  of  certainties,  the  disputants  never  attain  to  the  end  of 
the  matter  under  discussion,  even  as  a  person  who  is  turned  round 
and  round  on  an  oil-pressjng  machine  never  attains  to  the  end  of 
his  journey.2?  Casting  off  this  wrangle,  do  ye  think  only  of  the 
truth.  Unless  the  thick  gloom  (of  ignorance)  be  dispelled,  correct 

.done  by  someagent.  An  undone  act  cannot  be  conceived,  whose  effect  would  be  man  or 
the  agent  of  acts.  ‘Tejoantanam’  implies  ‘those  which  have  Tejas  for  their  end  hence, 
.earth,  & c.,  or  the  primal  elements.  —  T. 

*  The  argument  of  Kankayana  is  this  :  Nature  is  not  the  cause  ;  for  if  it  were  the 
cause  of  existent  objects,  no  action  would  have  been  necessary  to  produce  anticipated 
results.  Men  cultivate  the  soil  and  sow  seeds  thereon,  and  as  the  consequence  of  that 
act,  get  crops.  Men  study  with  effort  and  acquire  knowledge.  If  Nature  were  the 
pause,  tilling  of  the  soil  or  laborious  study  would  not  have  been  necessary  for  the  acquisi¬ 
tion  of  crops  and  knowledge.  These  would  have  come  of  themselves.  Most  editions 
read  ‘hyarambhaphalam’  ;  the  reading  ‘hyarambhe  phalam’  would  not  be  incorrect. 
Prajapati  means,  literally,  a  patriarch.  The  oflspring  of  Brahipan,  Prajapati  Kagyapa 
(or  Daksha)  is  the  creator  of  all  things.  He  is  possessed  of  immeasurable  will,  for 
otherwise  the  vast  universe  could  not  flow  from  him. —  T. 

t  ‘Atreya’  is  descendant  of  Atri’s  race.  ‘Bhikshu’  is  a  person  of  the  medicant 
Order.  The  Rishi  whose  answer  is  represented  by  these  Verses  is,  therefore,  a  person  qf 
Atjri’s  race  who  belonged  to  the  mendicant  order, — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA- 


271 


knowledge  can'riot  be  attained  in  the  matter  under  enquiry.27  If 
those  elements,  whose  existence  in  a  state  of  excellence  keeps  a 
man  in  healthy  become  deteriorated,  they  generate  diverse  kinds  of 
diseases.*28 

Having  heard  these  words  of  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri, 
Vam'aka  the  ruler  of  the  K-agis,  once  more  asked-  the  illustrious  son 
of  Atri,  saying, — What,  O  illustrious  one,  is  the  cause  of  the  origin 
and  growth  of  diseases  which  (as  thou  hast  said)  are  born  of  the 
deterioration  of  man  who  (as  a  healthy  creature),  is  the  product  of 
the  excellence  (of  the  elements  that  are  in  him)  ? — 

Unto  him  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said, — The  use  of  benefi¬ 
cial  food,  is  the  one  only  cause  of  the  growth  of  a  person  ;  while 
the  use  of  food  that  is  injurious  is  the  cause  of  disease.28 

Unto  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  who  was  saying  so,  Agnivega 
said, — How,  O  illustrious  one,  shall  we  succeed  in  ascertaining, 
without  the  possibility  of  error,  the  indications  of  food  that  is  bene¬ 
ficial  and  of  food  that  is  injurious  ?  We  see  that  in  consequence  of 
differences  of  measure,  time,  preparation,  habitat,  body,  faults, 
and  persons,  food  that  is  beneficial  and  food  that  is  injurious  pro¬ 
duce  the  very  opposite  efEects.f30 

Unto  him  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said, — 0  Agnivega,  those 
kinds  of  food  that  cause  the  harmonious  elements  of  the  body  to 


*  In  Verse  27,  ‘Adhyatmam’  is  used  for  ‘Truth.’  In. India  the  oil-pressing  machine 
consists  of  a  plank,  besides  other  contrivances,  upon  which  a  man  may  sit  or  lie  down. 
The  plank  goes  round  and  round  (with  the  person  upon  it)  as  the  bull  walks  round  and 
round. — 71 

f  The  question  propounded  by  Agniveija  is  this  :  Food  that  is  regarded  beneficial  is- 
seen  to  produce  injurious  effects,  and  food  that  is  regarded  injurious  is  seen  to  produce 
beneficial  effects.  The  results  that  deend  upon  differences  of  ‘Matra’  or  measure  ;  in 
‘Kriya’ or  the  manner  of  preparation  or  the  mode  of  administration  ;  of  ‘bhumi.’  i.e,, 
habitat,  for  the  same  vegetable  or  animal  procured  from  one  place  has  one  kind  of 
properties,  but  taken  from  another  place  has  another  kind  of  properties  ;  of  body,  i.e.t 
the  weakness  or  strength  of  the  person  to  whom  the  food  is  to  be  given  ;  of  faults,  i.e., 
diseases,  or  the  harmony  or  otherwise  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  ;;  and  lastly,  of  the  very 
constitutions  of  persons.  What  Agniveija,  therefore,  wishes  to  know  is  the  certain  and 
unfailing  indications  of  what  food  is  beneficial  and  what  food  is  otherwise.  ‘Anapavadam’ 
is  ‘Avyabhichari,’  as  explained  by  the  Commentators. —  71 


272 


CHA  RA  K  A  -  SA  ME  I T A . 


remain  in  their  normal  condition,  or  restore  harmony  to  elements 
that  have  become  inharmonious,  thou  shouldst  know,  are  benefi¬ 
cial.  All  kinds  of  food  whose  action  is  the  reverse  of  this,  are  in¬ 
jurious.  These  indications  of  beneficial  and  injurious  food  are  cer¬ 
tain  and  infallible.31 

Unto  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  that  said  so,  Agnive9a  said, — O 
illustrious  one,  instruction  of  this  kind  will  not  be  compre¬ 
hended  by  the  generality  of  physicians.*3 2 

Unto  him  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said, — 0  Agnive9a,  they 
unto  whom  the- science  of  food  is  known  in  respect  of  .properties, 
of  constituent  elements,  and  of  effects,  in  their  entirety,  as  also 
the  considerations  of  measure  and  the  like,  will  succeed  in  compre¬ 
hending  even  this  kind  of  instruction.-}-33 

We  shall  now  discourse  on  this  topic,  referring  to  consider¬ 
ations  of  measure  and  the  like,  in  such  a  Way  that  the  generality 
of  physicians  may,  without  doubt,  comprehend  it. 

As  regards  measure  and  the  like,  there  are  diverse  kinds  of 
alternatives.  We  shall,  aftef  this,  expound  the  Regulations  about 
diet,  referring  to  properties,  constituent  elements,  and  effects,  as 
also  to  especial  division.34 

Those  Regulations  are  as  follows  : — 

In  consequence  of  the  sameness  of  purpose,  the  character  as 
food,  of  all  varieties  of  food,  is  of  only  one  kind.}; 

Food,  in  respect  of  its  source,  is  twofold,  for  it  is  made  up  of 
mobile  and  immobile  objects. 


*  ‘Bhuishtakalpah  sarva  bhishajah’  implies  ‘Prayena  sarva  bhishajah,’  i.e.,  the 
greatest  part  of  physicians. —  T. 

t  ‘Aharatattwam’  is  science  of  food  ;  ‘Gunatah,’  i.e.,  with  respect  to  heaviness  or 
lightness;  ‘Dravyatah,  'i.e.,  With  respect  to  their  constituent  elements,  such  as  watery 
or  fiery,  &c.  ;  ‘ICarmmatah,’  i.e  ,  with  respect  to  the  effects  produced,  such  as  Jivanam  or 
Vrimhanam,  &c.  ‘Sarvavayatah’  refers  to  what  precedes,  as  explained  by  Gangadhara. 
Chakrapanidatta  takes  it  as  referring  to  ‘Mafradaya.’ — T. 

J  Food  is  taken  for  replenishing  the  system.  Whatever  the  kind  of  food,  the  object 
for  which  it  is  taken  is  that  and  no  other.  How  many  kinds  of  food  there  may  be,  their 
character,  therefore,  as  food,  is  of  only  one  kind  ;  i.e.,  looking  at  the  object  for  which 
food  is  taken,  there  can  be  no  classification  of  food,  whatever  its  variety. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHIT 


273 


Its  power  also  is  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  beneficial  and  injurious, 
judged  by  the  differences  in  respect  of  its  after-consequences. 

As  regards  the  manner  of  taking  food,  there  are  four  kinds, 
viz.,  drinking,  swallowing,  chewing,  and  licking. 

In  consequence  of  taste  being  of  six  kinds,  food  is  of  six 
kinds  in  respect  of  taste.*35 

Food  is  of  twenty  kinds,  following  the  qualites  of  heaviness, 
lightness,  coolness,  warmth,  oiliness,  dryness,  stability,  instability 
softness,  hardness,  unctiousness  and  its  reverse,  smoothness,  harsh¬ 
ness,  subtility,  grossness,  solidity  and  liquidness.38 

Food  is  of  infinite  variety  in  consequence  of  the  diversity  of 
ways  in  which  articles  may  be  combined  and  the  diversity  of 
methods  in  which  they  may  be  dressed. 

Those  varieties,  however,  and  ingredients  that  are  used  very 
generally,  as  also  those  modifications  that  are  due  to  well-known 
combinations  and  that  are  very  beneficial  or  very  baneful,  in 
consequence  of  their  nature,  to  mankind,  we  shall,  one  after  an¬ 
other,  lay  down.37 

They  are  as  follow  : — 

Among  that  genus  of  paddy  which  is  known  by  the  name  of 
£uka,  those  paddies  that  are  red  constitute  the  most  beneficial  diet 
and  are  hence  regarded  as  the  best.  Among  the  paddies  included 
under  the  name  of  £ami,  Mudga  is  the  best.  Amongst  waters,  the 
best  is  that  which  falls  from  the  sky.  Among  salts,  the  best  is 
that  which  cometh  from  sea-water.  That  called  Jivanti  is  the  best 
of  all  potherbs.t38 


*  It  has  been  stated  in  an  earlier  portion  of  the  work  that  the  tastes  are  pungent, 
bitter,  astringent,  sweet,  sour,  and  saltish. — T. 

t  All  bearded  paddy  is  called  Cuka.  Cali  paddy  is  that  which  grows  in  a  damp  soil 
or  a  field  covered  with  water.  Mudga  is  the  Phaseolus  Mungo ,  Linn.  It  does  not  fall 
within  the  genus  paddy.  It  seems  that  the  word  Dhanya  originally  meant  grain 
or  seed.  Cami  generally  implies  a  pod  or  legume, 

35 


274 


CHA  RA  KA-Sa  MU  IT  A . 


Among  flesh  of  all  animals  of  the  deer  species,  that  of  the 
Ena  is  the  best  Among  birds,  the  meat  of  the  Lava  is  the  best, 
Among  animals  living  in  holes,  the  meat  of  the  Godha  is  the  best. 
Among  fishes,  the  meat  of  the  Rohita  is  the  best-f 

Among  all  kinds  of  ghee,  that  from  cow’s  milk  is  the  best 
Among  all  varieties  of  milk,  that  of  the  cow  is  the  best.  Among 
all  oils  from  vegetable  substances,  that  from  sesame  is  the  best. 
Among  animals  living  in  marshy  regions,  the  fat  of  the  hog  is  the 
best.  Among  all  piscatorial  animals,  the  fat  of  the  porpoise  is  the 
best.  Among  aquatic  fovyl,  the  fat  of  the  Pakahansa  is  the  best,3® 

Among  all  kinds  of  pecking  fowls,  the  fat  of  the  cock  is  the 
best.  Among  all  animals  that  feed  on  twigs  and  leaves,  the  fat 
of  the  goat  is  the  best.  Among  roots,  ginger  is  the  best.  Among 
fruits,  Uvse  passae  are  the  best.  Among  all  the  products  ;of  the 
sugar-cane,  sugar  is  the  best, 

Thus  have  been  mentioned  those  articles  that  are,  by  nature, 
numbered  among  the  best  varieties  of  food.40 

We  9hall  now  lay  dovyn  some  of  those  articles  that  are  very 
baneful. 

A  small  variety  of  Yava  (called  Yavaka),  being  highly  unsuit¬ 
able  as  diet,  is  regarded  as  the  worst.  Among  the  paddies  known 
by  the  napie  of  Cami,  Masha  is  the  worst,  Among  waters,  the 
worst  is  that  of  rivers  in  the  season  of  rains.  Among  salts,  the 
worst  is  brapkish  earth.  Among  potherbs,  the  \yorst  is  the  mustard 
seed  plant.  Among  meat,  the  worst  is  beef.*4  * 

Among  birds,  the  meat  of  the  black  pigeon  is  the  worst. 
Among  animals  living  in  holes,  the  flesh  of  the  frog  is  the  worst. 
Among  fishes,  the  worst  is  Ghilchima.  Among  ghee,  that  from 

q  Ena  is  a  speeies  qf  deer,  pf  black  colour,  beautiful  eyes,  short  legs,  Lava  is  a  sort 
of  quail  ;  Perdix  Chinensis. 

Godha  is  the  Iguana.  Rohita  is  the  ordinary  Rohu  fish  or  Cyprinus  Roliila. 

*  Masha  is  the  Pheseolus  radiaius,  Roxb.  ‘Yavaka’  is  a  small  variety  of  the  Hordeum 
kexastichum,  Linn.  ‘XJshara’  is  a  kind  of  dry  and  saltish  earth,  \yhich  poor  people 
take  as  a  substitute  of  for  sea-salt.— T. 


OH  A  RA  KA -SA  MHITA . 


275 


sheep’s  miil<  is  the  worst.  Among  milk,  that  from  sheep  is  the 
worst.  Among  vegetable  oils,  that  from  Kusumbha  is  the  wsrst. 
Among  aninials  living  irt  marshy  regions,  the  fat  of  the  buffalo  is 
the  worst  Among  animals  of  the  piscatorial  genus,  the  fat  of  the 
crocodile  is  the  worst.  Among  aquatic  fowl,  the  fat  of  the  Kaka- 
fnadgu  is  the  Worst. 

Of  all  birds,  the  fat  of  the  Karandava  is  the  worst.  Of  all 
animals  that  feed  on  branches  of  trees,  the  fat  of  the  elephant  is 
the  worst.*41* 

Of  all  bulbous  roots,  the  Mulaka  is  the  worst.  Of  fruits,  the 
Worst  is  the  Nikncha.  Of  all  modifications  of  the  juice  of  the 
sugarcane,  the  worst  is  Phanifa; 

Thus  are  those  things  explained  which  are  the  foremo'st  of 
those  modifications  of  food  that  are,  as  regards  their  very  nature', 
productive  of  consequences  the  most  baneful.f43 

Of  the  modifications  of  food  those  have  been  explained  that  are 
beneficial  and  baneful.  After  this,  once  more,  We  shall  lay  down, 
principally,  what  those  articles  are  that  are  used  in  the  Well- 
known  (curative)  operations  and  in  medicines,  along  with  those 
that  are  subsidiary.  J  44 


‘Chilchima  is  a  kind  of  sprat  ;  Cljipea  cultraia.  ‘Kakamadgu’  is  the  water-hen 
or  gallinule. 

*  Some  texts  read  ‘Chataka’  for  ‘Karandava.’  The  formet  means  a  kind  of  sparrow, 
the  latter  an  aquatic  fowl  Of  the  duck  species. — T. 

t ‘Nikucha’ is  spelt  variously,  such  as ‘Likucha’  and  ‘Lakucha,’  In  Bengal  it  is 
generally  known  by  the  name  of  Madara.’  It  is,  of  course,  the  Artocarpus  Lakoocha, 
Roxb. 

‘Phanita*  is  the  inspissated  juice  of  the  sugarcane.  ‘Prakrishtatamani’  is  the 
correct  reading,  and  not ‘Nikrishtatamani.  ’  The  meaning  is  “the  chief  of  those  articles 
that  ate  baneful  afe  mentioned.” — T. 

J  A  few  Only  of  those  modifications  of  food  that  are  beneficial  and  baneful  have 
been  mentioned.  These  are,  therefore,  called  the  ‘Avayava’  of  those  modifications, 
meaning  ‘a  portion,’  i.e.,  some.  ‘Karma’  implies  the  curative  operations  of  purging 
vomiting,  &C.  The  articles  used  in  ‘Karma’  and  those  in  medicines  are  to  be  named, 
together  with  their  ‘AUnVandhas,’  i.e.,  the  subsidiary  articles,  for  promoting  the  action 
of  ‘Karma’  and  of  medicines. — T. 


276 


OHARA  KA  - SA  MHI TA . 


They  are  as  follows  : — 

Food  is  the  foremost  of  all  articles  that  support  life. 

Of  all  articles  that  are  assuring,  water  is  the  foremost. 

Of  all  articles  that  dispel  fatigue  or  exhaustion,  the  best  is 
wine. 

Of  all  articles  that  prolong  life,  milk  is  the  best. 

Of  all  articles  that  promote  nutrition  and  lead  to  increase  of 
flesh,  the  best  is  meat. 

Of  all  articles  that  are  soothing,  the  best  is  juice. 

Of  all  articles  that  promote  the  relish  of  food,  the  best  is  salt. 

Of  all  articles  that  are  agreeable  to  the  taste,  the  best  are  those 
that  have  a  sour  taste.*45 

Of  all  things  that  promote  strength,  the  best  is  the  flesh  of  the 
cock  (or  hen). 

Of  all  things  that  increase  the  semen,  the  best  is  the  vital  seed 
of  the  alligator. 

Of  all  things  that  allay  phlegm  and  bile,  the  best  is  honey. 

Of  all  things  that  allay  wind  and  bile,  the  best  is  ghee. 

Of  all  things  that  allay  wind  and  phlegm  the  best  is  oil. 

Of  all  things  that  are  destructive  of  phlegm,  the  best  is  vomit¬ 
ing  (induced  by  emetics). 

Of  all  things  that  are  destructive  of  bile,  purging  is  the  best. 


*  •AfWasakaranam’ implies ‘articles  that  are  assuring.’  Gangadhara  explains  that, 
of  such,  there  are  many,  such  as  consoling  words,  gifts  of  wealth,  &c.  Among  them  all’, 
the  best  is  water.  This  can  scarcely  be  the  meaning  here.  I  think,  instead  of  ‘assuring,*’ 
the  word  may  be  taken  to  mean  ‘soothing.’  ‘Hridya’  is  a  well-known  word.  It  implies 
things  that  contribute  to  bring  cheerfulness  or  relish.  Salt  is  the  best  of  all  things  that 
promote  the  flavour  or  relish  of  food.  ‘Amla’,  or  things  sour,  are,  by  themselves  aeree- 
able. —  T 


CH  A  RAKA-SAMEITA.  277 

Of  all  things  that  are  destructive  of  wind,  the  best  are  enemata. 

Of  all  things  that  soften  the  body  the  best  are  the  operations 
called. Swedana  (i.e.,  those  that  induce  perspiration). 

Of  all  things  that  make  the  body  firm,  the  best  is  physical 
exercise. 

Of  all  things  that  reduce  corpulency,  the  best  is  sexual  inter¬ 
course. 

Of  all  things  that  reduce  sexual  potency,  the  foremost  are 
alkaline  articles. 

Of  all  things  that  do  not  promote  the  relish  of  food,  the  fore¬ 
most  is  Tinduka  {Diospyros  Embryopteris,  Pers.  ;  syii,  Diospyros 
glutinosa,  Yiosnig.)**6 

Of  all  things  that  are  destructive  of  the  voice,  the  foremost  is 
unripe  Kapittha  ( Feronia  Elephantum). 

Of  all  things  that  are  the  reverse  of  what  is  agreeable  and 
possessed  of  relish,  the  foremost  is  the  ghee  of  sheep’s  milk. 

Of  all  things  that  are  destructive  of  consumption,  that  promote 
secretion  of  milk,  that  are  agreeable  to  the  constitution,  that  pre¬ 
vent  the  fluidity  of  the  blood,  and  that  allay  hemorrhages,  the 
foremost  is  the  ghee  of  goat’s  milk. 

Of  all  things  that  promote  phlegm  and  bile,  the  foremost  is 
sheep’s  milk. 

Of  all  things  that  promote  sleep,  the  foremost  is  the  milk  of 
the  buffalo. 

Of  all  things  that  prevent  secretions  and  cause  heaviness  of 
the  body,  the  foremost  is  badly  formed  curds. 

Of  all  things  that  reduce  corpulency,  the  foremost  is  the  food 
that  consists  of  boiled  Gavedhuka  (a  species  of  Coix). 

*  It  should  be  noted  that  in  naming  the  reverse  of  what  promotes  relish,  something 
that  is  used  as  food  should  be  named,  and  not  anything  of  bad  or  abominable  taste. 
Hence  Tinduka  (commonly  called  Gab)  is  mentioned. —  T. 


278 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Of  all  things  that  contribute  to  the  dryness  of  the  body,  the 
foremost  is  the  food  that  consists  of  boiled  Uddalaka. 

Of  all  things  that  generate  (increase)  urine,  the  foremost  is 
the  sugarcane. 

Of  all  things  that  cause  (increase)  faeces,  the  foremost  are  all 
corns  of  the  barley  species. 

Of  all  things  that  generate  wind,  the  foremost  in  jamvava.* 

Of  all  things  that  generate  phlegmonous  bile,  the  foremost 
are  cakes  of  sesame  seeds. 

Of  all  things  that  generate  acid  bile,  the  foremost  is  Kuiattharf1 

Of  all  things  that  generate  phlegmonous  bile,  the  foreiriost  are 
Masha.J 

Of  all  things  that  are  fit  to  be  used  as  emetics  and  enemata  of 
both  the  dry  and  the  oily  kind,  the  foremost  are  the  fruits  of  the 
Randia  dumetorumA 7 

Of  all  things  that  constitute  agreeable  purgatives,  the  foremost 
is  Trivrit  ( Ip  rrioea  Turpethum,  ;  syn.  Convolvulus  Turpethunt). 

Of  all  things  that  constitute  mild  purgatives,  the  foremost  is 
Chaturangula  (exudation  of  Cassia  fistula,  Linn  ;  syn.  Catharto- 
carpus  fistula,  Pers.) 

Of  all  things  that  constitute  hard  purgatives,  the  foremost  is 
the  exudation  of  Snuhi  (. Euphorbia  Neriijolia,  Linn  ;  syn.  Eu¬ 
phorbia  ligularia,  Roxb.) 


*  ‘Jamvava’  0r  ‘Jamvu’  is  the  fruit  of  the  Eugenia  Jambolana. 
t  Dolichos  unifiorus ,  Lamk  ;  syn.  Dolichos  biflorus,  ttoxb. 

I  Phaseolus  radiata ,  Roxb.  Three  things  are  mentioned  as  generating  phlegmonous 
bile  ;  the  first  is  sheep’s  milk.  The  Commentator  explains  that,  of  all  liquid  substances, 
this  is  the  foremost  one  that  possesses  such  an  attribute.  Then  come  sesame  cakes 
among  cooked  food  ;  and  then  Masha  among  hard  substances.  These  things  are  fore¬ 
most,  in  their  respective  categories,  in  producing  phlegmonous  bile,-- T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHJTA.  279 

Of  all  errhines,  the  foremost  are  the  seeds  of  Pratyakpushpi 
[Achyranthes  aspera ,  Linn  ;  syn.  Achyranthes  bidentata). 

Of  all  things  used  as  amthelmintics,  the  foremost  are  Vidanga 
(the  seeds  of  Embelia  Ribes,  ;  syn.  E.  glandulifera). 

Of  all  things  used  as  antidotes  to  poison,  the  foremost  is 
£irisa  (seeds  of  Mimosa  S irissa,  Roxb  ;  syn,  Albizzia  Lebbek, 
fientham). 

Of  all  things  used  as  remedies  in  leprosy,  the  foremost  is 
Khadira  (exudation  of  Acacia  catechu,  Linn  ;  syn.  Mimosa 
catechu,  Linn). 

Of  all  things  that  are  destructive  of  wind,  the  foremost  is  Rasng 
(  Vanda  Roxburghii  ;  syn.  Gymbidium  tessaloides,  Roxb). 

Of  all  medicines  for  preventing  the  (appearance  of)  marks  of 
age,  the  foremost  is  Amalaka  ( Phyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn  ;  syn. 
Emblica  officinalis ,  Gaert). 

Of  all  things  that  are  regarded  as  beneficial  at  the  outset  of 
treating  a  disease,  the  best  is  Haritaki  (Chebulic  myrobalaus)  * 

Of  all  things  that  provoke  desire  and  that  destroy  wind,  the 
foremost  is  the  root  of  the  Eranda  (Ricinus  communis ,  Linn.) 

Of  all  things  that  provoke  the  appetite,  that  are  used  as 
Pachana,  and  that  cure  epistasis  (suppression  of  the  urine),  the 
foremost  is  the  root  of  Pippali  ( Piper  longum,  Linn  ;  syn.  Ghavica 
Roxburghii). 

Of  all  things  that  are  provocative  of  appetite  and  destructive 
of  pains  and  swellings  in  the  anus,  the  foremost  is  the  root  of 
Chitraka  (. Plumbago  Zeylanica,  Linn :)48 

Of  all  things  that  are  refrigerant,  provocative  of  appetite, 
and  Pachaniya,  and  that  relieve  vomitting  and  cure  diarroea  with 
fever,  the  foremost  is  Udichya  (otherwise  called  Bala  or  Sida 
cordifalia,  Linn). 

*  ‘Pathya’  is  used  here  in  the  $ense  of  what  is  beneficial  if  administered  at  the  outset 
of  a  treatment.  ‘Chikitsadau  hitakarakam.’— ,T, 


280 


charaka-samhitA. 


Of  all  things  that  are  astringent,  provocative  of  appetite,  and 
Pachaniya,  the  foremost  is  Katwanga  (otherwise  called  Syonaka 
or  Golosanthes  Indica  ;  syn.  Bignonia  Indica,  Linn .) 

Of  all  things  that  are  astringent,  provocative  of  appetite,  and 
relieving  of  hemorrhage,  the  foremost  is  Ananta  ( Hemidesmus 
Jndicus  ;  syn.  Ichnocarpus  frutescens.) 

Of  all  things  that  are  astringent,  provocative  of  appetite  and 
Pachaniya,  the  foremost  is  Musta  ( Gyperus  rotundus,  Linn.) 

Of  all  things  that  are  astringent  and  destructive  of  appetite  and 
that  aid  the  secretion  of  phlegm  and  the  flow  of  blood,  the  foremost 
is  \mrila  (otherwise  called  Bhadra-musta  or  Ka9eruka,  i.e.,  Scirpus 
Kysoor,  Roxb). 

Of  all  things  that  are  astringent,  provocative  of  appetite,  and 
relieving  of  wind  and  phlegm,  the  foremost  is  Vilwa  £gle  mar- 
melos). 

Of  all  things  that  are  provocative  of  appetite,  Pachaniya,  * 
astringent,  and  relieving  of  all  the  faults,  viz.,  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm,  the  foremost  is  Ativisha  Aconitum  heterophyllum,  Wall.) 

Of  all  things  that  are  astringent  and  that  stop  hemorrhages, 
the  foremost  are  the  filaments  of  the  Utpala  Nymphoea  stellata, 
Linn),  Kumuda  ( Nymphoea  lotus,  Linn),  and  Padma  ( Nelumbium 
speciosum,  Linni) 

Of  all  things  that  relieve  bile  and  phlegm,  the  foremost  is 
Duralabha  (Alhagi  Maurorum  ;  syn.  Hedysarum  Alhagi,  Linn).4,0 

Of  all  things  that  relieve  excessive  hemorrhage,  the  foremost  is 
the  fragrant  Priyangu  ( Aglaia  Roxburghiana). 

Of  all  things  that  prevent  the  secretion  of  phlegm  and  bile, 
and  the  flow  of  blood,  and  that  dry  up  these  elements,  the  foremost 
is  the  bark  of  Kutaja  ( Holarrhena  antidysenterica,  Wall.) 

Of  all  things  that  are  astringent  and  that  stop  hemorrhages, 
the  foremost  are  the  fruits  of  Kasmari  (otherwise  called  Gambhari, 

{ Gmelina  arbor ea  Linn). 


From  Da.  E.  H.  Gregory,  M.D.,  Saint  Louis.  U.S.A. 

3525,  Lucas  Avenue,  Saint  Louis,  Uh  April,  1894. 
My  Dear  Dr.  Kaviratna,  *  *  *  * 

Your  work  is  certainly  praiseworthy.  It  gives  evidence  of  much  learn¬ 
ing,  and  affords  much  entertainment  and  instruction  to  the  modern  world. 

Yours  very  truly, 

(Sd.)  E.  H.  Gregory,  M.D. 


From  the  American  Druggist  and  Phermaceutical  Record. 

Part  VII. — It  contains  many  curious  and  valuable  facts  pertaining  to 
the  ancient  practice  of  medicine  by  Hindu  sages,  and  must  be  regarded  as 
a  valuable  contribution  to  the  native  literature  of  India. 


Translation  of  a  Notice  (in  Italian)  that  appeared  in  the 
Bibliografia  de  Societa  Asiatica  Italiana. 

Of  the  importance  of  this  publication,  even  those  who  are  strangers 
to  Indian  study  can  form  d  priori  a  clear  conception,  when  they  learn  that 
“Charaka-Samhita”  is  one  of  the  most  ancient  and  famous  treatises  of 
Indian  medicine.  It  has  been  referred  to  the  9th  or  10th  century,  but, 
as  usual,  it  is  impossible  to  state  that  this  is  the  exact  date.  The  learned 
and  indefatigable  Pandit  Avinash  Chunder  Kaviratna,  after  having  pub¬ 
lished  the  Sanskrit  text,  has  now,  by  this  translation,  rendered  the  greatest 
service  not  only  to  Indian  students,  but  also  to  all  those  who  are  in  rerest¬ 
ed  in  the  development  of  customs.  The  difficulties  overcome  by  the 
learned  Pandit  are  manifold,  especially  those  which  relate  to  the 
illustration  of  the  text,  but  this  has  been  provided  for  by  abundant  notes 
relative  to  general  therapeutics,  ritual  and  to  botany. 

In  the  6th  fasciculus,  which  has  just  appeared,  a  kind  of  domestic 
infirmary  is  treated  at  length.  It  should  be  stated  that  this  “Samhita” 
is  likely  to  be  very  useful  even  to  anthropologists,  ethnologists,  and 
naturalists.  The  illustrious  Pandit  may  be  congratulated  on  adding  this 
to  the  other  titles  of  merit  which  he  can  claim  from  the  public. 


From  H.  H.  Kerola  Varma  Valingakoil  Tampuran,  f.m.yv.,  m.r.a.s., 

Trevandrum, 

The  9th  February,  1894. 

Dear  Sir,  ****** 

This  and  the  former  seven  fascicules,  which  I  perused  with  great  in¬ 
terest,  have  afforded  me  considerable  delight,  as  they  contain  very  valu¬ 
able  and  useful  information.  Allow  me  to  congratulate  you  on  your  havino- 
successfully  completed  these  fascicules.  Such  a  popular  work  as  this  wifi 
surely  induce  one  and  all  to  undertake  it  from  motives  of  pecuniary  profit, 
but  I  am  glad  to  find  that  your  motives  are  not  such.  Yet  this  gigantic 
undertaking  will,  no  doubt,  require  money  to  bring  it  to  a  successful  con¬ 
clusion.  I  hope  the  enlightened  public  will  liberally  help  you. 

Yours  faithfully, 

(Sd.)  Kerola  Varma  Valingakoil  Tampuran,  F.M.W.,  M.R.A  .S. 


From  VankatiUo  Ram  Chandra,  Government  Pleader  of  Puna. 
Dear  Sir, 

I  have  received  the  first  eight  parts  of  your  English  translation  of 
“Charaka-Samhita.”  It  is,  I  need  hardly  mention,  a  very  useful  and  im¬ 
portant  work,  and  the  undertaking  is  highly  laudable.  Persons  who  are 
slightly  acquainted  with  Sanskrit  can  derive  much  help  from  the  trans¬ 
lation  to  study  the  original  Sanskrit  work.  Persons  who  are  unacquaint¬ 
ed  with  Sanskrit  will  now  have  light  by  which  they  would  know  what  is 
contained  in  the  Samhita.  The  work  will  show  to  the  foreign  nations 
what  the  ancient  Hindus  were  capable  of  producing.  *  *  *  * 

I  hope,  God  will  crown  your  labour  with  success.  What  is  most  remark¬ 
able  is  that  the  translation  is  made  by  one  who  is  acquainted  with  the 
European  science,  and  consequently  a  person  well  acquainted  with  the 
European  sciences  can  make  the  best  use  of  the  work.  In  short,  the 
work  may  be  said  to  be  a  miracle  of  human  industry.  Please  register  my 
name  as  a  subscriber,  and  kindly  send  me  all  the  numbers,  as  they  are 

issued.  *  *  *  *  * 

I  have  shown  your  books  to  my  friends  here,  and  they  all  admire  the 
undertaking.  A  friend  of  mine,  Mr.  Vaikunt  Vithal,  Hospital  Assistant 
at  Karwar,  has  already  written  to  you. 

I  remain, 

Yours  very  sincerely, 

(Sd.)  Yankatarao  Ram  Chandra, 


From  Babu  Pramada  Dass  Hitter, 

Benares. 

Dear  Sir,  *  *  *  *  * 

Medical  works  cannot  be  interesting,  as  a  rule,  to  the  general  reader  ; 

but  the  present,  connected  as  it  is  with  days  of  India’s  past  greatness, 
must  commend  itself  to  the  earnest  attention  of  every  Hindu.  I  can  well 
appreciate  and  admire  your  efforts  to  make  known  to  the  modern  civilised 
world  the  truths  of  our  ancient  medical  system,  for  ours  is  that  abject 
and  degraded  condition  in  which  we  cannot  appreciate  the  wisdom  of  our 
own  saints  and  sages  unless  it  is  certified  by  the  white  people  of  the  west 

and  the  far  west.  *  *  *  * 

Yours  sincerely, 

(Sd.)  Pramada  Dass  Mitter. 


From  The  Western  Druggist. 


Chicago,  U.  S.  A. 

March,  1894.. 


This  ancient  medical  work  of  India  is  certainly  a  revelation.  Although 
not  particularly  a  student  of  Oriental  literature,  the  writer  has  always  had 
a  profound  respect  for  the  ancient  Hindus,  based  on  a  knowledge  of  their 
attainments  and  philosophical  development  gathered  from  general  reading. 
However,  he  could  never  have  imagined,  without  access  to  this  translation, 
how  far  advanced  in  civilization  was  that  race  so  many  centuries  ago, 
how  those  wise  men  had  observed  nature,  and  how  accurately  and  correct¬ 
ly  they  reasoned.  It  is  truly  wonderful. 


It  appeals  to  every  intelligent  person, 
medical  profession.  *  *  * 


:  it  within  or  out  of  the 


PART  X. 


CHARAKA-SAMHIT7 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


Published  by 


AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATN A, 


Editor  of  Charaka-Sam'hita  and  of  Susruta 

(  in  original )  WITH  COMMENTARIES;  BENGALI 

Hindi  translator  of  Charaka-Samhita  , 
OF  SuSRUTA-SamHITA  ;  EDITOR-  OF  GhIKITS 
Sammilani  (  Medical  Journal  in 
Bengali) ;  PRACTITIONER  OF 

the  Hindu  System 
of  Medicine, 

&c.,  &c.,  &c. 


Calcutta 


‘Corinthian  Press,”  33,  New  China  B. 


From  Dewan  Bahadur  R.  Raghu  Nath 

i  Sir,  ; 


Dated  13th  dime,  189Jf. 


r  have  received  the  9th  fasciculus  of  your  .translation  of  “Charaka-Samhita” 
ion  to  the  previous  eight  ones. 

knj  man,  who  docs  something  for  propagating,  truths,  is  entitled  to  the  gratit.i 
5  people.  Of  truths  those  concerning  the  soul,  the  body,  and  property  are  m 
1.  On  these  subjects  our  forefathers’  knowledge  was  the  highest  and  the  pure 
were  not  satisfied  with  theories  simply,  but  tried  to  demonstrate  their  trui 
it  mathematically.  Medical  science  is  one  the  truths  of  which  are  subject  to  t 
■ience  of  all.  whether  learned  or  unlearned.  Nothing  can  be  taken  on  trust,  a 
thing  required,  to  be  fully  demonstrated  and'  proved  beyond. doubt, :  unlike  me 
cs.  Any  man  could  say  that  the  remedies,  prescribed  for  certain  diseases,  were  tr 
t.  Like  all  'out  sciences,  medical  .science  ha.s. also. been  left  uncultivated,  so  mu 
it  the  remedies,  imperfect,  in" many  cases  as  they  have  been  brought  into -use 
piers,  have  been  the  subject  of  our  admiration,  and  their  religion, .medicine  a 
ave  begun  to  be  considered  superior  to  those  of  our  Risliis.  At  such  a  junctu 
lerson  who  would  show  us  what  our  Rishis  had  recorded  for  the  good  of  the  wor 
eal  benefactor.  Of  such  persons  whose  number  is  very  small, you  are  prominent 
I  wish  you  success,  arid  hope  that  our  intelligent  and  honest  brethren  of  t 
will  begin  to  trust  the  ancient  Hindu  practice  more  than  the  Allopathic  practi 
lat.we  are  wont  to  term  this  enlightened  age. 


Yours  sincerely, 

(Sd.)  R.  Raghu  Nath  Rao. 


'rom  the  IJonhle  H.  J.  S.  Cotton,  Chief  Secretary  to  the  Governnient  of  Bengal]  , 

Darjeeling,  , 

1  "th  Jv.nex  ISO.'/.  ::f‘: 

) f. a ii  Sir, 

I  ant  much  obliged  to  you  for  sending  me  a  copy  of  the  9th  fasciculus  of  Gharal 
ltd,  which  appears  to  my  ignorant  appreciation  to  be  as  cuiious  and  interest) 
predecessors,  I  trust  you  will  be  able  to  complete  the  important  Work  in  whi 

I  am,  yours  faithfully, 

(Sd.)  H.  J.  S.  Cotton. 


T  From  Dr.  G.  Lista 


of  Plombeers.  Vosaes.  France .1 


ABSTRACT 


THE  CONTENTS  OF  THE  TENTH  FASCICULUS. 

In  the  continuation  of  Lesson  XXV  occurs  the  mention  of  those  things  which  are 
regarded  the  foremost  ones  of  particular  classes  or  groups  noted  for  particular  conse¬ 
quences.  The  list  is  exceedingly  interesting  and  shows  the  wisdom  of  the  Rishis  and 
their  acute  power  of  observation.  One  hundred  and  fifty-two  things,  in  all,  have  been 
named.  The  enumeration  includes  both  physical  substances  and  immaterial  attributes 
and  conditions. 

The  different  kinds  of  Wine  are  then  enumerated,  together  with  the  sources  from 
which  they  are  manufactured.  This  enumeration,  with  classification  of  Wines,  proves  the 
degree  of  civilization  attained  by  the  people  of  India  in  the  age  when  Punarvasu's  work 
was  compiled.  The  fruit-wines  were  manufactured  from  26  kinds  of  fruit  ;  the  root- 
wines  from  1 1  kinds  of  roots  ;  the  pith-wines  from  20  kinds  of  trees  whose  piths  were 
used  ;  the  flower-wines  from  16  kinds  of  flowers  ;  the  leaf-wines  from  2  kinds  of  leaves  ; 
the  stem- wines  from  4  kinds  of  plants  whose  stems  were  used  ;  the  bark-wines  from  4 
kinds  of  barks  ;  and  sugar-wines  from  only  one  kind  of  sugar. 

The  Wines  mentioned  are  altogether  of  four  and  eighty  kinds.  They  are  stated  to 
be  beneficial  to  both  the  body  and  the  mind. 

Lesson  XXVI  treats  of  the  Tastes  (or  Savours). 

There  are  altogether  six  principal  Tastes.  They  are  Sweet,  Sour,  Saline,  Pungent, 
Bitter  and  Astringent. 

The  virtue  of  properties  of  the  tastes  are  then  laid  down  in  brief. 

Tastes  may  exist  in  infinite  varieties  of  combination,  but  their  properties  are  not 
infinite  and  they  themselves  are  not  infinite. 

The  rest  of  this  chapter  is  an  exhaustive  dissertation  on  Tastes,  the  combinations  in 
■  which  they  occur,  the  properties  they  have,  how  they  are  to  be  ascertained,  the  physical 
elements  that  occur  in  each,  the  manner  in  which  those  elements  affect  their  operation 
and  energy  and  potency,  and  the  diseases  which  each  generates  when  taken  largely 
and  exclusively.. 

Altogether,  this  exhaustive  treatment  of  the  subject  is  very  curious.  The  Hindu 
physician  must  thoroughly  understand  and  bear  in  mind  the  incidents  attaching  to  Tastes 
before  he  can  hope  to  treat  diseases  with  success.  Nothing  like  it  occurs  in  the 
Western  system  of  Medicine.  To  say  that  this  dissertation  is  not  Scientific  but  Empiric 
would  simply  be  an  assertion  of  prejudice.  Aphorism  after  aphorism  is  laid  down, 
explaining  the  use  of  Tastes  is  prescribing  remedies  for  diseases.  That  Bitters  cure 
fevers  was  well  known  to  the  Rishis. 


CIIA  RA  KA-SAMHITA 


281 


Of  all  things  that  are  astringent,  destructive  of  wind,  provo¬ 
cative  of  appetite,  and  leading  to  increase  of  semen,  the  foremost 
is  Prishniparni  ( Uraria  lagopodioides  ;  syn.  Doodia  lagopodioides, 
Roxb).  . 


Of  all  things  that  lead  to  increase  of  semen  and  that  are  des¬ 
tructive  of  all  the  faults,  the  foremost  is  Vidarigandha  (otherwise 
called  Salaparni  or  Desmodium  Gangeticum  ;  syn.  Hedysarum 
Gangeticum,  Linn).* 

Of  all  things  that  are  astringent  and  that  lead  to  increase  of 
strength  and  destroy  wind,  the  foremost  is  Bala  ( Sida  Cordifolia, 
Linn.) 

Of  all  things  that  relieve  difficulty  of  micturition  and  destroy  c 
wind,  the  foremost  is  Gokhuraka  ( Tribulus  terrestris,  Linn  ;  sytjpr 
Tribulus  lanuginosus,  Linn.)  r 

Of  all  things  that  remove  and  cause  the  discharge  of  adherent- 
phlegm  and  other  humours,  that  increase  appetite,  that  digest  the  Y 
humours  and  set  them  free  (by  promoting  excretions  and  favouring 
their  discharge),  and  that  relieve  wind  and  phlegm,  the  foremost  is 
the  exudation  of  Hingu  (. Ferula  Assafcetida,  Linn.)\ 


Of  all  things  that  promote  excretions,  increase  appetite,  digest 
the  humours  and  set  them  free,  and  relieve  wind  and  phlegm,  the 
foremost  is  Amlavetasa  {Calamus  fasciculatus,  Roxb). 

Of  all  things  that  hurry  the  chyle,  that  are  Pachaniya,  and 
that  cure  piles,  the  foremost  is  Yavatjuka  (otherwise  called  Yava- 
kshara  or  carbonate  of  potash).J 


*  ‘Vidari’  is  different  from  ‘Vidarigandha.’  The  former  is  Convolvulus pamculatus, 
Linn.  It  is  known  also  by  the  name  of  Bhumi-kushmanda. — T. 

t  “Cchedaniya  are  medicines  which  remove  by  force,  as  it  were,  and  discharge  from 
the  body  adherent  phlegm  or  other  humours.  Emetics,  expectorants,  errhines,  caustics, 
etc.,  would  probably  come  under  this  head.” — The  Materia.  Medica  of  the  Hindus  by  V. 
C.  Dutt.  “Anulomana  (or  Anulomika)  are  medicines  that  digest  the  humours  and  set 
them  free,  that  is,  promote  excretions  and  favor  their  discharge.” — The  Materia  Medica 
of  the  Hindus  by  U.  C.  Dutt. 

J  “  Virechaka  or 'purgatives  are  described  under  three  heads,  namely,  Cransana, 
Bhedana,  and  Rechaka.  Those  medicines  which  hurry  the  chyle  or  materials  for  diges- 

36 


282  CHA  RAKA-SAM  RITA. 

The  habitual  use  of  whey  is  the  foremost  of  all  remedies  that 
are  destructive  of  the  faults  of  the  Grahani,  piles,  and  such 
disorders  as  arise  from  an  excessive  consumption  of  Ghee. 

The  habitual  use  of  the  flesh  of  carnivorous  animals  is  the 
foremost  of  all  remedies  that  are  destructive  of  the  faults  of  the 
Grahani,  consumption,  and  piles.6®  The  habitual  use  of  Ghee 
raised  from  thickened  milk  is  the  foremost  of  all  Kasayanas.*' 

The  habitual  use  of  powdered  barley  and  Ghee  in  equal 
proportions  is  the  foremost  of  all  remedies  that  fall  within  the 
class  called  Vrishya  and  that  are  destructive  of  all  •  kinds  of  sup¬ 
pression  of  the  wind.f 

The  habitual  use  of  oil  in  the  form  of  gargles  is  the  foremost 
of  all  remedies  that  strengthen  the  teeth  and  produce  a  rellsli 
for  food. 

Sandal  and  Udumvara  are  the  foremost  of  all  plasters  that 
alleviate  burning  of  the  skin.J 

RasnS  and  Aguru  are  the  foremost  of  all  plasters  that  are 
destructive  of  cold.1T 


tion,  without  allowing  them  to  be  properly  digested,  are  called  Cransana,  as  for  example 
the  pulp  of  Cassia  fistula.  Those  medicines  which  set  free  scybalse  or  other  contents  of 
the  intestines,  and  discharge  them  from  the  bowels,  without  producing  watery  stools,  are 
called  Bhedana,  as  for  exampla  Hatuki.  ( Picorrhiza  kurroa).  Those  medicines  which 
cause  the  discharge  of  the  digested  or  undigested  Contents  of  the  intestines  in  a  liquid  form 
are  called  Rechaka,  as  for  example,  Trivrit  (Ipomoea  TUrpethum).  These  last,  again,  are 
subdivided  into  three  orders,  namely,  mridu,  or  mild,  madhyama  or  intermediate,  and 
krura  or  drastic.” — The  Mat.  Med.  of  the  Hindus  by  V.  C.  Dutt. 

*  “  Yajjardvyddhi-vidhwansi  Vayastambhakaram  talhd,  Chakshuhyam  Vrittghanam 
Vrishyam  Bheshajam  tad-Rasayanam,”  i.  e.,  such  drugs  as  are  destructive  of  decrepitude 
as  prevent  the  marks  of  age,  as  increase  vision,  as  promote  nutrition  and  increase 
the  semen,  are  called  Rasayanas. — T. 

t  ‘  Vrishya’  ^anything  that  increases  the  semen.  ‘  Udavarta’  is  no  particular  disease, 
but  implies  all  kinds  of  suppression  of  the  wind. — T. 

t  ‘  Udumvara  is  the  Ficus  glomerata,  Willd. 

VRasna’  is  the  Vanda  Roxburghii ;  syn.  Cymbidium  tessaloides,  Roxb ;  Aguru 
is  Aquilaria  Agaliocha,  Roxb. 


0 


0  haraka-samhitA. 


283 


LSmajjaka  and  Usliira  are  the  foremost  of  all  plasters  that  are 
destructive  of  or  alleviate  burning  ( of  the  skin ),  faults  of  tha 
skin,  and  perspiration.* 

Kushtha  is  the  foremost  of  all  remedies,  in  the  form  of  powders 
for  rubbing  or  of  plasters,  that  are  destructive  of  the  Wind.®1 

Liquorice  is  the  foremost  of  all  articles  that  are  used  for 
strengthening  vision,  increasing  the  semen  and  hair,  improving  the 
voice  and  complexion,  purifying  the  blood,  healing  sores  and 
killing  worms. 

Wind  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  contribute  to  life 
and  consciousness. 

Fire  is  the  foremost  of  all  agents  that  ripen  things  that- are 
raw  soften  what  is  tough  and  immobile,  dispel  cold,  and  alleviate 
pain  and  tremours.f 

Water  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  coagulate  or  solidify, 
or  harden,  or  increase  density. 

That  water  in  which  a  heated  clod  of  earth  has  been  dipped 
and  its  heat  extinguished,  is  the  foremost  of  all  remedies  for 
alleviating  excessive  thirst. 

Excessive  eating  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  that  lead  to  the 
evils  of  indigestion.  Eating  in  accordance  with  the  strength  of 
the  digestive  fire  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to  the 
stirring  up  and  strengthening  of  the  digestive  fire. 

Indulgence  in  exercises  and  exertions  in  harmonious  corres¬ 
pondence  with  the  physical  system  is  the  foremost  of  all  indulgences. 


*  Lamajjaka  is  the  Andropogon  Iwarancusa ;  Linn.  Ushira  are  the  roots  of  the 
A  udropogon  Muricatum. 

t  Anything  that  is  solidified,  or  rendered  rigid  and  hard,  or  coagulated,  or  made 
immobile,  is  said  to  be  ‘  Stambhita.’  Heat  is  the  foremost  of  all  agents  that  destroy 
or  alleviate  such  a  state  or  condition.  Wind  is  sometimes  collected  and  suppressed  in  a 
particular  spot.  Heat  frees  it  and  renders  it  mobile.— T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MhlTA . 


Eating  at  regular  hours  is  the  foremost  of  all  acts  that  lead 
to  health. 

Suppression  of  the  urgings  of  nature  is  the  foremost  of  all 
acts  that  lead  to  disease. 

Gratification  is  the  foremost  of  all  merits  that  attach  to  eating. 

Wine  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to  cheerfulness. 

Abuse  of  wine  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  that  lead  to  loss 
of  intelligence  and  memory.53 

The  eating  of  heavy  food  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  that  lead 
to  indigestion. 

cEating  only  once  in  course  of  a  day  is  the  foremost  of  all 
causes  that  lead  to  the  happiness  of  good  digestion. 

Sexual  intercourse  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to 
attacks  of  consumption. 

Suppressing  the  emission  of  the  vital  seed  is  the  foremost 
of  all  things  that  lead  to  impotency. 

Stale  food  ( viz.,  such  as  has  been  prepared  the  day  before  ) 
is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to  disgust  for  food. 

Abstention  from  food  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead 
to  reduction  of  the  period  of  life. 

Abstemiousness  in  diet  ( viz.,  eating  without  fully  gratifying 
hunger )  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to  thinness  of  the 
body.  Eating  before  the  food  previously  taken  has  been  digested 
is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to  diseases  of  the  Grahani. 

Irregularity  of  diet  (  viz.,  eating  excessively  at  one  time  and 
abstemiously  at  another )  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead 
to  loss  of  the  digestive  fire. 

Eating  food  made  up  of  inharmonious  ingredients  ( such  as 
^P'T^tW/faiilk^  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to  digusting  and 
/  repuisive  diseases. 


charara-samhitA. 


285 


Abstention  from  desire  and  other  impulses  of  the  mind  is  the 
foremost  of  all  regimens  for  the  physical  system. 

Exertion  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  are  baneful  to 
the  system.53 

Injudicious  correlation  (of  objects  and  the  senses)  is  the 
foremost  of  all  causes  of  disease. 

Sexual  intercourse  with  a  woman  in  her  season  of  impurity 
is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  that  bring  about  adversity  and  distress. 

The  observance  of  the  Brahmacharyya  mode  of  life  is  the 
foremost  of  all  things  that  induce  longevity.* 

The  thought  of  sexual  congress  is  the  foremost  of  all  remedies 
for  increasing  virility. 

Cheerlessness  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  are  destruc¬ 
tive  of  virility. 

Exertion  requiring  the  injudicious  exercise  of  strength  is  the 
foremost  of  all  things  that  induce  shortness  of  life. 

Continued  melancholy  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  in¬ 
crease  the  violence  of  disease. 

Bath  (  in  cool  and  pure  water  )  is  the  foremost  of  all  things 
that  dispel  fatigue. 

Cheerfulness  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  gladden 
the  mind. 

Sorrow  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  waste  or  dry  up 
the  body. 


*  By  1  Brahmacharyya’  is  meant  the  celebate  life  a  youth  leads  while  living  in 
the  abode  of  his  preceptor  for  study.  The  word,  however,  is  used  also  to  signify 
celebate  existence  or  abstention  from  sexual  congress  in  thought,  word,  and  deed, 
with  the  observance  of  certain  acts  of  piety.  In  some  places,  the  mere  abstention  from 
sexual  congress  during  the  season  of  impurity  is  implied  by  Brahmacharyya.— T. 


280 


CHA  RA  RA-SA  MH1 TA . 


Contentment  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  contribute  to 
nourishment  or  growth  of  the  physical  system.  Nourishment  or 
growth  of  the  sytem  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  induce  sleep. 

Sleep  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  make  the  system 
drowsy.64 

The  enjoyment  of  all  the  tastes  is  the  Foremost  of  all  things 
that  contribute  to  increase  of  strength. 

The  enjoyment  of  only  one  kind  of  taste  is  the  foremost  of 
all  things  that  weaken  the  system. 

Obstetric  obstruction  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  deserve 
to  be  got  rid  of. 

Indigested  food  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  deserve  to 
be  expelled  out. 

Infants  are  the  foremost  of  those  that  should  be  treated  with 
medicines  that  are  mild  (  in  respect  of  both  dose  and  kind.) 

Old  men  are  the  foremost  of  those  whose  diseases  deserve  to 
be  suppressed  (without  being  cured  if  incurable  or  very  difficult 
of  cure).* 

A  woman  during  the  period  of  gestation  is  the  foremost  of  all 
persons  for  whom  virulent  remedies  and  physical  exercises  should 
never  be  prescribed. 

Cheerfulness  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  that  lead  to  concep¬ 
tion  (by  women  ). 

The  excitement  or  provocation  of  all  the  faults  together  is  the 
foremost  of  all  diseases  that  are  difficult  of  cure. 


*  Certain  diseases  are  called  ‘  Yapya’  (vide  note  in  p.  109).  What  is  stated  here 
is  this  :  When  an  old  man  falls  ill,  what  is  necessary  for  the  physician  to  do  is  any 
how  to  give  relief  by  suppressing  the  strength  of  the  disease  without  seeking  to  accomplish 
a  radical  cure  which  may  be  difficult,  or  impossible,  or  which  may  be  unnecessary  in 
consequence  of  the  long  period  that  it  is  likely  to  take.— T. 


CHA  RAllA-SA  MHITA . 


287 


Indigestion  and  other  faults  in  the  stomach  are  the  foremost 
of  all  diseases  that  require  inharmonious  treatment,* 

Fever  is  the  foremost  of  all  diseases.  Leprosy  is  the  fore¬ 
most  of  all  long-continuing  diseases. 

Phthisis  ( with  cavity  in  the  lungs )  is  the  foremost  of  all 
complicated  diseases. 

Diabetes  is  the  foremost  of  all  obstinate  diseases.f 

Leeches  are  the  foremost  of  all  things  used  as  subsidiary 
intruments  for  surgical  operation.* 

The  application  of  the  enema  or  administration  of  enemata 
is  the  foremost  of  the  five  operations  or  administrations  resorted 
to  for  corrective  treatment. 

The  Himavat  mountains  are  the  foremost  of  all  places  from 
which  drugs  are  gathered. 

A  dry  and  arid  province  is  the  foremost  of  all  sanitaria. 

The  Soma  is  the  foremost  of  all  medicinal  herbs. 

A  marshy  tract  is  the  foremost  of  all  unhealthy  places. 

Obedience  to  the  injunctions  of  the  physican  is  the.  foremost 
of  the  patient’s  merits. 

The  physician  is  the  foremost  of  all  the  necessaries  of  treatment. 

The  atheist  is  the  foremost  of  all  persons  that  deserve  to 
be  avoided. 

Cupidity  or  covetousness  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that 
cause  distress. 


*  What  is  meant  by  inharmonious  treatment  is  the  administration  of  warm  or  heat- 
producing  medicines  when  the  system  apparently  wants  coolness.  This  has  been  made 
clear  later  on.— T. 

t  ‘  Anushangin’  diseases  are  those  that  are  very  obstinate. 

t  ‘  Anu5astra’  implies  a  subsidiary  intrument  for  surgical  operations.  It  may  also 
mean  a  substitute  for  an  instrument. 


288 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  refusal  of  the  patient  to  obey  the  directions  of  the 
physician  is  the  foremost  of  all  evil  symptoms  ( or  indications 
of  death  ). 

Absence  of  indifference  to  what  comes  upon  oneself  is  the 
foremost  of  all  symptoms  of  impatience.*56  Combinations  ( in 
respect  of  time,  place,  patient,  disease,  and  drugs  )  are  'the  fore¬ 
most  of  all  the  merits  of  a  physician. 

An  assemblage  of  physicians  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that 
contribute  to  certitude  of  diagnosis. 

A  knowledge  of  the  (  medical )  scriptures  is  the  foremost  of 
all  medicines  ( that  a  physician  can  possess  ). 

Reasoning  based  upon  the  (  medical )  scriptures  is  the  fore¬ 
most  of  all  means  (for  diagnosing  disease  and  treating  it  for  cure). 
Proficiency  of  knowledge  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  necessary 
for  arriving  at  a  correct  conception  of  the  reasonableness  of 
treatment. 

Absence  of  exertion  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to 
loss  of  purpose  and  time.67 

Experience  possessed  by  the  physician  is  the  foremost  of 
things  leading  to  certitude  of  conclusions.  Incompetence  of  the 
physician  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  of  fear. 

Conversation  and  discussion  with  professors  of  the  same 
science  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to  vigor  of  the 
understanding. 

Superior  knowledge  ( in  the  physician  )  is  the  foremost  of  all 
things  needed  for  ascertainment  of  time  or  opportuneness. 

Irresolution  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  that  lead  to  the 
slipping  away  of  opportunities. 


*  By  ‘  Nirveda’  is  meant  a  disregard  of  worldly  objects,  arising  from  a  convic¬ 
tion  of  their  uselessness.  The  reverse  of  this  •  is  ‘  Anirveda.’  What  is  stated  here  is' 
that  the  foremost  of  all  indications  of  impatience  is  a  spirit  of  restlessness,  i.  e. ,  the 
inability  to  bear  contentedly  what  comes  upon  oneself.— T. 


OH  A  KA  KA  A  M  HI  TA . 


289 


Incompetence  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  of  fear. 

The  preceptor  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  that  aid  one  in 
the  acquisition  of  a  science. 

The  Science  of  Life  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  are 
regarded  as  nectar.* 

Actual  experience  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to 
certitude  of  conclusions. 

Good  counsels  are  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  deserve  to 
be  accomplished.  The  utterance  of  incoherent  words  is  the  fore¬ 
most  of  all  things  that  are  baneful. 

Renunciation  of  all  things  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  that 
contribute  to  happiness.68 

[  Here  are  some  Verses  ] . 

Thus  are  indicated  the  one  hundred  and  fifty-two  things 
which  are  regarded  as  the  foremost  of  their  respective  kinds.  It 
has  been  laid  down  that  these  are  sufficient  for  the  cure  or  allevia¬ 
tion  of  the  diverse  diseases  that  afflict  mankind.1 

Amongst  those  things  that  are  productive  of  the  same  or 
similar  consequences,  those  which  are  regarded  as  the  foremost  and 
which  are  superior  in  efficacy,  and  those  again  that  are  inferior  in 
point  of  efficacy,  have  all  been  pointed  out.2 

Whatever  things  are  beneficial  in  allaying  or  curing  (  excited  ) 
wind  and  bile  and  phlegm,  have  been,  principally,  laid  down,  as  also 
all  those  which  are  of  superior  efficacy  iri  the  matter  of  mitigating 
or  curing  disease.3 

Mastering  these  properly,  the  physician  that  is  endued  with 
skill,  should  administer  the  treatment  that  is  beneficial.  Verily,  the 
physician,  by  conducting  himself  in  this  way,  succeeds  in  earning 
both  righteousness  and  wealth  .4 

*  Nectar  is  a  celestial  drink  that  bestows  immortality, —  T. 

37 


290 


CfJARAKA-SAMHl  TA. 


All  that  is  suitable  to  the  way  ( of  life  )  and  that  is  agreeable 
to  the  mind  is  said  to  constitute  what  is  called  Pathya  ( or  regi- 
men ).  What,  however,  is  the  reverse  of  Pathya  and  is  not 
agreeable  to  the  mind,  should  never  be  attended  to." 

Combined  with  measure,  time  or  season,  the  nature  of  the 
operation,  place,  the  constitution  of  the  body,  the  faults  that  have 
been  provoked,  and  the  other  attributes,  both  what  is  Pathya  and 
what  is  its  reverse  are  seen  to  be  this  or  that  (  i.  e,,  baneful  or' 
beneficial  )8 

Hence,  although  the  nature  ( beneficial  or  otherwise )  has  been 
assigned  ( of  the  diverse  articles  mentioned  above  )  it  should  be 
remembered  that  that  nature  depends  upon  ( the  considerations 
of )  measure  and  the  rest.  The  physician  who  desires  success- 
should,  therefore,  administer  curative  operations,  relying  upon  the 
nature  of  these  articles  ( as  assigned  above).*7 

Having  listened  to  these  words  of  the  illustrious  son  of  Atrr, 
Agnive^a  once  more  asked  that  holy  Rishi,  saying. — Thy  illustrious 
self  has  explained  only  this  matter  just  according  to  our  question, 
(without  referring  to  other  topics  connected  with  it.)  We  now 
desire  to  hear  thy  holy  self  expound  to  us,  without  much  brevity, 
what  the  indications  in  their  entirety  are  of  the  different  kinds 
of  wine.8 

Unto  him  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said  :  Paddy,  fruits,  roots, 
pith,  flowers,  stalks,  leaves,  and  barks,  O  Agnive9a,  are,  in  brief, 
the  eight  sources  of  wines.  The  ninth  is  sugar.® 


*  What  is  stated  here  is  this :  Red  paddy  and  other  articles  Have  been  mentioned. 
Some  have  been  declared  to  be  beneficial ;  some  injurious. '  Their  character  or  nature, 
as  such,  depends  upon  the  measure  in  which  they  are  taken  ;  the  time  when  they  are 
taken ;  &c.  Although  their  nature  thus  depends  upon  measure  and  the  rest,  yet  in 
speaking  of  them,  they  must  be  spoken  of  as  beneficial  or  otherwise.  Their  nature  has 
been  assigned,  but  that  nature,  it  should  not  be  forgotten*  depends  upon  those  well- 
known  conditions.  The  physician  in  treating  disease  should  apply  his  curativesor  regimen, 
relying  upon  their  nature  as  assigned  above  and  remembering  that  that  nature  is  not 
independent  of  the  considerations  of  measure  and  the  rest. —  T. 


CBa  ra  rasa  m  hit a  . 


591 

IFrom  these,  by  permutation  and  combination,  infinite  varieties 
©f  wine  may  be  produced.  Amongst  them,  four  and  eighty 
varieties  are  regarded  beneficial  ■(  or,  as  regimen  ).  They  are  as 
follows, — Sura,  Souvira,  Tushodaka,  Maireya,  Medaka,  and  Dha- 
«yamla  are  from  paddy.*10 

Mridvika  (< a ),  Kharjjura  (i),  Kagmaryya  (c),  Dhanwana  (d), 
Raja  dan  a  (e\  Trinagunya  (/),  Parusha  (g),  Abhaya  ( h ),  Amlaka  (i), 
Mrigalandika  (/),  Jamvava(£),  Kapithwa  (/),  Kuvala  (m),  Vadara(«), 
Karkandhu  (a),  Pilu(^),  Piyala  (y),  Panasa  ( r ),  Nyagrodha  ( s ), 
Agwathwa  (?),  Plaksha  (»),  Kapitana  ( v ),  Udumvara  ( w ),  Ajamo- 
■da  (x),  ^ringataka  (y\  and  £ankhini  {z), — these  are  the  six  and 
twenty  fonts  from  which  fruit-wines  are  manufactured.11 

*  It  is  difficult  to  distinguish  these-  varieties  of  wine  manufactured  from  paddy. 
Nor  are  the  processes  now  known. —  T. 

•a.  Raisins.  Called  also  Draksha.  Tiiis  vinifera,\Linn.  The  fruits  are  ordinarily  called 
Kismissin  India. 

i.  The  wild  date  palm.  Phtenix  Sylvestris,  Roxb. 

■e.  G militia  arborea,  Linn. 

S.  Called  also  Dharmana.  Dhamani  in  Hindi  and  Bengali.  Grewia  elaslica,  Royle. 

*•  Mimttsops  Indica,  D.  C.;  syn.  Mimusops  hexandra,  Roxb. 

/.  Called  also  Ketaki.  Pandanus  odoratissimus,  Linn, 
g.  Grewia  Asiatkus,  Linn, 
di.  Chebulic  Myrobalans. 

Phyllanthu-s  emblica,  Linn. 

Called  also  Vibhitaki.  Ttrminalia  Belhrica,  Roxb. 
k.  Eugenia  Jambolana ,  Lamb, 
i.  Feronia  elephantum.  The  wood  apple. 
m.  A  large  variety  of  Vadara  or  Zizypkus  Jujuba,  Lamb, 

u.  Zizypkus  Jujuba,  Lamk. 

o.  Called  also  rigalakoli.'  Zizyphus  atnoplia,  Mill. 

p.  Salvadora  Persica,  Linn. 

f .  Buchanania  lalifolia ,  Roxb. 

r.  Artocarpus  integrifolia,  Linn. 

s.  Called  also  Vata.  Ficus  Bengalensis,  Linn. 

t.  Ficus  religiosa ,  Linn. 

u.  Called  also  Parkati.  Ficus  injecloria.,  Willd. 

v.  Called  also  Amrataka.  Spondias  mangifera  ;  Peri. 

w.  Ficus  glomerata ,  Willd. 

x.  Pimpinella  involucrala ;  syn.  Apiurn  involucrala,  Roxb. 

y.  Called  in  Bengali  Paniphala.  Trapa  bishinosa,  Roxb. 
x.  Called  also  Chorepushpi.  Andropogon  dcicularis,  Roxb . 


292 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Vidarigandha  ( a ),  Afwagandha  ( b ),  Krishnagandha  ( c ),  £ata- 
vari  (d),  £yama  ( e ),  Trivrit  ( f ),  Danti  ( g ),  Dravariti  (A),  Vilwa  (?')k 
Uruvuka  (J  ),  and  Chitra  (k),  are  the  eleven  from  whose  roots  root- 
wines  are  manufactured.12 

Cala  (/),  Priyaka  ( m ),  Aswakarna  ( n ),  Chandana  (o),  Syanda- 
na(/>),  Khadira  ( q ),  Kadara  (r),  Saptaparna  (s),  Arjjuna  (7), 
Asana  ( u ),  Arimeda  (v),  Tinduka  (w),  Kinihi  ( x ),  Cami  (y),  Cukti- 


a.  Called  also  Calaparni.  Desmodiuvi  Gangeticum ;  syn.  Hedy sar um  Gangeticum ; 

Linn. 

b.  Withania  somnifera,  Don  ;  syn.  Physaiis  flexuosa,  Roxb. 

c.  Called  also  Sobbanjana ;  Moringa  pterygospenna,  Gaerln ;  syn.  Hyperanth^ra 

moringa,  Willd. 

d.  Called  also  Catamuli.  Asparagus  racemosus,  Willd. 

e.  Iclmocarpus  frutescens  ;  syn.  Echites  frutescens,  Roxb. 

f.  Ipomaeti  Turpethum  ;  syn.  Convovlulus  Turpethum,  Linn. 

g.  Baliospermum  montanum ;  syn.  Croton  polyandrum,  Roxb.  The  Commentator 

Gangadhara  takes  Danti  here  to  mean  Hastidanti  or  Nagadanti.  Ordinarily, 
Hastidanti  or  Nagadanti  means  the  garden  raddish.  In  medical  science,  it  implies 
the  plant  commonly  called  “Cherapata  Danti”  in  Bengali,  which  is  a  variety 
of  Baliospermum  montanum. 

h.  Dravanti  is  a  variety  of  Danti  whose  roots  are  smaller. 

i.  AEgle  marmelos. 

j.  Called  also  Eranda.  Ricinus  communis,  Linn. 

k.  Plumbago  zeylanica,  Linn. 

l.  Shorea  robusta,  Gaerln. 

m.  Called  also  Priyangu.  Aglaia  Roxburgliiana. 

n.  It  is  a  variety  of  Shorea  robusta,  Gaertn. 

o.  The  red  variety  is  nsed.  Pterocarpus  santalinus. 

p.  Otherwise  called  Tinisa.  Ougenia  dalbergioides,  Benth ;  syn.  Dalbergia  Oojeinensis, 

Roxb. 

q.  Acacia  catechu.  Unit ;  syn.  Mimosa  catechu,  Linn. 

r.  A  variety  of  the  above. 

s.  Called  also  Saptachcchada.  Alslonia  scholaris ;  syn.  Echites  scholaris,  Roxb. 

t.  Terminalia  Arjuna,  Bedd ;  syn.  Pentaptera,  Arjuna,  Roxb. 

u.  Called  Piyasala  in  the  Indian  vernaculars.  Terminalia  tomentosa ,  Roxb. 

v.  Acacia  Farnesiana,  Willd ;  syn.  Mimosa  Farnesiana,  Roxb. 

w.  Diospyros  Embryopteris,  Pers. 

x.  The  Commentator  Gangadhara  thinks  that  this  does  not  mean  Apamarga  or 

Achyranthes  aspera,  Linn.,  but  some  other  plant  known  by  that  name. 

y.  Acacia  Suma,  Ham  ;  syn.  Mimosa  Suma  Roxb. 


charaka-samhitA. 


293- 


patia  {a),  Cingtjapa  (3),  Cirisha  ( c ),  Vanjula  (d),  Dhanwana  ( e ), 
and  Madhuka  {/), — these  twenty  are  trees  from  whose  pith  pith- 
wines  are  manufactured.13 

Padma  (g),  Utpala  ( h ),  Nalina  (i),  Kumuda  (/),  Saugandhika  (/c), 
Pundarika  ( /),  Catapatra  ( m ),  Madhuka  ( n ),  Priyangu  ( o ),  and 
Dhataki  (/), — these  are  the  ten  flowers  from  which  flower-wines 
are  manufactured.14 

Patola  (q),  and  Tadaka  ( r ),  are  the  two  plants  from  whose 
leaves  leaf-wines  are  manufactured.15 

Ikshu  (j),  Kandekshu  ( t ),  Ikshuvalika  (m),  and  Pundraka  ( v ), 
are  the  four  plants  from  whose  stems  stem-wines  are  mnufactured.18 


a.  ‘  Cukapatra’  is  the  correct  reading ;  and  not  1  Cuka’,  as  observed  by  Gangadhara. 

Culcapatra  is  a  variety  of  Vadara  or  Zizyplms  Jujuba,  Lamk. 

b.  Dablergia  Sissoo,  Roxb. 

c.  Mimossa  Sirissa,  Roxb,  syn ;  Albezzia  Lebbek,  Bentham. 

d.  Saraca  Indica,  Linn  ;  syn.  Jonesia  Asoka,  Roxb. 

e.  Called  also  Dharmana.  Gretoia  elastica,  Royle. 

/.  Russia  lalifolia,  Roxb. 

g.  It  has  various  names.  Nelumbium  speciosuin,  Linn. 

h.  Otherwise  called  Nilotpala.  Nymphaa  stellata,  Linn. 

i.  It  is  a  variety  of  Padma  with  fewer  petals. 

/.  Nymphaa  Lotus,  Linn. 

k.  Otherwise  called  Kalhara.  A  variety  of  g. 

l.  It  is  white  Padma  having  a  large  number  (hundreds)  of  petals. 

m.  A  red  variety  of  the  above. 

n.  Russia  latifolia,  Roxb. 

o.  Agalia  Roxburghina,  W.  A. 

p.  Woodfordia  floribunda,  Salisb.j  syn.  Grislea  tomentosa,  Roxb. 

q.  Trichosanthes  diocia,  Roxb. 

r.  Otherwise  called  Tadasa;  The  Commentator  Gangadhara  takes  it  to  be  the  well- 

known  tree  which  is  regarded  as  a  variety  of  the  Palmyra  palm  or  Borassus 
flabelliformis,  Linn. 

s.  Sacharum  Ojjicinarum,  Linn.  The  ordinary  sugar-cane.  The  dark  variety  is  im¬ 

plied  here. 

t.  Called  Khalia  in  the  Indian  vernaculars.  A  variety  of  the  sugar-cane  that  yields 

less  juice  and  is  much  harder. 

u.  Commonly  called  Lata.  A  variety  of  s. 

v.  A  white  variety  of  r. 


294 


CHAR  AKA -SA  MHI TA . 


Tilvaka(a),  Lodhra  (6),  Elavaluka  ( c ),  and  Kramuka,  (d), — these 
are  the  four  from  whose  barks  bark-wines  are  manufactured.17 

Sugar  is  the  only  thing  from  which  sugar-wine  is  manu¬ 
factured.18 

These  are  called  Asava  (distilled  spirits)  in  consequence  of 
their  being  got  by  distillation.* 

Even  these  are  the  four  and  eighty  varieties  of  distilled  spirits. 

I  have  thus  explained  the  four  and  eighty  kinds  of  wines  as  existing 
separately  from  one  another.19 

These  (four  and  eighty  kinds  of)  wines  are  capable  of  being  , 
mixed  with  a  large  number  of  other  objects.  These  latter,  again, 
may  be  used  in  a  large  variety  of  proportions.  Hence  wines  may 
be  of  diverse  kinds.  There  may  also  be  diverse  ways  of 
dressing  them.  Then,  again,  these  distilled  spirits,  though  mixed 
with  other  objects  and  dressed  by  means  of  such  objects  as  are 
used  in  dressing  them,  yet  exhibit  the  virtues  of  those  things  from 
which  they  are  originally  manufactured.f20 

Examining  (  with  the  aid  of  actual  experience  )  the  effects 
produced  by  the  large  variety  of  wines  thus  manufactured,  intelli¬ 
gent  physicians  (  in  prescribing  wines  for  use)  prescribe  the  articles 

a  A  white  variety  of  Symflocos  racemosa,  Roxb 

b.  Symflocos  racemosa ,  Roxb. 

c.  A  fragrant  powder  of  a  bark  sold  under  that  name.  It  is  believed  to  come  from  the 

Spice  islands. 

d.  Called  also  Guvaka.  Areca  catechu.,  Linn. 

*  *  Asava’  from  the  root  ‘  As’  which  implies  distilling.  The  etymology  of  the  word 
is  explained  by  the  Rishi. —  T. 

+  The  sense  seems  be  this  :  distilled  spirits,  originally  of  four  and  eighty  kinds, 
are  mixed  with  other  things ;  or,  rather,  things  other  than  those  from  which  they  are 
manufactured,  are  soaked  in  them.  They  are,  again,  dressed  with  the  aid  of  various 
other  objects,  for  adding  to  their  flavour  or  properties.  Now,  in  consequence  of  such 
soaking  and  such  dressing,  distilled  spirits  are  of  infinite  variety.  What  is  next  said 
is  that  though  mixed  with  other  objects  and  dressed  with  the  aid  of  others,  yet  they 
retain  the  virtues  of  their  original  sources.  They  may  take  new  virtues  in  consequence 
of  things  being  soaked  in  them  and  their  being  dressed  with  other  articles,  yet  the 
virtues  of  the  original  objects  are  never  lost — T. 


CHAR  A  KA-Sa  MlilTA . 


295 


that  should  be  mixed  with  them,  the  articles  with  which  they  should 
be  dressed,  the  places  for  which  which  of  them  are  suited,  as  also 
the  seasons,  measures,  &c,  that  are  adapted  to  particular  varieties.21 

(  Here  occurs  a  summary  in  verse.  ) 

The  four  and  eighty  kinds  of  principal  wines  that  contribute 
strength  to  mind,  body,  and  the  digestive  fire,  that  destroy  insomnia, 
grief,  and  disgust  for  food,  and  that  produce  cheerfulness  and  joy, 
have  been  spoken  of.  In  this  Lesson,  called  “  Ya}jah-Purushiyam’, 
the  Rishi  has  laid  down,  with  details,  the  foremost  theories  on  the 
subject  of  the  birth  or  origin  of  body  and  diseases,  the  certain  con¬ 
clusions  with  respect  to  food,  as  also  the  principal  wines.!.-11 

Thus  ends  the  twentyfifth  Lesson,  called  Yajjah-Purushiyam, 
in  Agnivega’s  treatise  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


