LESSON  XXVI. 

We  shall  next  expound  the  Lesson  called  Atreya-Bhadrakapya. 
Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.*1 

Once  on  a  time,  the  son  of  Atri,  and  Bhadrakapya,  and 
£akunteya,  and  the  full-eyed  Maudgalya,  and  the  golden-eyed 
Kaugika^  the  sinless  Bharadwaja  otherwise  called  Kumaragiras,  the 
blessed  king  Varyovida,  that  foremost  of  all  intelligent  men,  Nimi 
the  ruler  of  the  Videhas,  Vadiga  of  high  intelligence,  and 
Kankayana-valhika,  that  foremost  of  all  physicians  of  the  Valhika 
country, — these  Rishis,  all  of  whom  were  old  in  years  and  learning 
and  all  of  whom  had  subjugated  their  souls,  came  together  to  the 
delightful  Chaitraratha  woods,  desirous  of  passing  a  few  days  in  en¬ 
joyment  and  pleasure.  As  those  Rishis  conversant  with  every 
topic  were  seated  there,  the  following  discourse  of  grave  import 

•  « Atreya-Bhadrakapyy’  implies  *  that  relating  to  the  son  of  Atri  and  to  Bhadrakapya’; 
hence  that  Lesson  so  called  represents  a  conversation  or  discourse  between  Atri’s  son 
Punarvasu  and  some  other  Rishis  amongst  whom  was  Bhadrakapya.—  T. 


296 


CH  A  RA  KA-SAMHl  TA . 


took  place  among  them  on  the  subject  of  the  proper  ascertainment 
of  the  (  different)  tastes  and  food.*2-5 

There  is  one  kind  of  taste,  said  Bharakapya;  which  persons 
skilled  in  the  subject  regard  as  one  of  the  five  objects  of  the 
senses,  viz.,  that  which  relates  to  the  tongue.  That,  again,  is  not 
different  from  water.8 

The  Brahmana  ^akunteya  said  that  there  are  two  tastes,  their 
virtues  being  that  one  of  them  cuts  or  removes  from  the  body  all  bad 
humours  or  ingredients,  and  the  other  only  checks  or  curbs  them.7 

There  are  three  tastes,  said  the  full-eyed  Maudgalya.  Their 
virtues  are  cutting,  curbing,  and  both.8 

There  are  four  tastes,  said  the  golden-eyed  KauQika.  They 
are  agreeable  and  beneficial,  agreeable  and  not  beneficial,  dis¬ 
agreeable  and  not  beneficial,  and  disagreeable  and  beneficial.9 

There  are  five  tastes,  said  KumaraQiras-Bharadwaja.  They 
appertain  to  Earth,  Water,  Fire,  Wind,  and  Ether  ( or  Space).10 

There  are  six  tastes,  said  the  royal  sage  Varyovida.  They  are 
heavy,  light,  cold,  hot,  oily,  and  dry.11 

There  are  seven  tastes,  said  Nimi  the  ruler  of  the  Videhas. 
They  are  sweet,  sour,  saltish,  pungent,  bitter,  astringent  and 
(strained)  ashes.12 

There  are  eight  tastes,  said  Vadiga-Dhamargava.  They  are 
sweet,  sour,  saltish,  pungent,  bitter,  astringent,  (strained) 
ashes,  and  that  which  remains  in  an  unmanifest  form.13 

The  tastes  are  infinite  in  number,  said  KanSyana,  that  refuge 
of  all  the  physicians  of  the  Valhika  country,  in  consequence  of 
the  infinite  .variety  of  their  virtues,  operations  or  effects,  and 
methods  of  correction  (  or  mixture  for  adding  to  their  virtues,  &c.).1* 

The  illustrious  son  of-  Atri,  viz'.,  Punarvasu,  said  that  the 
number  of  tastes  is  truly  six.  They"  are  sweet,  sour,  saltish, 

*  It  seems  that  the  Rishis  and  royal  sages  named  here  are  altogether  ten  in  number, 
‘  Purnaksha’  and  ‘  Hiranyaksha’  are  adjectives.  The  reading  ‘  Sachanaghah’  is  better 
than  ‘  Cathanaghah’  as  ‘  Catha’  would  make  the  number  eleven.— T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MB  1 TA . 


297 


pungent,  bitter,  and  astringent.  The  source  from  which  these 
six  flow,  i.  e.,  their  origin,  is  Water.  Their  operations  or 
effects  are  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  cutting  and  curbing.  In  con¬ 
sequence,  again,  of  admixture  or  combination,  they  become 
both  cutting  and  curbing  at  the  same  time.  Agreeable  and 
Disagreeable  are  their  divisions  that  depend  upon  the  likes  and  dis¬ 
likes  of  men.  Beneficial  and  Not-beneficial  are  their  powers.  The 
refuge  of  the  Tastes  are  the  modifications  of  the  five  primal  ele¬ 
ments  (  of  Earth,  Water,  Fire,  Wind,  and  Ether  or  Space  ).  The 
Tastes,  again,  depend  upon  the  ( original )  nature  of  their  refuge, 
the  modifications  of  that  refuge,  combinations  of  the  substances 
that  form  their  refuge,  as  also  place,  and  time.*15 

The  virtues  or  properties  (attaching  to  the  Tastes)  occur  in 
those  which  constitute  the  refuge  (of  the  Tastes),  called  objects. 
Those  virtues  are  heavy,  light,  cold,  warm,  oily,  dry,  and  others.14 


*  The  modifications  of  the  five  primal  elements  constitute  the  refuge  of  the  Tastes. 
Every  substance  is  formed  by  modification  of  those  elements.  What  is  said,  therefore, 
is  that  material  substances  are  the  refuge  of  the  tastes,  i.e.,  the  Tastes  inhere  in  them, 
‘  Bhakti  ’  implies  like  or  desire.  The  agreeable  or  disagreeable  character  of  the  Tastes 
arises  not  from  anything  in  the  Tastes  themselves  but  from  the  likes  or  dislikes  of  men, 
so  that  what  is  sweet  to  one  man  may  not  be  so  to  another.  ‘  Prakritivikriti  .  .  . 
vacah’ Chakrapani  explains  that  ‘vacah’  is  to  be  taken  with  each  of  the 
words  preceding  it.  Hence,  what  is  said  is  that  the  Tastes  depend  upon  ‘  Prakriti,’ 
‘  vikriti,’  ‘  vichara,’  ‘  de9a,’  and  ‘  kala.’  Thus  Mudga  (  Phaseolus  Mungo)  is  astringent- 
sweet.  Its  nature,  however,  is  light.  This  lightness  depends  upon  the  *  prakriti’  or 
nature  of  Mudga,  and  not  upon  the  astringency  and  sweetness  of  its  taste.  Indeed,  if 
taste  were  to  determine  the  property,  in  this  case  the  astringency  and  sweetness  would 
have  produced  the  property  of  heaviness.  ‘Vikriti,’  as  fried  paddy,  which  is  light ;  but 
cakes  of  rice  are  heavy.  ‘  Vicharah’  is  a  technical  term  in  medicine,  implying  admixture 
or  combination.  Chakrapani  cites  the  instance  of  honey  mixed  with  ghee.  This  is 
as  baneful  as  poison,  regardless  of  the  taste  that  inheres  to  the  combination.  ‘  Deea’ 
stands  both  for  places  on  the  Earth  as  marshy  tracts,  mountainous  countries,  &c.,  and 
limbs  of  the  body  also.  Certain  objects  growing  in  marshy  tracts  have  one  kind  of  taste. 
The  same  objects,  when  growing  on  mountains,  have  different  tastes  with  different  virtues. 
Then,  again,  different  tastes  inhere  to  different  parts  of  the  body.  The  bones  of  a  deer 
have  one  kind  of  taste  ;  its  flesh  again  has  another  kind,  &c.  ‘  Kala’  similarly  implies 

both  seasons  of  the  year  and  periods  of  life.  An  object  of  a  certain  taste  is  beneficial 
at  a  certain  season  but  not  so  in  another  ;  or,  it  may  be  beneficial  to  a  child  but  not  so 
to  an  old  man.—  T. 


38 


CHARAKA-SAMHi  TA. 


Kshara  (strained  ashes)  are  so  called  from  their  being  produced 
by  ksharana  (dropping  down  or  straining),  This  is  not  a  taste. 
It  is,  on  the  other  hand,  an  object.  It  is,  in  fact,  produced  from 
many  kinds  of  taste.  Hence,  it  has  many  tastes.  Among  them, 
pungent  and  saline  predominate.  It  is  composed  of  many  objects 
of  the  senses.  It  is  manufactured  with  the  aid  of  different 
processes.*1  f 

Without  doubt,  in  their  original  refuge  tA  unm^fest  ex- 
istence  (or  presence)  of  the  Tastes.  So  also  in  their  combinations 
where  particular  ones  predominate.  So  too  in  objects  in  which  are 
combinations  (of  the  Tastes)  with  particular  ones  predominating.f18 

In  consequence,  again,  of  the  diversity  of  such  conditions  of 
their  existence  as  the  refuge  in  which  they  inhere,  (their  properties, 
operations,  &c.),  the  quality  of  innumerableness  does  not  attach 


*  The  reasoning  in  this  passage  is  thus  explained  by  Chakrapani.  Vadifa- 
Dhamargava  had  included  Kshara  in  his  enumeration  of  Tastes.  Punarvasu  remarks  that 
Khara  is  not  a  taste  and  assigns  his  reasons  for  it.  First,  Khara  is  produced  by  the  visible 
process  of  straining.  (The  root  kshara  implies  dropping  down  or  straining).  It  is  an 
object,  capable  of  being  seen,  touched,  and  smelt.  It  is  thus  a  combination  of  many 
objects  of  the  senses,  whereas'  taste  appertains  to  only  one  sense  and  cannot  be  seen  or 
touched,  and  smelt.  Being  produced  from  diverse  objects,  Kshara  must  have  diverse 
tastes,  for  effects  must  correspond  with  causes.  Tastes,  again,  are  never  produced  by 
visible  or  artificial  processes  ;  but  Kshara  is  ‘  karanabhinirvrittam,  ’  which,  as  Chakrapani 
explains,  means  ‘karanena  bhasmacravadina  abhinirvrittam  kritam,’  i.e.,  produced  or 
manufactured  with  the  aid  of  artificial  processes. — T. 

t  The  language  of  the  original  is  exceedingly  terse.  What  is  stated  here  is  this  : 
the  1  prakriti  ’  or  original  source  of  the  tastes  is  water.  Water,  however,  is  apparently 
tasteless.  How  then  can  the  six  tastes  be  said  to  belong  to  it  or  as  existing  in  it  ?  The 
Rishi  explains  that  the  tastes  do  exist  in  their  ‘prakriti’  or  water,  but  that  existence  is 
unmanifest.  This,  as  Chakrapani  points  out,  implies  that  whatever  the  taste  one  feels 
when  water  is  brought  in  contact  with  the  tongue,  that  taste  is  really  nothing  else 
than  sweet,  sour,  &c.,  in  an  unmanifest  state.  Similary,  when  the  tastes  exist  in  a 
combined  state  with  particular  ones  predominating,  the  others  must  be  held  to  be  existing 
in  an  unmanifest  state.  In  objects  also  in  which  the  tastes  exist  in  a  combined  state  with 
particular  ones  predominating,  the  subordinate  ones  must  be  taken  as  occurring  in  an 
unmanifest  state.  The  mention,  in  the  text,  of  ‘Anurasa-samanvite  dravye’  after  that 
of  ‘  Anurase  ’  seems  to  be  superfluous,  unless  it  be  the  intention  of  the  Rishi  to  refer  to 
the  abstract  and  the  concrete  separately. — T. 


CHARAKA  SAMH1TA.  299 

to  the  Tastes.  Nor  are  Tastes  different  from  the  substances  in 
which  they  inhere.*19 

The  source  or  origin  of  the  Tastes  is  due  to  the  exceedingly 
diverse  varieties  of  combination  in  which  they  exist.  Notwithstand¬ 
ing  this,  innumerableness  does  not  arise  in  respect  of  their  properties 
and  nature.  Hence,  intelligent  physicians  never  lay  down 
that  the  effects  are  infinite  of  the  Tastes  which  exist  in  infinite 
varieties  of  combination.f20 

Depending  upon  these  reasons,  we  shall  lay  down  instructions 
about  the  separate  indications  of  the  six  Tastes  when  they  exist 
not  in  a  combined  but  separate  state. 

At  the  outset,  however,  we  shall  say  something  referring  to 
the  diversity  of  objects  (which  are  the  refuge  of  the  Tastes).  All 
objects  are  the  result  of  the  combinations  of  five  primal  elements, 
{viz.,  Earth,  Water,  Fire,  Wind,  and  Ether  or  Space).  As  regards 
Medical  Science,  objects  are  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  those  endued  with 
animation  and  those  that  are  inanimate.  The  attributes  which 
inhere  in  objects  are  Sound,  &c.,  heaviness,  &c.,  ending  with 
solubility.  The  operations  performed  with  their  aid  are  five, 
beginning  with  vomiting,  as  has  been  already  said.f21 

*  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  one  of  the  previous  speakers  has  said  that  the  Tastes 
are  innumerable  in  consequence  of  their  refuge  properties,  &c.,  being  innumerable. 
The  Rishi  contradicts  that  assertion.  He  says  that  although  the  refuge,  properties, 
operations,  &c.  of  the  tastes  an  innumerable,  yet  innumerableness  cannot  be  predicated 
of  them.  The  Tastes  inhere  in  diverse  refuges,  have  diverse  properties  and  operations, 
&c.  But  they  do  not,  on  that  account,  change  their  own  essential  nature.  They  still 
remain  as  tastes,  without  being  anything  else.  Sweetness  may  attach  to  a  hundred 
different  things  without  changing  its  character  or  nature  as  sweetness.  It  is  sweetness  in 
every  case.  Then,  again,  the  tastes,  as  ‘  afrayi,  ’  are  not  different  from  their  ‘afraya;’  that, 
is,  sweetness  is  not  something  different  from  sugar,  sugar  and  sweetness  are  the  same. —  T. 

*  Tastes  exist  in  a  state  of  union.  The  varieties  of  combination  or  union  are  in¬ 
finite.  Although  the  ‘  abhinirvritti  ’  or  origin  of  taste  is  in  such  infinite  varieties  of  com¬ 
bination,  yet  infinity  or  innumerableness  does  not  attach  to  its  ‘gunaprakriti,’  i.  e'.,  'to  the 
‘  prakriti  ’  of  its  ‘  guna,  ’  or  *  guna  ’  and  *  prakriti  ’  (for  the  compound  may  be  taken 
both  ways. —  T. 

$  ‘  Asminnevarthe,’  i.  e,,  as  regards  the  purposes  of  the  Science  of  Life.  Chakra- 
pani  explains  that  this  is  said  ‘atiprasanga-doshat,’  i.  e.,  for  avoiding  the  fault  of  need- 


300 


CHA  RAKA  -SA  MHITA. 


Amongst  objects  those  that  are  principally  heavy,  sharp  or 
pungent,  hard,  mild,  immobile,  clear,  thick,  gross,  and  possessed 
of  scent,  are  regarded  as  appertaining  to  Earth. 

These  objects  promote  the  growth,  hardness,  heaviness,  and 

consistency  of  the  body.22 

Those  that  are  principally  liquid,  oily,  cold,  mild,  soft,  unctious, 
and  mobile,  are  regarded  as  appertaining  to  Water. 

These  objects  promote  impurities,  oiliness,  numbness,  stoppage 
of  secretions,  and  cheerfulness  and  joy  (in  both  body  and  mind).23 

Those  that  are  principally  hot,  keen,  subtile,  light,  dry,  and  clear, 
and  largely  endued  with  the  attribute  of  form,  are  regarded  as 
appertaining  to  Fire.24 

Those  that  are  principally  light,  cold,  dry,  sharp,  clear,  subtile, 
and  largely  endued  with  the  attribute  of  touch,  are  regarded  as 
appertaining  to  Wind.26 

Those  that  are  mild,  light,  subtile,  smooth,  and  largely  endued 
with  the  property  of  sound,  are  regarded  as  having  Ether  for  their 
essence.26 

In  consequence  of  such  instructions,  it  will  be  apparent  that 
there  is  no  object  in  the  world  that  is  not  capable  of  being  used  as 
medicine,  depending  upon  the  diverse  reasons  and  the  diverse 
purposes  set  forth  in  the  previous  Lessons. 

Then,  again,  objects  do  not  become  (efficacious)  medicines 
simply  in  consequence  of  the  puissance  of  their  attributes.*27 

Objects,  in  consequence  of  their  own  puissance,  or  that  of 
their  attributes,  or  that  of  both  themselves  and  their  attributes,  in 
different  seasons  and  coming  in  contact  with  diverse  substrata, 
and  depending  upon  different  kinds  of  combination,  produce  results 
on  the  system. 

less  elaboration  which  is  irrelevancy.  The  attributes  have  been  spoken  of  in  Lesson  j, 
aphorism  48  (ante).  As  to  ‘chetanavat’  and  ‘  achetana,’  see  Lesson  I,  adhorism 
47.  The  five  operations  have  been  frequently  referred  to  in  the  previous  Lessons.— T. 

*  To  become  efficacious  medicines  it  is  necessary  that  the  considerations  of  measure, 
time,  place,  &c.,  should  also  be  attended  to, — T, 


CHA  RA  RA-SA  M  HIT  A . 


301 


The  results  produced  are  called  their  Action. 

The  virtue  or  puissance  by  which  they  produce  these  results  is 
called  their  Energy. 

The  occasion  when  these  results  are  produced  is  called  Season 
or  Time. 

That  by  which  they  are  produced  is  called  the  Means;  and  that 
which  is  finally  accomplished  is  said  to  be  the  Purpose.*28 

Depending  upon  the  virtue  (or  puissance)  of  objects,  place, 
and  season  or  time,  there  are  three  and  sixty  varieties  of  Taste. 
We  shall  presently  lay  them  down.29 

Sweet  combined  with  sour  and  the  rest,  and  sour  and  the  rest 
combined  separately  with  what  remains, — these  groups  each  con¬ 
sisting  of  two  tastes, — come  up  to  five  and  ten  in  number.f30 

Sweet  with  sour  and  the  rest,  combined  with  what  remains, 
and  so  sour  (with  salt  and  the  rest,  combined  with  what  remains), 
and  so  salt  (with  pungent  and  the  rest,  combined  with  what  remains), 
and  so  pungent  (with  bitter  and  the  rest,  combined  with  what 
remains), — these  groups  each  consisting  of  three  tastes, — come  up  to 
twenty  in  number. {  31 


*  These  are  all  technical  terms  which  the  Rishi  explains  here.  The  immediate  and 
actual  results  produced  on  the  system  are  called  the  Action  or  Operation  of  the  drugs. 
That  by  which  those  results  are  produced  is  called  Means.  This  implies  measure,  manner 
of  combination,  &c.  —  T. 

t  Taking  the  latters  M,  A,  L,  K,  T,  and  K, ,  for  the  six  tastes  Madhura,  Amla, 
Lavana,  Katu,  Tikta,  and  Kashaya,  by  first  combining  M,  with  the  five  others,  we  get 
MA,  ML,  MK,  MT,  and  M K,  =5. 

Then  combining  A  with  those  that  follow,  we  get  A  L,  A  K,  A  T,  and  AJT,=4. 

(If  A  be  combined  with  what  precedes,  viz.,  M,  it  would  be  the  same  as  M  combined 
with  A,  for  MA=AM.)  Thus  L  combined  with  those  that  follow  it,  would  give  3; 
K  with  those  that  follow  it,  would  give  2  ;  and  T,  with  what  follows  it,  would  give  1. 
Adding  these,  5  +  4  +  3  +  2  +  1  =  15.—  T. 

t  Sweet  with  sour,  combined  with  what  remains,  would  give  M  A  L,  M  A  K,  MAT, 
M  A  A",  =  4.  So  sweet  with  salt,  combined  with  the  rest,  would  giveMLK,MLT,  and 
MLJ,=3.  Sweet  with  pungent  combined  with  what  remains  would  be  MKT  and 


302 


CIIARAKA-SAMH/TA. 


The  combination  of  the  Tastes  taken  four  at  a  time  would 
produce  five  and  ten  in  number, as  explained  below.32 

Sweet  united  with  sour,  combined  with  salt  and  the  rest,  taking 
each  separately,  and  then  combined  with  each  of  what  remains, 
taking  each  separately,  would  give  groups  of  four  in  respect  of 
the  Tastes.  3  3 

Sweet  united  with  salt,  combined  as  before  with  pungent  and 
the  rest,  taking  each  separately,  and  then  combined  with  each  of 
what  remains,  (would  give  groups  of  four). 

So  sweet  united  with  pungent,  (combined  as  before  with  bitter 
and  the  rest  taking  each  separately,  and  then  combined  with  each 
of  what  remains,  would  give  groups  of  four).31 

Sour  united  with  salt,  combined  with  pungent  and  the  rest 
taking  each  separately,  and  then  combined  with  each  of  what  re¬ 
mains,  would  give  groups  of  four. 

So  sour  united  with  pungent,  combined  with  the  rest,  would 
give  a  group  of  four.33 

Sour  and  pungent,  united  with  bitter,  combined  with  as¬ 
tringent  (gives  a  group  of  four). 


M  K  AT=2.  Sweet  with  bitter,  combined  with  what  remains,  would  give  MTf,  or  I. 
The  total,  therefore,  comes  up  to  io. 

Similarly,  sour,  with  salt,  combined  with  what  remains  .would  give  A  L  K,  ALT, 
and  A  LA',  =3. 

Sour,  with  pungent,  combined  with  what  remains,  would  give  A  K  T,  and  KKK—2 
so  sour  with  bitter,  combined  with  what  remains,  would  give  only  A  T  K,  or  I.  The  total, 
therefore,  comes  up  to  6. 

Similarly,  salt  with  pungent,  combined  with  what  remains,  would  give  L  K  T,  and 
LK  A', =2. 

Similarly,  salt  with  bitter,  combined  with  what  remains,  would  give  L  T  K,  or  I. 

So  pungent  with  bitter,  combined  with  what  remains,  would  give  KT  K,  or  I. 

The  grand  total  comes  up  to  20.  Algebraically  stated,  the  combination  of  6  things 
taken  3  at  or  time  would  give 

— _ i _ =  .6x5*4*3x2xi  _20_t 

]^x|_6-3  3x2xix;P<2xi 


CH  A  RA  KA  -SA  ME  I TA . 


By  leaving  out  one  (out  of  six)  every  time,  groups  of  five  would 
come  up  to  six  in  number.36 

Taken  one  at  a  time,  the  Tastes  would  come  up  to  six  in  number. 

All  six  taken  together,  would  give  one  as  the  number.  Thus 
objects,  grouped  according  to  the  number  of  Tastes,  come  up  to 
three  and  sixty.*37 

These  three  and  sixty  kinds  would  become  infinite  if  the  tastes 
(as  they  exist  in  their  predominating  forms)  and  those  that  exist 
with  them  in  unmanifest  forms,  be  taken  into  consideration. 

Indeed,  the  Tastes,  as  they  are  perceived,  again,  in  degrees, 
exceed  all  calculation  in  respect  of  number.-)*38 

There  are  seven  and  fifty  kinds  of  combinations.  (With  the 
six  original  or  independent  ones),  the  Tastes  are  held  to  be  of  three 
and  sixty  kinds. 

In  consequence  of  the  fitness  of  the  Tastes  in  this  matter  (viz., 
in  that  of  preventing  the  hale  from  contracting  diseases  and  curing 
disease  when  it  has  set  in),  physicians  conversant  with  the  Tastes 
have  thus  classified  them. J3  8 

The  physician,  desirous  of  success,  after  reflecting  upon  the 
faults  and  Jhe  drugs  required  (and  place,  time,  &c.)  should  some- 


*  The  algebraical  formula;  about  combinations  were  not  known  to  the  Rishis  or  their 
disciples.  Hence  the  need  of  such  elaborate  explanations  as  are  contained  in  Verses 
32  to  37  for  bringing  out  the  number  of  tastes  depending  upon  combinations  of  four  of 
them  taken  at  a  time,  or  five,  or  six.  The  total  number  is  63  including  the  six  separate 
and  independent  Tastes.  —  T. 

t  As  regards  sweet  alone,  there  are  infinite  degrees  of  sweetness.  The  second  line 
of  Verse  38  may  be  taken  independently,  or  taking  the  particle  ‘hi’  as  equivalent  to 
‘  since,’  it  may  be  taken  as  furnishing  the  reasons  of  the  infinity  of  Tastes  in  respect  of 
number,  as  dependent  upon  considerations  of  Tastes  existing  in  their  predominating 
forms  with  those  that  exist  in  their  unmanifest  forms,  those  predominating  and  unmani-' 
fest  forms  themselves  being  dependent  on  the  consideration  of  degrees. — T. 

}  The  sense  is  this  :  medical  science  would  have  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  question 
of  Tastes  or  their  classification  as  dependent  on  combination,  but  for  the  fitness  of  the  tastes 
in  the  matter  of  treatment,  of  treatment,  that  is,  for  strengthing  health  and  curing 
disease. — T. 


304  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

times  prescribe  only  one  Taste  and  sometimes  Tastes  that  are 
combined.*40 

Indeed,  physicians  possessed  of  wisdom,  in  respect  of  the 
medicines  they  prescribe,  use  such  objects  as  consist  of  two  Tastes, 
&c,  as  also  combined  Tastes,  or  the  (six)  original  Tastes  taken 
separately  .f  41 

That  physician,  who  is  conversant  with  the  varieties  of  Tastes 
and  their  use  also  with  the  varieties  of  manner  in  which  the 
faults  may  be  excited,  is  never  stupified  in  ascertaining  the  causes 
and  symptoms  and  the  means  of  mitigation  or  cure  of  the  diverse 
diseases  that  afflict  mankind.42 

That  taste  which  becomes  manifest,  of  a  dry  or  wet  object,  at 
the  outset  or  at  the  end,  is  called  its  (true)  taste.  That 
taste  which  becomes  perceptible  otherwise  or  in  succession  is 
called  the  subordinate  or  unmanifest  taste.  There  is,  however 
nothing  in  such  subordinate  or  unmanifest  taste  that  can  exclude 
it  from  the  six  original  or  independent  Tastes,  for  there  is  no 
seventh  taste  as  already  explained.^43 


*  ‘Tastes  that  are  combined  ’  does  not,  here  mean  any  of  the  seven  and  fifty  com¬ 
bined  tastes  mentioned  before,  but  one  object  with  many  tastes. — T. 

t  ‘  Combined  tastes  ’  here  means  objects,  each  having  one  taste,  combined  together. 
The  fact  is  what  is,  stated  in  41  is  different  from  what  is  stated  in  40.  What  is  stated 
in  40  is  that  objects  each  having  one  taste,  or  single  objects  each  having  more  than  one 
taste  are  prescribed.  In  41  it  is  •  said  that  single  objects  having  two,  three,  four,  &e., 
tastes,  or  such  admixtures  (of  objects)  as  have  many  tastes,  are  to  be  prescribed  ;  or,  it 
may  be,  that  40  represents  the  Rishi’s  own  opinion,  while  in  41  he  cites  the  authority  fo« 
his  opinion  by  referring  to  other  physicians.  —  T. 

t  This  is  a  difficult  Verse.  I  have  rendered  it,  following  Chakrapani.  The  first  ‘cha> 
implies  wet  or  soaked  or  dreched ;  the  second  ‘cha’  implies  ‘  at  the  end.’  Literally 
rendered,  the  verse,  therefore,  is  this  :  “of  a  dry  object  or  (the  same  when  wet),  at  the 
outset  or  (at  the  end),  that  taste  which  is  manifest,  is  (truly)  the  taste  :  the  taste  that  is- 
perceptible  otherwise  is  the  subordinate  taste.”  Chakrapani  goes  on  to  explain  :  take 
Piper  longum  ;  when  drenched  or  soaked  in  water,  its  taste  is  sweet ;  when  dry,  it  is 
Pungent.  The  latter  is  its  taste  ;  take  dried  grapes  ;  when  dry,  they  are  sweet  ;  when 
drenched,  they  are  sweet.  There  being  no  difference,  Sweet  is  its  taste.  Take  any  of  the 
liquids,  say,  kanjika  or  sour  gruel  of  vice.  That  taste  which  becomes  perceptible  at  the 
outset  is  its  true  taste.  That  which  is  perceived  afterwards  is  its  subordinate  taste.  The 


(JHARAKA-SA  M  HI  TA . 


305 


(Besides  the  attributes,  numbering  20,  of  heaviness  or  weight, 
&c.,  of  objects,  already  mentioned)  there  are  certain  other  attributes 
called  Para,  &c.  They  are  Paratwa,  Aparatwa,  Yukti,  Sankhya, 
Samyoga,  Vibhaga,  Prithaktwa,  Parimana,  Sanskara,  and  Abhyasa. 
These  are  regarded  as  means  for  the  success  of  treatment.  They 
are  being  explained  by  mentioning  their  indications.**^46 

In  Place,  Time,  Age,  Measure,  Preparation,  Power,  Taste,  and 
others,  occur  the  qualities  of  Paratwa  and  Aparatwa. 

That  application  of  medicines  which  is  well-suited  to  the 
circumstances  of  the  case  is  called  Yukti.t48 

By  Sankhya  is  meant  the  result  of  counting. 

Admixture  or  combination  is  Samyoga. 

Samyoga  may  be  of  three  kinds  :  the  combination  which  arises 
from  the  union  of  the  operation  or  effects  of  two  hostile  objects  ; 
that  which  arises  from  the  union  of  the  operation  or  effects  of 
many  objects  ;  and  that  which  arises  from  the  union  of  the  opera- 


verse  refers  to  2  states  and  2  states  of  an  object,  i.e.,  dry  and  at  the  outset,  dry  and  at 
the  end,  wet  and  at.  the  outset,  wet  and  at  the  end.  In  ascertaining  the  tate  of  an  object, 
this  order  is  to  be  followed.  That  which  becomes  perceptible  in  the  state  and  stage 
mentioned  first  should  have  precedence  over  the  state  and  stage  following. — T. 

*  All  these  terms,-  which  are  technical,  have  been  explained  in  the  Verses  that 
follow. — T. 

■}•  The  terms  ‘  Paratwa’  and  ‘  Aparatwa  ’  belong  to  the  Nyaya  Philosophy,  in  which 
they  mean  Remoteness  and  Proximity.  ( Vide  Dr.  Ballantyne’s  translation  of  the 
“Tarka-Sangraha.”  In  Medical  Science,  they  have  other  meanings.  ‘Para’  is  Pradhana 
or  chief,  i.  e.,  superior.  ‘Apara’  is  Apradhana  or  inferior.  Upon  this  view,  with  respect 
to  Place,  a  dry  sandy  region  is  called  Para,  because  of  its  suitability  to  health  ;  and  a 
marshy  tract  is  called  Apara  or  inferior,  because  of  its  unsuitability  to  health.  As  re¬ 
gards  Time,  the  season  that  gives  is  called  Para  or  superior  ;  the  season  that  takes  is 
Apara  or  inferior  (Vide  pp.  65-67  ante).  As  regards  age,  youth  is  Para,  while  old  age 
is  Apara.  So  in  the  case  of  the  rest. 

‘Ya  yojana  yujyate  (sa)  .yuktih,’ — this  is  the  construction.  By  ‘Yukti,’  therefore, 
is  meant  the  proper  or  suitable  application  of  medicines.  This,  of  course,  is  dependent 
upon  a  correct  consideration  of  the  faults  excited. — T. 


306 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  M  HIT A. 


tion  or  effects  of  two  separate  objects  (not  particularly  related  to 
each  other).  Such  combinations  are  not  enduring.*47 

Vibhaga  (disjunction)  is  division.  It  consists  in  disjoining, 
i.e ,  the  use  or  application  of  objects  by  apportioning  or  disuni¬ 
ting  them.48+ 

Parimana  is  measure. 

Samskara  is  the  production  of  other  attributes  by  admixture. 

Abhyasa  is  habituating  oneself  in  any  thing.  It  is  in  eminent 
or  continued  practice.49 

Thus  all  the  attributes  beginning  with  Paratwa  have  been  ex¬ 
plained  by  a  reference  to  the  indication  of  each.  Without  these 
being  properly  mastered,  good  treatment  can  never  flow.50 

It  has  been  said  before  that  attributes  can  never  form  the 
refuge  of  attributes.  Hence  the  physician  should  take  the  attri¬ 
butes  of  the  Tastes  to  be  only  attributes  of  (those)  substances  in 
which  the  Tastes  inhere.  The  intentions  of  him  who  has  written 
this  treatise  on  the  Science  of  Life  are  the  same  though  expressed 
otherwise. 

Hence,  properly  understanding  the  distinctions  of  Place, 
Time,  &c.,  as  also  the  intentions  of  the  author  of  this  Science  of 

*  Mixture  or  combination  is  a  principal  feature  of  applying  medicines.  It  is  of 
three  kinds.  The  first  kind  is  that  which  consists  of  the  union  of  two  hostile  objects,  as  of 
two  rams  fighting  against  each  other.  The  second  consists  of  the  union  of  many  things, 
such  as  of  a  hundred  or  thousand  grains  of  rice  boiling  together  in  a  pot.  The  third 
kind  consists  of  the  union  of  two  such  objects  as  a  tree  and  a  crow  perching  on  it.  All 
these  unions  are  unenduring,  not  being  that  chemical  union  of  different  elements  which 
produces  a  compact  substance. — T. 

t  Prithaktwam  is  Severalty.  It  may  be  of  three  kinds.  First,  absence  of  combination, 
as  a  jar  and  a  picture ;  these  may  be  kept  together,  but  they  are  Prithak  or  several. 
Prithaktwam  may  arise,  in  the  second  place,  from  Vailakshanya  or  difference  in  kind, 
such  as  a  herd  consisting  of  buffalos  and  swine.  The  buffalos  are  different  from  the 
swine,  notwithstanding  the  fact  of  their  being  kept  together.  The  third  kind  of  severalty 
is  referred  to  as  Anekata  or  multiplicity.  Thus,  hundreds  or  thousands  of  individual 
grains  of  Phaseolus  radiatus.  Though  belonging  to  the  same  species,  they  are  Prithak, 
or  severalty  attaches  to  them, — T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  M  HIT  A . 


307 


Life,  and  the  (diverse)  means  (there  are  for  alleviation  and  cure  of 
disease),  the  physician  should  prescribe  that  which  is  neces¬ 
sary.*51-52 

After  this,  the  six  classes  of  the  Tastes  are  being  explained 
as  also  how  those  six  are  counted  as  arising  from  the  five  primal 
elements. 

The  Waters  have  their  origin  in  Space  or  Ether.  They  partake 
the  nature  of  Soma  (moon).  They  are,  by  nature,  cool,  and  light 
The  taste  residing  in  them  is  unmanifest.  Falling  from  the  sky, 
they  fall  down  (on  the  Earth)  and  become  endued  with  the  attri¬ 
butes  of  the  five  primal  elements,  and  refresh  (or  cool)  the  forms 
of  all  mobile  and  immobile  objects  in  which  forms  of  objects  the 
six  tastes  become  displayed.53 

Among  the  six  Tastes,  that  which  is  called  Sweet  arises  from 
a  preponderance  of  the  attributes  of  Soma. 

From  a  preponderance  of  the  attributes  of  Earth  and  Fire, 
arises  the  Taste  called  Sour. 

From  a  preponderance  of  the  attributes  of  Water  and  Fire 
arises  the  taste  called  Saline. 


*  What  is  stated  in  51-52  is  this  attributes  cannot  have  attributes  for  their,  refuge. 
The  Tastes  are  themselves  attributes,  pf  material  substances,  for  it  is  material  substances 
to  which  the  tastes  attach  themselves.  We  speak  of  Sugar  as  having  a  sweet  taste. 
Chillies  as  having  a  pungent  taste,  &c.  The  attributes  of  the  tastes  cannot  reside  in  the 
tastes,  for  the  tastes  are  themselves  attributes  of  material  substances.  The  correct  view, 
therefore,  would  be  to  take  the  attributes  of  sweetness,  bitterness,  &c.  of  the  tastes  as 
residing  in  material  substances  that  have  taste  for  their  attribute.  There  is  one  school  of 
Hindu  philosophy  which  does  not  affirm  the  separate  existence  of  substances  ;  substances, 
according  to  it,  being  only  a  combination  of  their  attributes,  for  substances  cannot  be 
known  except  by  their  attributes.  According  to  another  view,  substances  are  unknown 
essences  to  which  the  attributes  only  attach  themselves,  these  being  separate  from  the 
essences  to  which  they  attach.  Punarvasu  seems  to  be  a  follower  of  the  latter  doctrine. 
The  whole  discussion,  however,  seems  to  be  more  verbal  than  real.  Sweetness  is  an 
attribute  of  the  taste  called  sweet.  To  what  does  sweetness  as  an  attribute  inhere  ? 
That  is  the  question  here  raised.  Sweetness  and  the  taste  called  sweet  are  the  same  thing. 
Instead  of  saying  that  Sweetness  is  an  attribute  of  the  taste  called  sweet  and,  therefore, 
inhering  to  that  taste,  it  is  more  intelligible  to  say  that  it  inheres  to  the  material  substance 
that  has  a  sweet  taste. —  T. 


charaka-samhitA. 


From  a  preponderance  of  the  attributes  of  Wind  and  F'ire 
arises  the  taste  called  Pungent. 

From  a  preponderance  of  the  attributes  of  Wind  and  Ether 
arises  the  taste  called  Bitter. 

From  a  preponderance  of  the  attributes  of  Wind  and  Earth 
arises  the  taste  called  Astringent. 

Even  thus  arises  the  sixfold  character  of  the  Tastes  from 
the  specialities  in  respect  of  the  insufficiency  or  preponderance  of 
the  five  primal  elements,  even  as  specialities  of  color  and  form 
arise  of  all  material  objects,  mobile  and  immobile.54 

In  consequence,  again,  of  Time  being  characterised  by  six 
seasons,  specialities  of  insufficiency  and  preponderance  in  respect 
of  the  (five)  primal  elements  arise  in  the  case  of  Time  also.*55 

Amongst  these,  those  Tastes  that  have  Fire  and  Wind  for  their 
soul,  generally  act  on  the  upper  parts  of  the  body,  in  consequence 
of  the  lightness  and  mobility  of  the  Wind  and  the  upward  course 
of  Fire. 

Those  Tastes  that  have  Water  and  Earth  for  their  soul,  gener¬ 
ally  act  on  the  lower  parts  of  the  body,  in  consequence  of  the 
heaviness  of  Earth  and  the  downward  course  of  Water. 

Tastes  that  have  all  the  above  elements  in  a  combined  state  as 
their  soul,  act  both  on  the  upper  and  the  lower  parts  of  the  body.t5S 


*  In  aphorism  54,  the  origin  of  the  Tastes  is  explained.  That  origin,  the  Rishi  ex¬ 
pounds,  is  due  to  the  specialities  of  insufficiency  and  preponderance  in  respect  of  the 
five  primal  elements*  even  as  specialities  or  diversity  of  color  and  form  arise  in  material 
objects  from  the  same  reason,  for  all  material  objects,  though  composed  of  the  five  primal 
elements,  contain  those  elements  in  diverse  proportions.  In  55,  the  Rishi  explains  that 
Time,  though  apparently  uniform,  has  yet  six  seasons  which  are  different  from  one  an¬ 
other.  In  consequence  of  this  diversity  of  seasons,  in  the  case  of  Time  also,  diversities 
arise  in  material  objects,  for  in  Hemanta  the  attributes  of  Soma  preponderate  ;  in 
Winter,  the  attributes  of  Wind  and  Ether  preponderate  ;  &c. —  T. 

t  The  Pungent  taste,  for  example,  has  Fire  and  Wind  for  its  soul  or  cause.  Wind 
is  light  and  mobile.  It  has  a  tendency  to  rise  upwards.  Fire  also  has  an  upward  course. 
Hence,  all  articles  with  the  pungent  taste  are  calculated  to  act  on  the  upper  parts  of  the 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MU  I TA . 


309 


We  shall,  after  this,  expound  the  attributes  and  actions,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  substances,  of  the  six  Tastes  one  by  one. 

Among  them,  the  Taste  that  is  Sweet,  in  consequence  of  its 
being  well-adapted  to  the  body,  increases  the  juices,  blood,  flesh, 
fat,  bones,  marrow,  Ojas,  and  vital  seed. 

It  contributes  to  the  health  and  cheerfulness  of  the  six  senses 
{viz.,  the  five  organs  and  the  mind). 

It  improves  strength  and  complexion. 

It  destroys  (excited)  bile,  poisons,  and  (excited)  wind. 

It  is  beneficial  to  the  skin,  the  hair,  and  the  voice. 

It  contributes  to  cheerfulness  in  general. 

It  prolongs  life,  is  sedative  and  nutrive,  oilifies  the  system  (by 
destroying  its  dryness),  makes  the  system  consistent,  promotes  the 
strength  of  weakened  parts,  and  unites  fractured  limbs. 

It  contributes  to  the  strength  and  cheerfulness  of  the  organ 
of  scent,  mouth,  throat,  lips,  and  palate. 

It  alleviates  burning  sensation  (of  the  skin)  and  swoons. 

It  is  exceedingly  liked  by  bees  and  ants. 

It  is  oily,  cool,  and  heavy.57 

This  Taste  {viz.,  Sweet),  though  possessed  of  these  attributes, 
yet  if  used  exclusively  (and  largely),  generates  corpulency,  softness 
of  the  body,  idleness  or  aversion  to  labour,  excessive  sleep,  heavi¬ 
ness  (of  the  limbs  and  the  whole  body),  disgust  for  food,  weakness 
of  the  digestive  fire,  increase  of  the  flesh  of  the  mouth  and  throat 
asthma,  consumption,  catarrh  or  cold  in  nose  and  mouth, Tympanites, 
Fevers  in  which  the  cold  stage  predominates,  Epistasis  or  suppres- 


body,  and  hence  are  used  as  remedies  in  affections  of  phlegm.  So  the  Saline-astringent, 
having  Water  and  Earth  for  its  soul,  acts  on  the  lower  parts  of  the  body  and  is  used  as  a 
remedy  in  affections  of  the  abdomen. —  T , 


310 


charakasamhitA. 


sion  of  urine,  constant  sensation  of  sweetness  in  the  mouth,  cons¬ 
tant  vomiting,  loss  of  consciousness  and  of  the  voice,  Bronchocele, 
enlargement  of  the  lymphatic  glands,  elephantaisis,  swellings  in 
the  throat,  phlegmonous  plasters  in  the  rectum,  nerves,  and  anus, 
diseases  of  the  eye,  catarrhal  discharges  from'the  nose,  and  such 
other  diseases  as  are  born  of  (the  excitement  of)  the  Phlegm.58 

The  Sour  Taste  adds  relish  to  food  ;  excites  the  digestive  fire  ; 
gives  nutrition  to  the  body  ;  weakens  objects  by  entering  into 
them,  enlivens  the  mind  ;  invigorates  the  senses ;  increases  the 
strength  ;  makes  the  wind  flow  in  its  natural  course  ;  cools  and 
gratifies  the  heart  ;  causes  the  mouth  to  be  filled  with  saliva;  assists 
at  deglutition  ;  generates  impurities  in  the  body  ;  and  contributes 
to  general  cheerfulness. 

It  is  light,  warm,  and  oily.59 

Though  possessed  of  such  attributes,  yet  if  used  exclusively 
and  largely,  it  produces  tenderness  of  the  teeth  and  a  sensation  of 
fulness  even  when  nothinghas  been  eaten;  causes  the  eyes  to  be  closed 
and  the  hair  on  the  body  to  stand  erect  ;  melts  thick  phlegm  (and 
gradually  liquifies  it)  ;  enhances  the  bile  ;  corrupts  the  blood,  burns 
the  skin  :  relaxes  the  body  ;  causes  swellings  and  inflammations  to 
arise  in  persons  that  are  weak  or  wounded  or  emaciated  or  weaken¬ 
ed  ;  restores  the  soundness  of  such  parts  as  have  sores,  or  as  have 
been  struck  or  bitten  or  burnt  or  fractured,  or  as  have  been  torn 
in  consequence  of  one  having  been  rescued  from  impalement,  or 
as  have  been  cauterised  by  the  urine  of  some  poisonous  animal,  or  as 
have  been  touched  (as  by  a  leech  or  with  the  nails  or  teeth  of  some 
poisoned  creature),  or  as  have  been  bruised  or  cut  or  pierced  or 
crushed  ;  and  in  consequence  of  its  nature  being  fiery,  it  burns  the 
throat,  the  thoracic  region,  and  the  heart.60 

The  Saline  Taste  digests  (the  bad  humours),  generates  im¬ 
purities,  promotes  the  appetite,  expels  stools,  cuts  away  and  re¬ 
moves  by  force  (adherent  phlegm  and  other  humours),  and  purges 
the  intestines  after  making  the  stools  watery. 


CH  A  RAKA-SAM  H ITA. 


311 


It  is  keen,  and  operates  as  a  purgative.  It  cuts  away  and 
removes. 

It  expels  undigested  food  from  the  intestines. 

It  scoops  and  hollows  parts  that  are  solid. 

It  destroys  the  (excited)  wind.  It  allays  and  destroys  rigidity 
of  the  limbs  or  the  whole  body.  It  removes  the  sensation  which 
one  feels  at  times  of  this  or  that  limb  being  bound  with  cords. 

It  melts  or  softens  things  congealed  and  hardened. 

It  overwhelms  all  other  Tastes.* 

It  causes  saliva  and  other  matters  to  appear  in  the  mouth. 

It  melts  or  liquifies  thickened  phlegm.  It  cleanses  all  ducts. 
It  softens  all  the  limbs  of  the  body.  It  adds  relish  to  food.  It  is 
well  suited  to  be  mixed  with  food. 

It  is  heavy,  oily,  and  warm,  but  not  excessively  so.f01 

Although  possessed  of  these  attributes,  yet  when  used  exclu¬ 
sively  and  largely,  it  generates  the  following  diseases ;  it  pro¬ 
vokes  the  bile  ;  it  increases  the  blood  (abnormally);  it  causes  thirst  ; 
it  produces  unconsciousness  or  swoons  ;  it  causes  stupefaction  ;  it 
causes  heat  of  body  ;  it  burns  ;  it  deadens  the  flesh  ;  it  causes 
leprous  eruptions  to  ripen  and  melt  ;  it  enhances  the  power  of 
any  poison  that  has  found  its  way  into  the  system  ;  it  causes  swel¬ 
lings  to  burst  ;  it  blackens  the  teeth  ;  it  destroys  the  virile  power  ; 
it  obstructs  the  free  action  of  the  senses  ;  it  induces  wrinkles, 


*  Chakrapani  explains  ‘pratyanika’  as  implying  ‘yalra  matrarikto  lavano  bhavatt 
tatra  nanyorasa  upalahshyate'. — T. 

t  There  are  many  words  in  this  aphorism  that  are,  rather,  of  doubtful  import. 
‘Chyavana’  means  anything  that  expels.  This  probably  refers  to  the  power  of  salt  to 
expel  digested  and  undigested  matter.  ‘Bhedana’  means  that  which  expels  scybake’ 
without  liquifying  them.  ‘Vikaci’  is  explained  by  Chakrapani  as  equivalent  to 
‘cchedana’  .which  would  be  tautological,  for  ‘cchedana’  is,  as  Chakrapani  explains, 
‘vishyandanafila,’  meaning,  probably,  expelling  undigested  matter.  ‘Natyartham’  has 
reference  to  what  follows.  —  T. 


312  CH  A  RA  K A-S  AMR  IT  A. 

whiteness  of  the  hair,  and  baldness  ;  it  generates  hemorrhages, 
Amla-pitta,*  Erysipelas,  Leprosy,  Herpes,  total  baldness,  and 
other  diseases. 

The  Pungent  Taste  corrects  (the  dulness  of)  the  mouth  ;  pro¬ 
vokes  the  digestive  fire  ;  dries  up  the  food  that  has  been  eaten  ; 
causes  nasal  discharges  ;  purges  the  eye  ;  clears  all  the  senses  ; 
alleviates  and  destroys  Tympanites,  swellings  or  intumescences, 
plethoric  growth  of  the  body,  urticaria,  opthalmia,  oiliness,  sweat, 
impure  secretions,  and  all  kinds  of  impurities. 

It  adds  relish  to  all  kinds  of  food. 

It  alleviates  and  cures  Itching  of  the  skin.  It  destroys  all 
kinds  of  eruptions.  It  destroys  worms  and  parasites. 

It  furrows  the  flesh. 

It  liquifies  congealed  or  coagulated  blood.  It  separates  or 
disjoins  such  elements  of  the  body  as  coagulate  or  unite  with  one 
another.  It  cleanses  and  widens  all  ducts. 

It  is  light,  warm,  and  dry.68 

Although  possessed  of  these  attributes,  yet  when  taken  exclu¬ 
sively  and  largely,  in  consequence  of  the  strength  of  its  effects  on 
the  system,  it  destroys  the  virile  power. 

In  consequence  of  the  puissance  of  its  energy,  it  stupifies  the 
mind,  causes  pain,  produces  a  lassitude  or  enervation  of  the  system, 
leads  to  leanness  or  emaciation,  brings  about  unconsciousness  or 
swoons,  bends  the  body,  produces  great  agony,  generates  errors, 
burns  the  throat,  causes  great  heat  of  the  body,  and  diminishes  the 
strength. 

In  consequence  of  the  preponderance  in  it  of  Wind  and  Fire, 
it  generates  mental  wanderings  (erroneous  impressions  due  to 

#  “By  ‘Amla-pitta’  is  meant  dyspepsia  with  vomiting  or  purging,  including  hsema- 
temesis,  perhaps,  of  cancer,  pyrosis,  and  acidity.” — {7,  C.  Dult's  Mat.  Med.  of  the 
Hindus.— T. 


It  is  very  much  to  be  desired  that  the  translation  of  Snsruta  should  be  done  with 
as  nine’ll  regularity  as  yours.  You  will  have  rendered  to  Science  a  service  for  which 
all  the  Orientalists  will  be  grateful. 

[FrontMos.  A.  Barth,o/  Columbia,  Paris.  ] 

Dea'ik  Sir, 

Accept  ray  best  thanks  for  Part  IX- just  received,  of  your  translation  of  “Charaka- 
Samhita.”  The  discussion  about  the  origin  of  disease  and  the  various  statisticsOibouf 
food  and  diet  are  very  interesting.  They  are  just  the  sort  of  doctrine  and  observation 
as  is  to  be  expected  from  the  ancient  Hindu  practice.  Here  all  is  genuine,  be  it 
either  experience  or  prej  udice. 

[  From  the  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association.  ] 

Chicago,  April  21,  1894. 

In  our  issue  of  September  23,  we  commented  editorially  on  the  character  of  this 
work,  its  great  antiquity,  and  its  interest  to  all  physicians. 

[  From  the  Indian  Mirror,  of  May,  18,  1894.] 
“Sip.  Chap.lf,s  Elliott,  in  the  course  of  his  Presidental  address  at  the  Asiatic  Society 
of  Bengal,  noticed  Pandit  Avinash  Chunde'r  Kaviratna’s  English  translation  of 
“Charaka”  in  terms  of  deserving  praise.  Here  is.  what  His  Honour  said  : — 

(  Already  quoted  on  the  wrapper  of  the  9th  fasciculus.  ) 

The  Pandit  is  an  enthusiast  in  the  cause. Of  Hindu  Medical  Science.  Much  credit 
is  due  to  him  for  his  efforts  in  diffusing  a  knowledge  of  the  ancient  medical  scriptures 
of  India.  Locked  in  a  difficult  toiigue,  many  valuable  truths  seem  to  have  been  well 
known  to. the  Bisliis. 

\From  the  American  Druggist  and  Pharmaceutical  Record,  New  York ,  May  24,  1894.] 
It  contains  many  curious  and  valuable  facts  pertaining  to  the  ancient  practice  of 
medicine  by  Hindu  sages,  and  must  be  regarded  as  a  valuable  contribution  to  the 
native  literature  of  India. 

[  From  Popular  Science  News,  of  New  York,  May,  1894.] 
The  eighth  part  of  the  English  translation  of  this  very  remarkable  medical  work 
has  just  been  published.  If  any  one  has  imagined  that  all  ancient  medicine  was 
mummery  or  superstition,  nothing  could  more  quickly  undeceive  them  than  this.  It 
was  composed  six  hundred  years  before  the  Christian  era,  and  yet  it,  in  many  ways, 
puts  to  shame.  European  medical  lore  prior  to  the  great  advances  of  the  present  century. 
The  translator  is  a  Hindoo  physician  and  medical  editor  well  qualified  for  his  task,  as  is 
manifest  in  the  fact  that  Prof.  Max  Muller  and  other  eminent  Orientalists  have  com¬ 
mended  it.  He  is  rendering  a  truly  valuable  service  to  medical  history  and  human 
progress.  .  , 


[  From  Meyer  Brothers’  Druggist  of  St.  Louis ,  May,  ,15.94. 1 
This  is  a  work  which  should  be  a  part  of  every'  medical  and  pharmaceutical  library 
in  the  world.  It  is  of  importance  as  well  as  interest  to  read  the  facts  carefully. 


[  From,  the  Western  Druggist,  of  Chicago,  June,  J594-] 

Charaka-Samhita.  Part  VIII  of  this  great  work  of  ancient  Hindu  medicine,  so 
excellently  translated  into  English  by  Dr.  Avinash  Chundra  Kaviratna  of  Calcutta,  now 
lies  before  us.  Its  contents  are  extremely  interesting.  The  true  nature  of  wind,  bile 
and  phlegm,  the  evils  brought  oh  by  .obesity  and  leanness,  and  the  means  by  which, 
these  may  be  got  rid  of,  and  the  purposes  served  by  sleep  in  the  economy  of  the  human 
constitution  are  subjects  discussed  in  this  fascicule.  They  demand  attention  from  every 
thoughtful  person.  It  may  be  well  bo  recall  to  mind  the  fact  that  this  arduous  work 
has  not  been  undertaken  by  the  indefatigable  translator  from  motives  of  pecuniary 
profit.  This  task  and  the  risk  of  publication  has  been  undertaken  solely  from  a 
desire  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  modern  world  to  the  truths  that,  iie  buried  in  this 
interesting  relic  of  the  Eishis  of  ancient  India.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  he  will  meet  . 
with  sufficient  encouragement  to  bring  the  work  to  a  successful  finish. 


[  From  the  Behar  Times,  of  July,' 20,  liS9Jt.  ] 

The  Charaka-Samhita.  Kaviraj  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna  is  a  well-known 
Ayurvedic  practitioner  of  Calcutta  and  Translator  and  Editor  of  several  Ayurvedic 
books  and  journals.  The  Kaviraj  is  at  present  engaged  on  an  English  translation  of 
Charaka  -Samhita,  the  best  authority  bn  Hindu  Medicine  and  Hygiene,  described  by  him-) 
as  “the  greatest  scientific  work  of  ancient  Indian  wisdom.”  The  translation  is  being 
issued  in  monthly  parts,  of  which  several  have  already  appeared  ;  and  the  Translator 
has  earned  the  approbation  and  the  gratitude  of  the  world  of  learning  as  well  for  the 
manner  as  the  matter  of  his  translation.  Charaka-Samhita  is  undoubtedly  a  work  of 
which  any  nation  may  be  proud  ;  and  Kaviraj  Avinash  Chandra,  by  placing  it  before 
the  Western  world  iii  an  English  garb,  has  not  only  enriched  the  Western  world,  but 
has  done  a  service  to  his  own  country,  by  attracting  to  it  the  admiration  of  foreign 
savants  and  scientists.  Some  of  the  most  eminent  men  of  Europe  and  America  have 
written  appreciatingly  of  the  work  undertaken  by  Kaviraj  Avinash  Chander,  and  the 
parts  already,  issued  have  been  favourably  reviewed  by  the  leading  papers  in  England, : 
and  India.  Kaviratna’s  enterprise  deserves  success  and  ought  to  command  ready 
support  in  India. 


PART  XI. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


PUBLISHED  BY 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita 

(in  original)  WITH  COMMENTARIES;  BENGALI  AND 

Hindi  translator  of  Charaka-Samhita  and 
of  Susruta-Samhita;  editor  of  Chikitsa- 
Sammilani  (  Medical  Journal  in 
Bengali) ;  PRACTITIONER  OF 

the  Hindu  System 
of  Medicine, 

&c.,  &c.,  &c. 


Calcutta; 

Printed  by  D.  C.  Dass  &  Co., 
“Corinthian  Press,”  33,  New  China  Bazar 
and 

Published  at 
soo,  Cornwallis  Street. 


(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved. ) 


ABSTRACT 


OF 

THE  CONTENTS  OF  THE  ELEVENTH  FASCICULUS. 


The  contents  of  this  fascicule  are  varied  and  extremely  interesting. 

In  continuation  of  Lesson  XXVI,  the  properties  are  shown  of  the  Bitter  and 
the  Astringent  tastes,  and  their  evil  consequences  when  taken  in  excess. 

The  Energy  of  objects  Sweet  in  taste  and  assimilation  ;  and  of  those  that  are 
Pungent  in  taste  and  assimilation. 

The  virtues  of  objects  are  gatherable  from  their  Tastes. 

There  are  exceptions  to  this  general  law. 

Those  exceptions  are  noted  here.  These  discover  considerable  powers  of 
observation. 

Particular  tastes  are  foremost  in  particular  attributes. 

The  indications  of  tastes,  as  they  appear  on  assimilation. 

Explanation  of  what  is  meant  by  the  Energy  of  an  object. 

Objects  having  no  Energy  have  no  Action  ;  for  Action  proceeds  from  Energy. 

Taste,  Assimilation  and  Energy  differentiated. 

The  Potency  of  objects  explained,  and  illustrated  by  examples. 

The  relative  force  of  Taste,  Assimilation,  Energy,  and  Potency,  in  the  action 

of  objects  upon  the  human  system. 

The  sensations  produced  by  the  different  Tastes. 

The  unsuitability  of  particular  dietary  modifications  to  the  human  system. 

Observations  on  different  kinds  of  articles  or  food  that  become  injurious  if 
combined  together  and  the  diseases  they  produce. 

The  remedies  for  allaying  such  diseases. 

Lesson  XXVII  is  begun.  The  importance  of  food  and  drink  to  Life. 

The  ordinances  in  detail  respecting  food  and  drink. 

Observations  on  the  several  articles  that  constitute  the  first  dietary  group,  vis., 
cuka-dhanya  or  grain. 

Observations  on  the  articles  composing  the  second  group,  viz.,  cami-dhanya 
or  seeds  growing  within  pods. 

Observations  on  the  different  kinds  of  animal  meat,  composing  the  third 
group,  distributed  into  Prasahas,  Bhumifayas,  Anupa,  Jalaja,  Jalachara,  Jangala, 
Vishkira,  and  Pratuda. 

Observations  on  the  fourth  dietary  group,  consisting  of  Potherbs. 

[IV.  B. — It  may  be  remarked  that  as  yet  European  Medical  Science  has 
sanctioned  the  use  of  only  one  of  the  six  tastes,  viz.,  the  Bitter,  as  a  curative 
agency  in  Fevers.  Quinine  has  come  to  be  used  extensively.  The  presumption 
is  certainly  powerful  in  favor  of  the  theory  that  the  five  other  tastes  are  equally 
operative  in  other  diseases.  The  Rishis  assert  so  without  expressing  any  doubt. 
If  Bitters  cure  fevers,  why  should  not  other  tastes  have  curative  effects  in  respect 
to  other  diseases  ?  ] 


V 

C&jtRjkfTA^AMHITA.  313 

delirium),  sensation  of  intSjifcation,  mental  anxiety,  tremours, 
sharp  shooting  pains,  piercing  pains,  and  other  diseases,  due  to  the 
wind,  in  the  feet,  the  arms,  the  flanks  or  sides  of  the  chest,  the 
back,  and  other  parts  of  the  body.*84 

The  Bitter  taste  is  so  disagreeable  as  to  produce  a  disgust  for 
itself,  but  nevertheless  it  cures  disgust  for  food. 

It  destroys  the  action  of  poisons. 

It  is  anthelmintic. 

It  alleviates  swoons,  burning  sensation  of  the  skin,  itching, 
leprosy,  and  thirst. 

It  causes  the  skin  and  the  flesh  to  become  tough. 

It  is  destructive  of  fevers. 

It  promotes  or  sharpens  the  appetite. 

It  assists  the  digestion  of  undigested  food.f 

It  improves  the  qualities  of  the  milk  in  the  breast. 

It  removes  bad  humours  and  altered  constituents  of  the  body 
by  thinning  them  gradually  and  thus  clearing  the  system  of  them. 

It  dries  up  phlegmonous  secretions,  fat,  serum  (or  marrow  of 
the  fleshj,  marrow  of  the  bones,  saliva,  puss,  sweat,  urine,  stools,  bile, , 
and  phlegm. 

Its  attributes  are  dry,  cool,  and  light.85 

Although  possessed  of  these  qualities,  yet,  if  taken  exclusive¬ 
ly  and  abundantly,  in  consequence  of  its  nature  being  dry  and 
rough  and  clear,  it  dries  up  the  juices  (of  the  body),  blood,  flesh, 
fat,  bones,  the  marrow  of  the  bones,  and  vital  seed. 

*  ‘Davathu’  implies  inflammation  of  the  eye,  or  mental  anxiety.  Here,  I  think,  it 
signifies  anxiety,  for  it  stands  with  ‘Bhrama’  ahd  ‘Mada’  both  of  which  are  mental 
diseases.  Gangadhara  reads  ‘Vamatha,’  meaning  vomiting.  This  is  very  probably 
correct.  —  T. 

f  The  difference  between  ‘Dipana’  and  ‘Pachana’  is  this  :  the  first  is  a  mere  appetiser  • 
the  last  is  a  digestive,  —  T. 

40 


314. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MH1 TA . 


It  causes  a  roughness  in  all  the  ducts  of  the  body. 

It  takes  away  strength,  causes  emaciation,  produces  swoons, 
and  generates  delirium. 

It  causes  the  mouth  to  become  dry,  and  generates  many  other 
diseases  brought  about  by  excitement  of  the  Wind.* * * § 

The  Astringent  Taste  restores  harmony  among  the  faults. 

It  restrains  (the  stools,  urine,  and  other  secretions).+ 

It  draws  in  and  contracts  the  limbs  of  the  body.J 

It  causes  sores  and  parts  eaten  away  to  heal  or  fill  up.^f 

It  dries  up  the  fluids  of  the  body. 

It  retains  or  restrains  all  scretions.f 

It  alleviates  phlegm  and  hemorrhages  caused  by  excitement  of 
the  bile. 

It  sucks  up  all  phlegmonous  and  other  secretions  of  the  system. 

It  is  dry,  cool,  and  heavy.67 

Although  possessed  of  these  qualities,  yet,  if  taken  exclusively 
and  in  copious  measure,  it  makes  the  mouth  dry. 

It  produces  pain  in  the  heart  (by  contracting  it). 


*  ‘Ruksha’  is  dry,  being  the  reverse  of  oily.  ‘Khara’  is  sharp  or,  rather,  rough, 
being  the  reverse  of  smooth.  ‘  Vicada’  is  clear. — T. 

f  Generally  speaking,  ‘Grahi’  or  inspissants  are  medicines  which  dry  up  the  fluids  of 
the  body.  A  particular  drug  is  called  ‘Samgrahi’  when  it  either  dries  up  the  fluids  or 
restrains  their  escape  from  the  body  or  the  particular  parts  of  the  body  where  they  are 
generated. — T. 

$  ‘Pidana’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  ‘akrishya-sankocha-kara.’ — T. 

‘Ropana’  is  explained  by  the  same  Commentator  as  ‘Vranasya  mangsadi- 
purana.’ — T. 

§  “Stambhana  or  constipators  are  medicines  which,  from  their  drying,  astringent, 
and  cooling  qualities,  and  from  their  easy  digestibility,  increase  the  air  and  retain  the 
secretions.” — U.  C.  Dutt’s  Mat.  Med.  of  the  Hindus. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


,315 


It  causes  abdominal  flatulence. 

It  restrains  the  free  utterance  of  speech. 

It  obstructs  the  ducts  of  the  system. 

It  produces  darkness  of  complexion. 

It  destroys  virility. 

Restraining  the  secretions  (constipating  them),  it  brings  about 
untimely  decrepitude. 

It  restrains  the  wind,  urine,  and  stools. 

It  produces  emaciation. 

It  brings  about  heaviness  and  pain  in  the  body. 

It  produces  thirst. 

It  retains  fluids  and  secretions  and  prevents  them  from  flowing 
or  escaping  out  of  the  body. 

In  consequence  of  its  being  rough,  clear,  and  dry,  it  brings  about 
Hemiplegia,  Paralysis,  Spasmodic  contractions,  facial  paralysis,  and 
other  diseases  of  the  kind  that  spring  from  excited  wind.68 

Even  thus  the  six  Tastes,  separately  or  (in  admixture),  taken 
or  administered  properly  and  in  due  measure,  prove  beneficial  unto 
all  creatures  endued  with  life.  If  administered  otherwise,  they 
produce  evil  consequences.  Hence,  the  physician  possessed  of 
learning  should  administer  them  properly  and  in  due  measure,  with 
the  view  of  producing  only  beneficial  consequences.*69 

Here  occur  some  verses. 

That  object  which  is  sweet  in  Taste  and  Assimilation,  should 
be  known  as  cooling  in  Energy.  That  which  is  sour  in  Taste 
and  Assimilation,  should  be  known  as  heating  in  Energy.  So  also 


The  particle  ‘va,’  following  ‘Prithaktwena,’  means,  by  implication,  admixture. —  T. 


316 


CHA  RA  KA -SAM  RITA . 


that  object  which  is  pungent  in  Taste  and  Assimilation,  should  be 
known  as  heating  in  energy.1 

The  virtues  of  objects,  in  brief,  are  gatherable  from  instructions 
as  regards  their  Tastes.  Presently,  instructions  are  being  laid  down 
respecting  those  objects  that  are  otherwise  in  energy  or  that  be¬ 
come  otherwise  upon  Assimilation.*2 

Of  such  as  Milk,  as  Ghee,  as  Ghavya  and  Chitraka,  and  others 
of  the  kind,  the  physician  should  indicate  the  properties  by  (a 
reference  to)  their  Taste.3 

There  are  some  sweet  things  that  are,  however,  of  heating 
energy,  as  also  some  astringent  things  and  some  that  are  bitter, 
and  some  that  are  bitter-astringents  as  the  compound  called  Mahat 
Panchamula,  and  the  meat  of  some  animals  living  in  marshy 
regions  (that  are  so).4t 

Rock-salt,  though  saline  in  taste,  is  not  of  heating  energy  ; 
so  Amalaka  (. Phyllanthus  Emblica ,  Linn.),  though  possessed  of  a 
sour  taste,  is  not  of  heating  energy.  Arka  (a),  Aguru  (5),  and 
Guduchi  (c),  amongst  things  that  are  bitter,  are  endued  with  heat¬ 
ing  properties.6 

Some  objects  possessed  of  a  sour  taste  are  of  constipating 
effects  ;  while  some,  of  the  same  taste,  produce  purging  effects  ;  of 
the  former,  Kapithwa  (d),  is  an  example  ;  of  the  latter  Amalaka  (e), 8 1 


*  The  sense  seems  to  be  this  :  generally  speaking,  the  properties  of  objects  are 
gatherable  from  taste  and  assimilation.  There  are  certain  objects,  however,  whose  pro¬ 
perties  do  not  obey  this  rule  or  law.  What  they  are,  will  be  enumerated  below. — T. 

j-  ‘Mahat-Panchamula’  consists  of  Aigle  marmelos,  Echites  frutescens,  Roxb.,  Gmelina 
arborea,  Linn.,  Bignonia  suaveolens,  Roxb.,  and  Premna  serratifolia,  Linn. — T’ 

a.  Calatropis  gigantea  or  procera  ;  syn.  Asclepias  gigantea  ;  Willd. 

b.  Aquilaria  Agallocha,  Roxb. 

c.  Tinospora  Cordifolia,  Miers  ;  syn.  Menispermum  Cordifolium,  Willd. 

d.  Kapithwa  is  Feronia  elephantum  ;  (the  wood-apple  tree.) 

e.  Amalaka  is  Phyllanthus  Etnblica,,  Linn  : 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA . 


317 


Although  things  possessed  of  a  pungent  taste  do  not  lead  to 
increase  of  semen,  yet  Pippali  (/),  and  Nagara  ( g ),  do  lead  to  such 
increase.  Things  possessed  of  an  astringent  taste  generally  in¬ 
crease  the  wind  and  retain  the  secretions,  and  are,  besides,  cooling 
in  respect  of  their  properties,  yet  Abhaya  ( h ),  is  held  to  be  different.7 

For  these  reasons,  by  laying  down  instructions  in  respect  of 
Taste  alone,  the  properties  of  all  objects  are  incapable  of  being 
indicated.  Even  such  difference  of  properties  is  seen  in  objects  and 
objects,  though  all  of  them  may  be  possessed  of  even  the  same 
taste.*8 

In  consequence  of  its  dryness,  the  Astringent  Taste  is,  of  all 
things  that  are  dry,  the  foremost  ;  the  Pungent  is  middling  ;  the 
Bitter  is  inferior. 

In  consequence  of  its  heating  properties,  the  Saline,  among  all 
things  heating,  is  the  foremost  ;  the  Sour  is  middling  ;  and  the 
Pungent  is  inferior. 

In  consequence  of  its  oilness,  among  all  things  oily  the  Sweet 
taste  is  the  foremost  ;  the  Sour  taste  is  middling;  and  the  Saline 
taste  is  inferior.9-10 

As  regards  cooling  properties,  the  Sweet  taste  is  the  foremost  ; 
the  Astringent  taste  is  middling  ;  and  the  Bitter  taste  is  inferior. 

As  regards  the  property  of  heaviness,  the  Sweet  taste  is  the 
foremost  ;  the  Astringent  taste  is  middling  ;  and  the  Bitter  taste  is 
inferior.11 

As  regards  the  property  of  lightness,  the  Bitter  taste  is  the 
foremost  ;  the  Pungent  taste  is  middling  ;  and  the  Sour  taste  is 


f  Piper  longum,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Chavica  Roxburghii. 

g.  Dry  ginger. 

h.  Terminalia  Chebula,  Relz. 

*  The  repetition  ‘objects  and  objects’  simply  means  different  objects. —  T 


318 


CHAR  AKA -SA  \1  HI  TA . 


inferior.  Some  are  of  opinion  that  the  Saline  taste  is  the  most  in¬ 
ferior  in  respect  of  all  things  that  are  light.*1  2 

It  has  been  said  that  the  Saline  taste  is  inferior  as  regards  the 
property  of  heaviness.  It  is  inferior  also  as  regards  the  property 
of  lightness/}" 

After  this,  the  indications  are  being  laid  down  of  the  tastes  as 
they  appear  upon  assimilation.13 

Of  the  Pungent,  the  Bitter,  and  the  Astringent,  the  change, 
upon  assimilation,  is  generally  Pungent.  The  Sour  taste  changes 
into  the  Sour.  The  Sweet  and  the  Saline  change  into  the  Sweet.14 

The  Sweet,  the  Saline,  and  the  Sour  are  the  three  tastes  that 
have  the  property  of  oiliness.  Hence,  they  are  regarded  as  very 
beneficial  in  causing  evacuations  of  wind,  urine,  and  faeces.15 

The  Pungent,  the  Bitter,  and  the  Astringent  are  the  three  tastes 
that  have  the  property  of  dryness.  Hence,  these  are  seen  to  be 
productive  of  pain  in  the  matter  of  expelling  wind,  faeces,  urine, 
and  semen.13 

•  The  Pungent  taste,  in  respect  of  its  after  effects,  is  destructive 
of  the  semen  ;  leads  to  retention  of  faeces  and  urine,  and  to 
increase  of  wind. 

The  Sweet  tate,  in  respect  of  its  after  effects,  leads  to  easy 
and  copious  discharges  of  urine  and  stools,  and  increases  phlegm 
and  semen.17 


*  The  phraseology  of  these  Verses  is  very  terse.  The  first  line  of  12,  literally 
rendered,  runs  thus  :  ‘above  sour  is  pungent  ;  thence  bitter,  in  consequence  of  lightness 
is  regarded  the  first.’  Hence,  to  make  the  Verses  easily  intelligible,  I  expand  them 
slightly. — T. 

+  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  as  regards  he  aviness,  the  saline  taste  is  inferior  {vide  1 1 ) 
meaning  that  it  is  not  so  heavy  as  the  two  others  mentioned  in  Verse  II.  In  Verse  12, 
it  is  said  that  the  saline  taste  is  inferior  to  the  others  in  lightness  ;  i.e.,  it  is  not  so  light 
as  the  others.  Not  being,  again,  so  heavy  as  the  others,  it  is  inferior  both  in  view  of 
heaviness  apd  lightness. —  T, 


CM  A  RA  KA-Sa  MhlTA. 


319 


The  assimilation  of  the  Sour  taste  leads  to  increase  of  the 
bile,  evacuation  of  stools  and  urine,  and  destruction  of  semen. 

Among  them  all,  the  assimilation  of  the  Sweet  taste  produces 
the  properties  of  heaviness,  while  those  of  the  Pungent  and  the 
Sour  tastes  are  otherwise.18 

The  inferiority,  middling  character,  or  superiority  of  the  indi¬ 
cations  of  assimilation  (of  particular  objects),  is  ascertained  from 
the  differences  in  respect  of  properties  of  those  objects.19* 

Some  say  that  mild  and  keen,  heavy  and  light,  oily  and  dry, 
and  hot  and  cooling,  are  the  eight  kinds  of  Energy  which  objects 
may  have.  Others  are  of  opinion  that  objects  have  only  two  kinds 
of  Energy,  viz.,  cooling  and  hot. 

That  is  called  the  Energy  of  an  object  in  consequence  of  which 
the  object  acts  or  operates  on  the  system. 

An  object  which  has  no  Energy  can  have  no  action  (upon  the 
system.) 

Every  action  proceeds  from  Energy.90-21 

'That  is  called  the  Taste  of  objects  which  is  perceived  as  soon 
as  the  objects  are  brought  into  contact  (with  the  tongue.) 

That  is  called  Assimilation  which  is  ascertained  from  the 
completion  of  the  action. 

That  is  called  Energy  which  is  ascertained  from  the  retention 
of  the  object  within  the  body  and  its  first  contact  with  the  tongue.f22 


*  As  explained  by  Chakrapani,  what  is  stated  here  is  this  :  objects  may  be  stweet, 
sweeter,  or  sweetest.  The  indications  of  assimilation,  therefore,  must  be  inferior,  or 
middling,  or  superior,  according  to  the  measure  or  degree  of  sweetness.  So,  with  respect 
to  the  other  tastes.  Different  degrees  would  produce  those  indications  in  different 
measure. — T. 

+  ‘Vipaka’  and  ‘Virya’  are  here  defined.  ‘Vipaka’  literally  means  cooking.  The 
‘vipaka’  of  an  object,  therefore,  indicates  its  cooking  or  digestion  in  the  stomach.  In¬ 
stead  of  digestion,  which  is  a  common  word,  I  have  adopted  the  word  assimilation  as 
more  consistent  with  scientific  dignity.  ‘Adhivasa’  means,  as  explained  by  Chakrapani, 


320 


CH  A  RA  RA-SA  MH I TA . 


Where  uniformity  is  observed  (between  two  objects)  in  respect 
of  taste,  energy,  and  assimilation,  but  a  difference  or  distinction 
occurs  in  their  operation  or  effect,  such  distinction  is  said  to  arise 
from  what  is  called  the  potency  of  the  objects.23* 

Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica,  Linn.)  is  pungent  in  taste, 
and  pungent  in  assimilation,  and  hot  in  energy.  So  is  Danti 
(Baliospermum  montanum  ;  syn.  Groton  polyandrum,  Roxb.)  But 
Danti  operates  as  a  purgative  (while  Chitiaka  does  not).  This 
occurs  through  the  potency  of  Danti.2  4f 

Poison  is  said  to  destroy  poison.  This  is  due  to  potency  (of 
the  poison  used  to  destroy  another  previously  administered). 

Certain  objects  act  upwards  (as  fruits  of  Randia  dumetorum)  ; 
while  others,  (as  Trivrit  or  Ipomcea  Turpethuni)  act  downwards. 
This  difference  of  action  is  brought  about  by  difference  of 
potency.25 

The  diverse  kinds  of  acts  which  result  from  gems  and  other 
articles  worn  on  the  body  are  all  due  to  the  potency  of  those 
objects.  Potency  is  said  to  be  inconceivable.26! 

Some  object  produces  the  intended  action  through  taste  ;  some 
through  energy  ;  some  through  the  properties  ;  some  through 
assimilation  ;  and  some  through  potency.27 


‘Sahavasthana,’  i.e.,  lying  of  the  object  within  the  body,  implying  its  retention  within 
the  system.  Energy  is  ascertained  from  the  symptoms  that  manifest  themselves  after  con¬ 
tact  and  before  assimilation.  Thus,  pepper  is  pungent,  judged  by  what  appears  from  its 
contact  with  the  tongue.  It  is  keen  and  hot  ;  these  constitute  its  energy  ;  whether  it  is 
constipating  or  otherwise,  whether  it  increases  semen,  &c.,  are  results  depending  upon 
assimilation  or  digestion.  Those  results  are  technically  called  assimilation — T. 

*  This  is  illustrated  in  the  next  Verse, — T. 

f  That  operation  or  effect  of  an  object  which  is  not  due  to  taste,  energy,  and  assimi¬ 
lation,  is  said  to  be  due  to  potency.  Potency  is  said  to  be  inconceivable,  being  incapable 
of  ascertainment  by  mere  knowledge  of  taste,  energy,  and  assimilation. — T. 

I  Gems  are  commonly  worn,  as  also  roots  and  barks,  &c.,  enclosed  within  little 
drums  of  gold,  in  the  belief  that  these  ward  off  evil  and  particular  diseases.  The  diverse 
kinds  of  action  manifested  by  these  is  due  to  what  must  be  called  their  potency. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  321 

In  cases  where  there  is  uniformity  of  attributes  in  Taste  and 
the  others  (viz.,  in  Energy,  Assimilation,  and  Potency),  Tasteis  sub¬ 
jugated  by  Assimilation  ;  both  of  them,  again,  are  subjugated  by 
Eenergy  ;  and  all  three  are  subjugated  by  Potency.  Even  such  is 
the  natural  force  of  each  of  these.*28 

By  what  has  been  said  above,  Assimilation  and  Energy  and 
Potency  have  been  sufficiently  explained. 

We  shall,  after  this,  lay  down  instructions  respecting  the  modes 
by  which  the  (six)  Tastes  may  be  ascertained.29 

An  object  having  a  sweet  taste,  when  placed  in  the  mouth, 
olifies  it  (i.e.,  dispels  all  sensation  of  dryness),  produces  pleasure 
and  joy,  and  also  a  sensation  of  softness.  By  these  is  Sweetness 
ascertained.  Besides,  the  whole  mouth  seems  to  be  filled  with  it 
and  a  sensation  of  adhesion  results  from  it.30 

From  tenderness  of  the  teeth,  the  appearance  of  saliva,  of 
perspiration  (on  the  body),  awakening  of  the  mouth,  and  a  burning 
sensation  of  both  the  mouth  and  the  throat,  as  soon  as  the  object 
is  placed  in  the  mouth,  one  should  say  that  its  taste  is  Sour.31 

That  object  which,  when  placed  in  the  mouth,  produces  a  tem¬ 
porary  sensation  of  pleasure  and,  causing  the  appearance  of  saliva 
and  other  secretions  from  the  glands  of  the  mouth,  fills  it  with  a 
sensation  of  softness  and  soon  after  with  a  sensation  of  burning, 
should  be  known  as  Saline  in  taste.32 

That  object  which,  as  soon  as  it  is  brought  into  contact  with 
the  tongue,  produces  a  sense  of  pain  and  pinches  it  and,  causing 
also  a  sensation  of  burning,  leads  to  a  discharge  of  secretions  from 
the  mouth,  nose,  and  eyes,  is  said  to  be  Pungent.33 

That  object  which,  on  coming  into  contact  with  the  tongue, 
pains  it  much  and  destroys  its  relish,  and  which,  producingthesensa- 


*  Vide  note  at  the  end  of  this  Lesson. 


41 


322 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMEITA. 


tfon  of  dryness  and  the  reverse  of  sliminess,  makes  us  cheerless, 
should  be  known  as  Bitter.34 

That  object  which  brings  upon  the  tongue  a  sensation  that  is 
the  very  reverse  of  sliminess,  as  also  of  contraction  and  rigidity, 
and  which  seems  to  contract  the  throat  also  and  stretch  the  heart, 
is  to  be  known  as  possessing  the  Astringent  taste.35 

Unto  the  illustrious  Punarvasu  the  son  of  Atri,  Agnive^a  said, 
— O  illustrious  one,  we  have  heard  duly  thy  words  fraught  with 
truth  and  wealth  of  meaning  on  the  subject  of  drugs  and  their 
action.  We  desire  now  to  listen  to  thy  instructions  in  detail  on 
the  indications  of  the  unsuitability  of  dietary  modifications.1* 

Unto  him  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said  that  certain  things 
being  hostile  to  the  elements  or  ingredients  of  the  body,  (if  taken) 
produce  hostile  effects  on  those  elements  or  ingredients. 

Of  these,  some  (though  suitable  to  the  ingredients  of  the  body) 
become  hostile  to  those  ingredients  in  consequence  of  their  being 
mixed  with  others  that  are  hostile. 

Some  become  hostile  in  consequence  of  dressing  or  of  ad¬ 
mixtures  made  for  giving  them  relish.  Some  become  so  through 
considerations  of  place,  time,  measure,  &c. 

And  lastly,  some  become  so  in  consequence  of  their  nature.2 

On  this  subject,  of  those  things  which  are  very  generally  used 
as  food,  we  shall  lay  down  instructions  on  only  a  portion,  selecting 
only  those  that  are  hostile.3 

Fish  should  never  be  taken  with  milk.  Both  of  these  are 
^weet  in  taste.  They  are,  again,  sweet  in  assimilation.  Being 
highly  emollient,  they  retain  the  secretions  (without  allowing  them 
to  escape)  and  thus  cause  a  heaviness  or  fulness  of  the  body. 
One  of  them  (milk)  is  of  cooling  energy  ;  the  other  (fish)  of  heating 
energy  ;  they  are  thus  of  opposite  energies.  In  consequence  of 

*  This  and  the  following  aphorisms  are  in  prose.  Hence  I  number  them  anew, 
beginning  with  i,—  T. 


vharaka-samhita. 


32S 


their  being  thus  of  opposite  energies,  they  corrupt  or  defile  the 
blood.  In  consequence,  again,  of  their  being  highly  emollient, 
they  stop  the  pores  and  passages  through  which  all  impurities 
escape.4 

Having  heard  these  words  of  Atri’s  son,  Bhadrakapya,  address¬ 
ing  Agnivega,  said, — All  varieties  of  fish  may  be  taken  with  milk, 
with  the  single  exception  of  Chilichima*  This  variety  of  fish  has 
scales.  All  over  its  body  there  are  lines  of  red.  In  shape  ijt 
resembles  the  Rohitaka  ( Cyprinus  Rohita).  It  generally  disports 
on  mire  (marshy  regions  having  little  water).  If  this  fish  is  eaten 
with  milk,  without  doubt  some  disease  arising  either  from  (defiled) 
blood  or  suppression  of  impurities  would  arise  ;  or,  the.  eater  may 
even  meet  with  death,5 

It  is  not  so, — said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  The  prohibition 
extends  to  all  fishes,  for  none  of  them  are  to  be  taken  with  milk. 
The  Chilichima  is  particularly  interdicted.  In  consequence  of  its 
emollient  character  in  excess,  it  generates  such  diseases  (ue.,  those 
born  of  blood  and  those  due  to  suppression  of  secretions)  as  are 
characterised  by  aggravated  symptoms.  It  is  capable  also  of 
generating  poisonous  juices  in  the  stomach.6 

The  meat  of  domesticated  animals,  of  those  that  live  in  marshy 
regions,  and  of  those  that  are  aquatic,  should  never  be  taken  in  con^ 
junction  with  such  things  as  honey,  sesame  oil,  molasses,  milk,  Masha 
Phaseolus  radiatus),  Mulaka  ( Raphanus  sativus,  Linn.,  i.e.,  garden 
radish),  lotus  stalks,  and  such  paddy  as  have  put  forth  sprouts. 

If  these  be  taken,  such  diseases  may  be  generated  as  Deafness. 
Blindness,  Paralyses  Agitans,  Rigidity  (of  the  body),  Lassitude, 
dumbness  (or  partial  suppression  of  the  voice),  and  nasal  voice. 
Or,  such  food  may  bring  about  death  itself.7 

The  potherbs  called  Paushkara,  and  those  called  Rohinika,  as 
also  pigeons  fried  in  oil,  should  not  be  taken  with  honey  and  milk. 

*  Spelt  variously.  It  is  a  kind  of  sprat  ;  probably,  Clufca  Cult  rata.— T. 


CHAR  A  RA-SA  MH  /  TA . 


324 

If  these  be  thus  taken,  then  corruption  (through  excess  of  impuri¬ 
ties)  of  blood,  exhaustion  (or  lassitude)  of  the  nerves,  Delusions, 
pain  and  heat  with  a  puffiness  in  the  temples  and  forehead,  Bron- 
chocele,  and  the  red  eruptions  called  Rohinika,  may  be  generated. 
Such  food  may  even  bring  about  death.8* 

Having  taken  Mulaka,  (a),  Laguna,  ( b ),  Krishnagandha,  (c), 
Arjjaka  ( d ),  Sumukha  ( e ),  Surasa  (/),  and  such  other  things,  one 
should  not  take  milk,  through  fear  of  Leprosy.8 

Bamboo  leaves  and  ripe  Lakucbas  (g)  should  never  be  taken 
with  honey  and  milk.  If  taken,  it  may  bring  about  death,  or  loss 
of  strength,  of  complexion,  of  energy,  and  of  vital  seed.  Indeed, 
such  food  may  bring  about  various  diseases  with  violent  symptoms, 
or  even  impotence.10! 

Ripe  Lakuchas  should  not  be  taken  with  the  juice  (or  broth) 
of  Phaseolus  radiatus ,  or  molasses,  or  ghee,  in  consequence  of 
these  being  hostile  to  the  former  in  properties. 

Amrataka  (/»),  Matulunga  (z),  Lakucha  (j),  Karamardda  (7s), 


*  ‘Paushkara’  implies  the  leaves  of  Pushkara  or  the  lotus.  ‘Rohini’  is  ‘Katurohiui,’ 

i.e.,  Picrorrkiza  Kurroa,  Royle. —  T. 

a.  Raphanus  sativus,  Linn. 

b.  Garlics. 

.  c.  Moringa  Plerygosperma, 

d.  A  variety  of  Ocimnm  sanctum. 

c.  Ditto. 

f.  Ditto. 

g.  Artocarpass  Lakoocha,  Roxb. 

t  ‘Jatu’  is  not,  here,  the  well  known  Sanskrit  particle.  ‘Jatu  Caka’  is,  as  explained 
by  Chakrapani,  ‘Vanca-patrika’  or  Bamboo  leaves.  At  some  seasons,  these  leaves  are 
eaten  by  the  poorer  classes  in  India. — T. 

h.  Spondias  mangifera,  Pers. 

i.  Citrus  tnedica,  Linn. 

j.  Artocarpus  Lakoocha,  Roxb. 

k.  Carissd  Carandas,  Linn ;  syn.  Carissa  congesta,  Wight. 


CHA RA  KA-Sa MH1TA. 


825 


Mocha  (a),  Danta9atha  ( b ),  Vadara  ( c ),  Kafamra  ( d ),  Bhavya 
( e ),  Jamvava  ( f ),  Kapittha  ( g ),  Tintidika  (A),  Paravata  (i),  Akshota  ij), 
Panasa  (A),  Narikela  (/),  Dadima  ( m ),  Amlaka  («),  and  such  other 
sour  things,  liquid  or  solid,  are  hostile  to  milk.  12. 

So  Kangu  ( 0 ),  Varaka  ( p ),  Mukushthaka  ( q ),  Kulattha  {r), 
Masha  (j),  and  Nishpava  (t),  are  hostile  if  taken  with  milk.  The 
potherb  called  Padmottarika  ( u ),  Sugar-Maireya  (v),  and  honey, 
if  taken  together,  become  hostile  (owing  to  their  incompatibility), 
and  excite  or  provoke  the  wind  exceedingly.13 

The  drinking  of  Mantha*  after  taking  frumenty  ( Payasa ) 
exceedingly  provokes  the  phlegm.  Such  drink  is  hostile  to  the 

a.  This  word  is  used  for  various  things.  Here  it  probably  implies  the  fruits  o  f 
Moringa  pterygosperma. 

b.  This  also  is  a  word  that  is  used  for  Kapittha  ( Feronia  elephantwn),  or 
Karamardda  ( Carissa  Caretndas)  or  a  variety  of  citrus. 

c.  Zizyphtis  Jujuba,  Larnk. 

d.  Mangifera  sylvatica ,  Rxb. 

e.  Dillenia  Indica,  Linn. 

f.  Eugenia  Jambolana,  Larnk, 

g.  Feronia  elephantum. 

h.  Tamarindus  Indica,  Linn. 

i.  A  variety  of  citrus. 

7.  Juglans  regia,  Linn . 

k.  Artocarpus  Integrijolia,  Linn. 

l.  Cocos  nucifera ,  Linn. 

m.  Punica  granalvm,  Linn. 

n.  Phyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn. 

o.  Setaria  Italica,  Kunth. 

p.  Some  texts  read  ‘Vanaka’.  Chakrapani  notices  ‘vanaka’  and  comments  upon 
it,  saying,  ‘vanaka  vanako-dravah’  which  does  not  seem  to  be  very  intelligible.  If 
‘varaka’  be  accepted,  it  would  mean  ‘van-mudga’  which,  however,  is  the  same 
as  ‘Mukushtaka’.  Vide  note  q  below.  Probably  it  means  ‘Kshetpapra’  or  Oldenlandia 
herbacea,  D.  C. 

q.  Called  also  ‘Vana-mudga  ;  Pkaseolus  aconili/olus,  Jacq. 

r.  Dolichos  uniflorus,  Larnk  ;  syn.  Dolichos  biflorus,  Roxb. 

s.  Pkaseolus  radiatus,  Roxb. 

t.  Vigna  catjang-,  syn.  Dolichos  sinensis,  Linn. 

u.  Called  also  ‘  Kusumbha  9aka.’  Carthamus  tinctorius,  Linn. 

v.  ‘Sarkara’  is  an  adjective  of  ‘Maireya,  which  is  a  kind  of  wine. 

*  ‘Mantha’  is  a  dish  of  barley  meal  with  Ghee  and  water.  It  is  a  kind  of  gruel 
porridge,  ‘Payasa’  is  rice  boiled  in  sugar  and  milk ;  a  kind  of  frumenty. — T, 


326 


CH  A  RA  RA-SA  MH  /  TA . 


food  mentioned.  Upodika  ( Basella  rubra ,  Linn)  boiled  with 
pounded  sesame,  induces  diarrhoea.14 

The  meat  of  cranes  is  hostile  to  the  wine  called  Varuni  and 
Kulmasha.  That  meat,  if  fried  in  the  fat  of  the  boar,  is  capable 
of  bringing  about  death  in  course  of  the  very  day.*15 

The  flesh  of  the  peacock,  if  taken  with  castor-oil  and  roasted 
on  fire  made  of  the  castor-oil  plant,  is  capable  of  bringing  about 
death  the  very  day.16 

The  flesh  of  the  bird  called  Haritaka  (the  green  or  wood 
pigeon),  roasted  on  a  fire  made  of  the  wood  of  Kadamba  ( Nauclea 
Gadamba,  Roxb.)  brings  about  death  the  very  day.  If  taken,  with 
the  ashes  of  such  fire  or  dust  on  it,  mixed  with  the  wine  called 
Kshaudra,  it  induces  death.f 

Pippali  boiled  in  oil  obtained  from  frying  fish,  as  also  Kaka- 
machi  (boiled  similarly),  if  taken  with  honey,  induces  death.J18 

Honey  taken  in  a  heated  state,  or  taken  by  a  person  afflicted 
with  heat,  induces  death.19 

Honey  and  Ghee  in  equal  portions,  honey  and  rain  water 
mingled  in  equal  measures,  honey  and  Pushkara  seeds,  warm 
water  drink  after  the  taking  of  honey,  Bhallataka  and  warm  water, 
Kampillaka  boiled  in  whey,  stale  Kakamachi,  the  flesh  of  Bhasa 
roasted  on  a  spit,  are  incompatible  combinations.  (Hence,  if  these 
be  taken,  disease  and  even  death  may  be  produced). 

We  have  thus  laid  down  (what  kinds  of  food  are  incompatible) 
agreeably  to  your  questiori.il2  0 

*  ‘Valaka’  is  a  small  kind  of  crane.  ‘Varuni’  is  a  kind  of  wine.  ‘Kulmasha’  is 
sour  gruel  that  is  prepared  by  the  spontaneous  fermentation  of  rice  boiled  in  water.  It 
is  commonly  called  ‘Kanji’. — T. 

-j-  ‘Haridra’  or  ‘Haridra’  is  another  name  of  Nauclea  Cadamba,  Roxb. — T. 

j  Pippali  is  Piper  longum,  Linn.  Kakamachi  is  Solanum  nigrum,  Linn. 

Pushkara-vija  are  seeds  of  the  lotus. 

Bhallataka  is  Semccarpus  Anacardium,  Linn.  The  poison  of  the  fruit  is  eliminated 
by  an  artificial  process. 

Kampillaka  is  Mallotux  Philippensis  ;  syn,  Roiteleria  tinctoria,  Roxb. 

Kakamachi  (as  already  explained)  is  Solanum  nigrum,  Linn.  Bhasa  is  a  species 
of  aquatic  fowl. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  Mill  TA .  327 

{Here  occurs  a  verse.) 

Whatever  diet  excites  the  faults  without  being  able  to  dispel 
or  drive  them  out  of  the  system,  becomes  a  source  of  affliction  or 
disease.21 

Diet  that  is  incompatible  is  said  to  be  the  cause  of  the  follow¬ 
ing  diseases,  viz..  Impotence,  Blindness,  Erysipelas,  abdominal 
dropsy,  malignant  Boils,  Lunacy,  Fistula-in-ano,  Swoons,  Vertigo, 
Flatulence,  choaking  of  the  throat  (with  suppression  of  the 
voice),  chlorosis  and  anaemia,  acidity  of  the  stomach  (such  that  no 
food  is  capable  of  being  retained),  Leprous  blotches,  Leprosy, 
diseases  that  affect  the  Grahani,  Pulmonary  consumption,  Bilious 
hemorrhage,  Fever,  Inflammation  of  the  schneidenian  membrane, 
with  loss  of  the  sense  of  smell,  incapacity  to  beget  healthy 
offspring,  as  also. death  itself.23 

The  following  causes  or  operations  are  the  remedies  of  these 
diseases  and  of  others  that  are  generated  by  incompatible  diet. 

They  are  vomiting,  purging,  and  all  such  means  as  are  fitted 
for  neutralising  the  several  kinds  of  incompatible  food  that 
have  been  taken,  as  also  ( previous )  correction  cf  the  body  by 
use  or  administration  of  such  food  or  articles  as  are  capable 
of  neutralising  the  several  kinds  of  incompatible  food  if  they 
are  taken.*23 

{Here  occurs  a  verse.) 

All  diseases  that  are  generated  by  the  taking  of  incompatible 
food  are  destroyed  by  purging,  and  vomitting,  and  neutralising 
agents,  and  by  the  previous  administration  or  use  of  such  articles  as 
are  beneficial.2  4 


*  The  concluding  portion  of  this  aphorism  refers  (as  pointed  out  by  Chakrapani)  to 
.the  prevention  of  diseases  due  to  incompatible  food.  The  sense  is  that  if  such  neutral¬ 
ising  food  or  articles  are  previously  taken,  then  the  several  kinds  of  incompatible  food 
•taken  do  not  succeed  in  generating  the  diseases  they  are-  otherwise  capable  of  gener- 
ting. — T- 


328  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

( Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary .) 

The  different  opinions  of  the  great  Rishis  in  the  matter  of 
ascertaining  (the  number  of)  Tastes,  the  classification  of  objects, 
with  their  properties  and  operations,  enumeration  of  objects  as 
dependent  on  tastes,1  the  reasons  for  enumerating  the  Tastes,  the 
indications  of  manifest  and- unmanifest  Tastes,  the  indications  of 
the  attributes  of  Para ,  &c.,  laid  down  separately  for  each,2  the 
reason  for  which  the  Tastes  are  numbered  six  though  each  of  them 
consists  of  the  five  primal  elements  in  different  proportions,  the 
preponderance  of  those  elements  in  consequence  of  which  some 
Tastes  act  upwards  and  some  act  downwards,3  particular  ex¬ 
position  of  each  of  the  six  Tastes  according  to  their  respective 
properties  or  attributes  and  operations,  how  the  attributes  and 
operations  of  objects  are  ascertainable  from  their  Tastes  and  what 
the  exceptions  are  of  the  rules  laid  down  for  that  purpose,4  what 
are  foremost,  what  inferior,  and  what  middling  among  the  Tastes 
in  the  matter  of  their  heaviness  and  lightness,  the  indications  of 
Assimilation  as  also  of  Potency,  the  several  kinds  of  Potency,5  the 
respective  indications  of  the  six  Tastes,  (*.  e .,  those  by  which  they 
are  capable  of  being  discriminated),  the  several  objects  that  are 
incompatible  with  each  other  or  one  another,  and  the  effects  they 
produce  when  taken  together,6  the  diseases  that  are  generated 
by  taking  food  consisting  of  incompatible  ingredients,  and  the 
remedies  prescribable  for  those  diseases,  have  all  been  laid  down 
in  this  Lesson  called  Atreya-Bhadrakapya.7 

Thus  ends  the  Twenty-sixth  Lesson,  called  Atreya  Bhadra- 
kapya,  in  Agniveqa’s  treatise  as  revised  by  Charaka.* 


*  Verse  28  of  the  Lesson  which  concludes  the  observations  of  the  Rishi  on  Taste, 
Assimilation,  Energy,  and  Potency,  is  important.  What  is  stated  there  is  that  so  far 
as  the  operation  of  drugs  in  concerned,  Assimilation  overpowers  Taste  ;  Energy  over¬ 
powers  both  ;  and  Potency  overpowers  all  three.  A  certain  object  may  be  pungent  in 
Taste  but  sweet  in  Assimilation.  The  physician,  in  selecting  it,  should  be  guided  by  its 
nature  as  observable  on  Assimilation.  Where,  again,  the  Energy  of  the  object  is  different, 
that  should  guide  the  selection.  Finally,  Potency  would  claim  consideration  above  the 
three  others.  —  T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHITA . 


