4  7*35'? 


INTRODUCTION. 


THOSE  who  have  enquired  into  the  subject  know  that  the 
medical  literature  of  ancient  and  mediaeval  India  is  exceedingly 
|  voluminous.  All  the  works,  if  capable  of  being  collected  together, 
i  would  fill  a  fairly  large  library.  Besides  a  respectable  number 
[  of  works  that  profess  to  be  comprehensive  treatises  on  the  causes 
I  of  disease  and  its  cure  and  the  normal  conditions  of  health,  the 
[  number  of  abridgments  is  almost  unlimited.  The  reason  of  this  is 
k  not  far  to  seek.  In  the  absence  of  Colleges  and  Universities 
Established  and  conducted  under  royal  patronage  and  thronged  with 
K^udents  from  every  part  of  the  country,  individual  practi- 
^■mers,  whose  professional  success  became  marked  or  whose  learn¬ 
ing  was  generally  admitted,  attracted  a  fairly  large  number  of 
^■ipils  around  them.  Like  the  professors  of  other  branches  of 
Roiowledge,  medical  practitioners  also,  in  conformity  with  the 
■excellent  custom  of  the  country,  had  to  teach  their  pupils  gratis , 
■supplying  them  at  the  same  time  with  free  board  and  quarters 
B|y  incorporating  them  temporarily  with  their  own  families.  These 
Msachers  very  frequently  compiled  abridgments  of  their  own, 
■drawing  largely  upon  the  larger  standard  works,  and  incorporat¬ 
ing  with  the  abstracted  matter  the  results  of  their  own  experience, 
p  Almost  all  these  abridgments  were  compiled  for  use  in  the  lecture 
I  room  and  received  from  their  authors  beautiful  and  poetical  names. 
Sometimes  teachers  of  greater  ambition,  who  desired  to  address 
whole  profession  instead  of  their  immediate  pupils,  made 
■■ore  pretentious  compilations  or  wrote  excellent  commentaries 
Hr  works  or  abridgments  of  acknowledged  authority.  In  this  way 
medical  literature  of  ancient  and  mediaeval  India  increased  and 
lllfivelled  into  almost  gigantic  proportions. 


[  n  1 


Of  all  these  works,  however,  the  most  ancient  one  that  is  still 
extant  and  universally  studied  by  the  profession  is  “.Charaka 
Samhita.”  Professor  Wilson  supposed  “  that  from  Charaka  and 
Susruta  being  mentioned  in  the  Puranas,  the  ninth  or  tenth  century 
is  the  most  modern  limit  of  our  conjecture  ;  while  the  style  of 
the  authors,  as  well  as  their  having  become  the  heroes  of  fable, 
indicate  a  long  anterior  date.  ”  Dr.  Royle,  in  his  “  Essay  on 
the  Antiquity  of  Indian  Medical  Science,”  has  cited  passages 
from  the  Latin  translations  of  Avicenna,  Rhazes,  and  Serapion 
in  which  Charaka  is  mentioned.  Professor  Wilson  is  of  opinion 
that  the  Arabians  of  the  eighth  century  cultivated  the  Hindu 
Works  on  Medicine  before  those  of  the  Greeks  ;  and  that  Charaka 
and  Susruta,  and  the  treatise  called  Nidana,  and  others,  were 
translated  and  studied  by  the  Arabians  in  the  days  of  Harun  and 
Mansur  (A.  D.  775),  either  from  the  originals,  or  from  translations 
made  at  a  still  earlier  period  into  the  language  of  Persia.  The 
age,  however,  of  Charaka,  is  not  its  only  recommendation, 
for  by  a  strange  coincidence  it  happens  at  the  same  time  to  be 
the  most  comprehensive  treatise  we  possess  on  disease  and 
the  general  conditions  of  health.  An  older  work  called  “  Ayur¬ 
veda,”  and  supposed  to  have  formed  a  part  of  the  Atharvan, 
is  frequently  mentioned.  But  no  trace  can  be  had  of  it 
in  any  form  however  mutilated.  It  is  believed  to  have  been  of 
divine  or  at  best  of  inspired  origin.  If  it  really  existed  and  was 
no  myth  of  later  times,  there  can  be  no  question  that  it  had 
perished  even  at  the  time  the  work  of  Agnive9a  (upon  which 
“  Charaka  Samhita  ”  is  based)  was  compiled.  Another  ancient 
work,  almost  as  comprehensive  and  of  as  acknowledged  authority, 
is  “Susruta-Ayurveda.”  The  universal  belief  is  that  the  great 
work  of  Charaka  preceded  the  latter  in  point  of  time.  Internal 
evidence  also  supports  this  view. 

In  the  introduction  of  Charaka’s  great  work  it  is  stated  that 
Bharadwaja,  a  learned  sage,  obtained  the  sacred  Ayurveda  (Science 
of  Life)  from  Indra  the  chief  of  the  celestials,  who  had  acquired  it, 
through  the  Agwins,  from  Prajapati,  a  son  of  the  Self-create  Brah¬ 
man.  Then  Punarvasu  of  Atri’s  race,  another  sage,  who  got  it  from 
Bharadwaja,  communicated  it  to  six  pupils,  viz.,  Agnivefa,  Bhela, 
Jatukarna,  Paragara,  Harita  and  Kharapani.  Although  there  was  no 
difference  in  teaching,  yet  in  consequence  of  diversity  of  intelli¬ 
gence,  Agnive9a  surpassed  the  rest  and  produced  a  work  on  the 


[  iii  ] 


subject.  Then  Bhela  and  the  others  followed.  All  of  them 
recited  their  works  to  a  conclave  of  sages  headed  by  the  son  of  Atri. 
The  learned  auditors  applauded  all  the  works  and  their  authors 
equally.  Somehow  the  treatise  of  Agnivef a  superseded  those  of 
his  fellow-£&udents.  Sometime  after,  Agnive^a’s  treatise  was 
edited  and  corrected  by  Charaka  whose  name  it  now  bears.  At  the 
end  of  each  book  of  the  work  it  is  stated  that  this  Tantra  (scientific 
treatise)  is  composed  by  Agnivefa  and  corrected  by  Charaka. 
Mention  is  made  by  a  later  writer  of  the  name  of  Vagbhatta,  in  the 
introduction  to  his  work  called  “Ashtanga-Hridaya  Samhita,”  that 
this  treatise  was  compiled  from  the  earlier  works  of  Agnivesa, 
Harita,  Bhela,  Saswata,  Susruta,  Kavala,  and  others.  It  would  thus 
seem  that  the  six  disciples  of  Punarvasu  were  no  mythical  persons, 
for  two  of  them  at  least  are  named  by  Vagbhatta.  Punarvasu  is 
said  to  have  taught  his  pupils  “on  the  breast  of  Himavat.”  It  is 
impossible,  at  this  distance  of  time,  to  identify  the  country  where 
the  sage  resided  and  lectured.  The  name  of  Punarvasu,  as  also  of 
his  sire  Atri,  frequently  occurs  in  the  Vedas.  Atri  was  a  renowned 
sage  and  a  law  treatise  is  extant  bearing  his  name.  Nothing  can 
be  known  also  of  the  nativity  of  Charaka.  It  is  mentioned,  how¬ 
ever,  by  Dridhavala  who  added  some  sections  to  Charaka’s  work, 
that  the  latter  was  a  native  of  “Panchanada,”  evidently  meaning 
the  Punjab  or  the  country  of  the  five  rivers. 

The  work  of  Charaka  abounds  with  weighty  aphorisms  about  dis¬ 
ease  and  its  causes  as  also  about  the  way  of  avoiding  disease,  the 
truth  and  beauty  of  which,  considering  the  age  in  which  they  were 
composed,  will  extort  the  admiration  of  the  modern  reader.  Some 
years  ago,  Dr.  M.  L.  Sircar,  while  introducing  only  the  first 
chapter  of  this  work  to  English  readers,  observed  that  “there  is 
much  in  it  that  even  an  accomplished  physician  will  profit  bjr 
learning.”  Speaking,  for  example,  of  the  causes  of  disease,  the 
following  aphorism,  as  laid  down  by  the  author,  may  be  cited  as  an 
instance  of  the  wisdom  the  reader  may  expect  in  the  following 
pages 

“Correlation,  adverse  or  absent  or  excessive,  between  time,, 
mental  faculties,  and  objects  of  the  senses,  constitutes  in  brief  the 
threefold  causes  of  disease  affecting  either  the  body  or  the  mind.” 

Time,  in  the  above,  is  regarded  to  be  of  two  kinds  ;  first,  the 
different'states  or  periods  of  life,  as  childhood,  youth,  manhood, 
old  age,  and  second,  the  seasons  of  the  year.  That  which  is 


[  iy  1 


done  or  borne  by  a  person  in  a  certain  period  of  his  life  and  a 
certain  season  of  the  year,  may  not  be  suitable  to  him  in  another 
period  of  life  and  another  season.  Then  again  the  relation,  ad¬ 
verse  or  friendly,  of  mental  faculties  with  both  time  and  objects 
of  the  senses,  is  another  fruitful  cause  of  disease  or  a  condition  of 
health.  Western  medical  science  has  recently  recognised  this 
truth,  disease  having  for  a  long  period  been  viewed  only  as  a 
physical  derangement  brought  about  by  gross  physical  causes.  If 
properly  elaborated,  this  verse  of  two  lines  may  be  seen  to  include 
every  possible  cause  of  the  diseases  to  which  humanity  is  subject. 
It  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  generalisations  such  as  these 
represented  only  the  hap-hazard  guesses  of  the  medical  authorities 
of  ancient  India.  Without  doubt,  they,  were  arrived  at  after  careful 
observation  for  centuries.  Omitting  all  reference  to  those  portions  of 
the  work  that  deal  with  pathogenetic  conditions,  the  portions  that 
are  purely  hygienic  and  treat  of  how  best  to  keep  health,  are  in¬ 
valuable  to  all  classes  and  races  of  men.  The  reader  will  find  that 
some  of  the  highest  and  latest  discoveries  of  hygienic  science 
were  well  known  to  the  ancient  medical  authorities  of  India.  A 
life  of  purity,  of  cleanliness,  and  freedom  from  stirring  emotions, 
is  recommended  in  language  that  often  rises  to  the  dignity  of 
poetry  and  is  unquestionably  ennobling  throughout. 

As  a  system  of  cure,  Charaka  is  still  regarded  to  be  of  very 
high  authority.  That  system  is  professed  and  practised  by  a  very 
large  number  of  persons  in  India,  and  if  it  were  all  empiricism 
and  quackery,  it  could  never  have  survived  so  many  centuries. 
The  effects  of  medical  treatment  are  visible  and  addressed  to  the 
commonest  understanding.  Real  quackery  in  the  treatment  of 
disease  and  human  suffering  has  very  little  chance  of  going 
undetected.  Many  persons  who  have  enquired  into  the  matter, 
without  yielding  to  the  prejudices  fostered  by  Western  culture, 
are  of  opinion  that  many  diseases  peculiar  to  India  can  be  cured 
more  effectually,  cheaply,  and  quickly,  by  the  aid  of  the  intelligent 
native  practitioner  relying  on  Charaka  than  by  pursuing  Western 
systems  of  cure. 

The  following  pages  will  discover  many  excellent  recipes  for 
the  treatment  of  fever  and  some  of  the  diseases  peculiar  to  India. 
Although  no  febrifuge  specific  like  cinchona  was  known  to  the 
physicians  of  ancient  and  mediaeval  India,  yet  the  following  verse, 
from  Chakrapanidatta,  the  well-known  commentator  of  Charaka, 


[  V  ] 


shows  that  the  treatment  of  fever  was,  with  us,  as  rational  as 
that  laid  down  in  any  modern  medical  work  : — 

“  Fast,  fomentation,*  time,  gruel  of  barley,  and  decoctions 
of  bitters,  destroy  all  disorders  and  functional  derangements  in 
acute  fever.” 

Apart  from  the  physical  means  recommended  for  the  cure 
of  febrile  distempers,  that  which  deserves  especial  attention 
in  the  above  list  is  the  mention  of  time  as  a  therapeutic  agent 
in  the  treatment  of  disease.  There  is  a  tendency  in  modern 
systems  of  cure  to  totally  overlook  the  action  of  time.  The 
physician  who  disregards  the  healing  virtue  of  time  and  seeks  to 
force  nature  by  the  action  of  his  drugs  can  never  command 
success.  In  India,  however,  in  the  treatment  of  almost  every 
disease,  the  therapeutic  virtues  of  time  have  been  recognised  from 
remote  ages.  Without  citing  additional  instances,  it  may  be 
safely  said  that  the  reader  of  the  following  pages  will  find,  almost 
at  every  step,  something  to  learn  or  admire. 

While  introducing  his  work  entitled  “  Commentary  on  the 
Hindu  system  of  Medicine,”  in  I845,  Dr.  T.  A.  Wise,  of  the  Bengal 
Medical  Service,  observed,  “  an  accomplished  scholar  had  indeed 
given  an  interesting  account  of  Hindu  opinions  regarding  certain 
diseases  ;+  a  persevering  traveller  had  afforded  a  sketch  of  certain 
opinions  contained  in  the  Hindu  medical  Shastras,  as  translated 
into  the  Tibetan  language  ;%  an  antiquarian  and  a  distinguished 
physician  had  given  some  of  their  peculiar  opinions,  as  found 
in  the  medical  works  of  the  south  of  India  ;$  and  an  able  lecturer 
had  combined  all  this  information  with  important  additions  of  his 
own; ||  but  a  comprehensive  view  of  their  system  of  medicine, 
which  it  is  the  intention  of  the  present  work  to  supply,  is  still 
wanting  to  complete  our  information  on  the  subject.”  I  have  no 
desire  to  underrate  the  labours  of  Dr.  Wise.  On  the  other  hand, 
every  Hindu  and  every  student  of  the  history  of  Medicine  ought 
to  be  grateful  to  him  for  his  labours  in  compiling  within  a 

*  The  word  Swedanam  in  the  original  includes  warm-water  baths,  vapour  baths, 
and  hot  cataplasms  of  medicinal  plants,  besides  fomentation  by  the  frequent  applica¬ 
tion  of  a  heated  cloth  or  a  bag  filled  with  heated  sand  or  salt. 

t  Professor  Wilson,  Tran.  Med.  and  Phy.  Society  Calcutta,  Vol.  I.,  Oriental 
Magazine  for  March,  1823. 

f  Mr.  A.  Soma  de  Koros,  Journal  Asiatic  Society,  Calcutta;  No.  37,  January,  1835. 

$  Dr.  Heyne’s  Tracts  on  India,  and  Ainslie’s  Meteria  Medica  Indica,  Lond. 

|]  Dr.  Royle  on  the  Antiquity  of  Hindu  Medicine,  1838. 


[  Vi  ] 


convenient  compass  what  he  regarded  the  best  things  in  Hindu 
medical  literature.  Unfortunately,  Dr.  Wise  had,  in  a  very  large 
measure,  to  depend  on  others  for  his  knowledge  of  the  contents 
of  that  literature.  His  work,  therefore,  however  valuable  in  other 
respects,  contained  some  errors.  Even  as  a  general  exposition 
of  the  Hindu  system  of  medicine,  it  is  certainly  defective,  in 
consequence  of  much  that  is  valuable  in  that  system  having  been 
entirely  omitted.  At  any  rate,  the  existence  of  Dr.  Wise’s  work, 
supposing  it  to  even  accurately  represent  the  state  of  Sanskrit 
scholarship  as  it  was  in  1845,  can  by  no  means  be  regarded  to 
ha-ve  dispensed  with  the  necessity  of  a  complete  translation  into 
English  of  a  work  like  Charaka. 

Induced  by  these  and  other  reasons,  I  have  determined  to  bring 
out  an  English  translation  of  “Charaka-Samhita.”  An  effort 
had  been  made,  in  1870,  by  our  distinguished  countryman,  Dr. 
Mahendra  Lai  Sircar,  a  name  that  has  now  travelled  into  every 
part  of  the  civilised  world  where  science  and  scientific  experi¬ 
ments  are  honored,  for  bringing  out,  with  the  assistance  of 
a  competent  native  physician,  an  English  translation  of  this  great 
work  in  monthly  instalments.  It  is  highly  to  be  regretted  that 
after  only  the  first  two  chapters  had  been  brought  out,  the  essay 
came  to  an  end.  The  reason,  I  am  told,  of  this  abrupt  termination, 
was  ill  health  and  pressure  of  duties  consequent  on  the  extensive 
practice  of  that  accomplished  physician.  I  have  consulted  with 
some  eminent  physicians  practising  Western  systems  of  cure. 
All  of  them  think  that  an  English  translation  of  this 
ancient  medical  treatise  of  India,  besides  its  importance 
from  a  philological  and  historical  point  of  view,  would 
achieve  a  desideratum.  In  his  letter  to  me,  Professor  Max  Muller 
observes  that  the  book  is  of  great  importance  both  to  Sanskrit 
scholars  and  to  medical  men  who  take  an  interest  in  the  historical 
development  of  medicine.  It  is  my  firm  belief  that  an  English 
translation  of  Charaka,  if  executed  properly,  and  if  it  succeeds  in 
attracting  the  attention  of  scientific  men  in  Europe  and  America, 
is  sure  to  produce  many  important  changes  in  modern  systems  of 
treating  disease.  Charaka  is  a  highly  philosophical  work.  Its 
deliverances  on  many  subjects,  unsurpassed  for  their  brevity  and 
weight,  are  like  those  of  Bacon,  extremely  suggestive.  Locked  in 
a  difficult  tongue,  those  hints  have  for  ages  lain  unutilised. 
Whether  employed  in  teaching  students  or  practising  their  system. 


[  vii  ] 


Hindu  physicians  have  moved  too  much  in  a  groove.  The  vigorous 
intellect  of  the  West,  by  taking  up  those  hints,  may  produce  results 
of  the  utmost  importance  to  science  and  the  sacred  cause  of 
alleviating  human  misery.  Some  years  ago,  the  late  lamented 
Baboo  Joykissen  Mookerjee  of  Uttarpara,  the  Nestor  of  the 
landed  aristocracy  of  Bengal,  suggested  the  publication  of  the 
ancient  medical  writings  of  India  with  faithful  English  translations. 
Modern  criticism  and  scholarship  have  clearly  established  that  the 
people  of  ancient  India  constituted  the  oldest,  the  most  civilised, 
and  the  most  philosophic  section  of  the  Aryan  race,  and  that 
they  gave  to  the  rest  of  the  world  its  literature  and  science,  in 
fact,  its  materials  of  thought  and  culture  of  every  kind.  That 
the  greatest  medical  work  of  such  a  people  should  still  remain  a 
sealed  book  to  the  largest  portion  of  mankind,  is  a  slur  on  civili¬ 
sation.  As  regards  the  Hindu  in  especial,  such  an  essay  strongly 
appeals  to  his  sentiments  of  patriotism. 

About  ei'ght  years  ago  I  brought  out  an  edition  of  this  great 
work,  consisting  of  both  text  and  a  Bengali  translation.  The  text 
was  in  the  Bengali  character.  The  edition  consisted  of  a  thousand 
copies,  and  was  rapidly  exhausted.  Yielding  to  the  solicitations 
of  the  profession,  I  then  commenced  an  edition  of  the  second 
great  Sanskrit  work  on  medicine,  called  "  Susruta-Samhita.”-  That 
edition  is  a  triglot  one,  consisting  as  it  does  of  text  and  commen¬ 
tary,  a  Bengali  translation,  and  a  translation  in  Hindi,  all  issued 
in  separate  and  successive  fascicules.  About  half  of  this  work 
has  been  already  accomplished.  (Besides  the  above,  I  have 
commenced  a  second  edition  of  “  Charaka-Samhita  ”  (text  and 
commentary)  in  the  Devanagara  character,  only  four  fascicules 
of  which  have  by  this  been  out. 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add  here  that  my  own  knowledge 
of  English  is  not  sufficient  to  enable  me  to  translate  the  work 
myself.  I  have,  however,  determined  to  execute  the  task  with 
competent  literary  and  professional  assistance.  Fortunately,  the 
work  of  Charaka  does  not  contain  many  medical  technicalities. 
There  is  no  expression  in  it  that  may  not  be  rendered  into  intelli¬ 
gible  English  with  a  little  care.  The  translation  is  intended  to  be 
made  as  faithful  as  practicable,  for  without  that  characteristic, 
such  versions  cannot  subserve  many  important  ends.  In  explaining 
the  names  of  the  drugs,  both  vegetable  and  mineral,  valuable 
assistance  may  often  be  had  from  the  careful  and  laborious  work 


[  viii  ] 

of  Babu  Undaya  Chand  Dutta,  entitled  “  The  Materia  Medica  of 
the  Hindus.” 

It  is  my  intention  to  bring  out  the  work  in  successive  monthly 
fascicules.  Each  fascicule  shall  ordinarily  contain  four  forms  of 
matter,  octavo,  royal.  Under  favourable  circumstances,  however, 
fascicules  containing  even  eight  forms  may  be  issued. 

Calcutta  .- 

2oo,- Cornwallis  Street,  [-Avinash  Chunder  Kaviratna. 
June  i,  1890.  j 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


THE  PLACE  OF  APHORISMS. 

LESSON  I. 

So  then  We  will  explain  the  lesson  about  Longevity.  Even  this 
was  said  by  the  illustrious  son  of  Atrl.* 

Desirous  of  long  life,  Bharadwaja  of  austere  penances  repaired 
to  the  supreme  deity  Indra,  regarding  him  worthy  of  court.1  Since 
the  Science  of  Life,  as  declared  by  Brahman,  was  received  by 
Prajapati  in  its  entirety,  the  Agwins  then  from  him,®  from  the 
Agwins  the  illustrious  Cakra  alone  had  received  (it),  therefore, 
requested  by  the  Rishis,  Bharadwaja  repaired  to  Cakra.8 

When  diseases  appeared  as  impediments  to  penances,  fasts, 
study,  continence, t  vows,  and  life,  of  embodied  creatures,4  then 
great  Rishis  of  righteous  deeds,  keeping  compassion  for  all  beings 
before  them,  assembled  together  on  the  auspicious  side  of  Himavat*. 
Angiras,  and  Jamadagni,  Vagishtha,  Kagyapa,  Bhrigu,  Atreya, 
Gautama,  Sankhya,  Pulastya,  Narada,  Asita,6  Agastya,  and  Varna- 
deva,  Markandeya  and  Agwalayana,  Parikshi,  (the  other)  Atreya 
of  the  Bhikshu  order,  Bharadwaja,  Kapinjala,7  Vigwamitra  and 
Agwaratha,  Bhargava,  and  Chyavana,  Abhijit,  Gargya,  Candilya, 
Kaundilya,  Varkhi,  Devala,  and  Galava,8  Sankrittya,  Vaijavapi, 
Kugika,  Vsdarayana,  Vadiga,  and  Caraloman,  and  both  Kapya 
and  Katyayana,9  Kankayana,  Kaikageya,  Dhaumya,  Marichi,  and 
Kagyapa,  Carkaraksha,  Hiranyaksha,  Lokaksha,  and  Paingi,10 
Caunaka,  and  Cakuneya  Maitreya,  Maimatayani,  the  Vaikahnasas, 


*  It  would  seem  from  the  words  athdtah  that  this  treatise  follows  a  previous  one  on 
a  cognate  subject. 

Vakhyasyamah ,  rendered  ‘  explain,’  may  also  mean  ‘elaborate.’  In  either  case  the 
sense  would  be  the  same. 

Bhagamana  literally  means  a  possessor  of  the  six  divine  attributes,  w,  lordship, 
energy,  fame,  prosperity,  knowledge,  and  renunciation.  Ordinarily,  however,  when  used 
in  connection  with  names,  it  implies  ‘illustrious’  or  ‘reverend’ — T. 

t  Brahmacharyya  is  the  celebate  life  of  a  pupil  in  the  house  of  his  preceptor  for 
study.  Here,  it  seems,  the  word  is  used  generally  for  celebate  life  or  abstinence  with 
certain  rigid  vows. — T. 


2 


CHARAKA-SAMHITl, 


also  the  Valakhilyas,  and  other  great  Rishis, 1 1  oceans  of  the 
knowledge  of  Brahma,  of  restraint,  and  of  observances,  blazing 
with  the  energy  of  ascetic  penances,  (and)  like  fires  upon  which 
have  been  poured  libations  of  clarified  butter,12  these,  seated 
there  at  their  ease,  took  part  in  this  beneficial  conversation, (saying), 
— “Freedom  from  disease  is  the  excellent  root  of  Religion,  Profit, 
Pleasure,  and  Salvation.13  Diseases  are  depredators  thereof  as 
also  of  happy  life.  This  (therefore)  is  a  great  enemy  of  men 
that  hath  appeared.14  What  shall  be  the  means  of  checking 
them?’’ — Having  said  this,  they  betook  to  meditation,*18 

Then  with  the  eye  of  meditation  they  beheld  Cakra  to  be  their 
refuge. — “The  Lord  of  the  celestials  will  duly  declare  the  means  of 
check  in  respect  of  diseases. 1 8  Who  must  repair  to  the  abode  of 
the  Thousand-eyed  for  asking  the  lord  of  Cachi  ?” — >“In  this  matter 
even  I  should  be  commissioned,” — these  words  Bharadwaja  said 
first;  therefore,  was  he  commissioned  by  the  Rishis. f17-18 

Proceeding  to  Cakra’s  abode  he  beheld,  in  the  midst  of  the 
celestial  Rishis,  the  slayer  of  Vala,  blazing  like  firej19  Repairing 
(thither),  and  saluting  the  Chief  of  the  deities  with  words  wishing 
him  victory,  the  intelligent  and  illustrious  one  declared  the 
excellent  message  of  the  Rishis ,§ao — “Diseases  have  sprung  into 
existence,  striking  fear  into  every  creature.  Therefore,  O  Chief 
of  the  celestials,  tell  me  duly  what  the  means  of  check  are  !”  21 
The  illustrious  one  of  a  hundred  sacrifices||  declared  the  Science 
of  Life  unto  that  great  Riski  in  a  few  words,  knowing  his  intelli¬ 
gence  to  be  great,22  Fraught  with  the  knowledge  of  causes,  symp¬ 
toms,  and  drugs,  the  refuge  both  of  the  hale  and  the  sick,  consisting 
of  three  aphorisms,  eternal  and  auspicious,  which  the  Grandsire 
had  (first)  discovered,23  that  limitless  and  shoreless  Science  of  Life, 
of  three  trunks,  the  intelligent  ascetic,  with  mind  devoted  to  it, 
soon  enough  duly  learnt  in  its  entirety, 2  4  Having  learnt  it  in  its 
entirety,  Bharadwaja  acquired  through  it  unlimited  life,  and  endued 
with  happiness,  declared  it  to  the  Rishis  exactly  (as  he  had  ac- 

*  Verse  15  consists  of  one  line.  Teskam  might  refer  to  manushyanam  in  the  previous 
verse..— Ti 

t  Verse  18  oonsists  of  one  line.  Thousand-eyed. \  i.e.,  Indra.  Lord  of  Cachi ,  Indra, 
whose  spouse  is  Cachi. — T, 

J  Indra  is  called  the  slayer  of  Vala,  of  Namuchi,  &c.;  the  latter  were  demons  that 
the  chief  of  the  celestials  slew  for  the  peace  of  the  three  worlds. — T. 

§  To  this  day,  a  Brahmana,  desirous  of  blessing  any  one  of  the  three  other  orders, 
would  say, —  Victory  to  thee  l — T. 

||  Indra. — T, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


quired  it.)26  The  Rishis  also,  solicitous  of  the  good  of  (all)  creatures 
and  of  long  life,  received  from  Bharadwaja  that  Science  enhancing 
the  period  of  life.26  Those  great  Rishis  (then)  beheld  duly,  with 
the  eye  of  knowledge,  similarities,  dissimilarities,  properties,  objects, 
and  operations, 2  7  as  also  compositions.  Knowing  these,  and  con¬ 
forming  to  the  ordinances  of  that  Science,  they  obtained  great 
felicity  and  even  immortal  life.28  Then  Punarvasu,  inclined  for 
friendship,  through  compassion  for  all  creatures,  communicated  the 
auspicious  Science  of  Life  unto  six  disciples.29  Agnivega,  Bhela, 
Jatukarna,  Paragara,  Harita,  and  Kharapani,  received  the  prelections 
of  that  ascetic.30  Diversity  of  intelligence  was  there,  (but)  no  dif¬ 
ference  in  teaching  on  the  part  of  the  ascetic ;  whence  Agnivega 
first  became  the  author  of  a  treatise.3 1  Then  Bhela  and  the  others 
also  compiled  their  own  treatises ;  (and)  those  intelligent  men  caused 
Atri’s  son  with  a  conclave  of  Rishis  to  listen  to  their  works. 3  2  Having 
listened  to  those  compilations  of  auspicious  subjects,  the  Rishis, 
filled  with  joy,  admitted  that  they  had  been  duly  compiled.33  And  all 
of  them  praised  those  benefactors  of  every  creature.  (And  they  all) 
loudly  exclaimed  at  the  same  time,- — “Compassion  (hath  been 
shown)  for  all  creatures!”34  The  celestial  Rishis,  staying  in  the 
firmament,  with  the  gods  themselves,  heard  that  auspicious  declara¬ 
tion  of  those  great  Rishis.  And  having  heard  it,  they  rejoiced 
greatly.36  “0  excellent,”-— this  sweet  and  deep  voice  in  the  skies, 
uttered  by  creatures  from  joy,  resounded  through  the  three  worlds.36 
Auspicious  winds  blew  in  all  directions ;  all  the  points  of  the  compass 
were  irradiated  with  effulgence ;  and  a  celestial  shower  of  flowers, 
mixed  with  drops  of  rain,  fell.37  Then  the  presiding  deities  of 
Knowledge,  Intellect,  Success,  Memory,  Quickness  of  perception, 
Fortitude,  Fame,  Forgiveness,  &c.,  entered  those  Rishis  headed  by 
Agnivega.38  The  treatises  of  those  (six  disciples)  were  approved  by 
the  great  Rishis.  (And  since  they  were)  for  the  benefit  of  the 
whole  range  of  creatures,  they  acquired  great  fame  on  Earth.39 

Good,  evil,  happy  and  unhappy  is  Life.  That  (  knowledge)  in 
which  are  declared  its  nature,  and  measure,  and  what  is  beneficial  to 
it  and  what  injurious,  is  called  the  Science  of  Life.40  The  union  of 
body,  senses,  mind,  and  soul  is  called  Life.  The  latter  is  known 
again  by  the  names  of  Dhari, Jivita,  Nityaga,  and  Anubandha  *41 

*  Life  is  called  Dhari  (holder  together)  because  it  holds  together  the  elements  of 
which  it  consists  ;  Jivita  is  existence  ;  Nityaga  (always  going),  because  it  is  continually 
running  or  going  away;  Anubandha  ( tie  or  link),  because  this  life  is  a  link  in  the 
endless  chain  of  individual  existence.  The  last  refers  to  the  doctrine  of  the  transmigration 
ef  souls. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  sacred  Science  of  Life,  approved  by  persons  conversant 
ivith  the  Vedas,  and  beneficial  to  both  ( this  and  the  other)  region 
of  men,  is  being  expounded  (as  follows.)42  Of  all  things,  at  all 
times,  similarity  is  the  cause  of  increase ;  and  dissimilarity  is  the 
cause  of  decrease.  A  tendency  exists  towards  both.* * * §43 

Similarity  is  that  which  produces  oneness;  and  dissimilarity  is 
that  which  produces  diversity.  Therefore,  similarity  is  identity  of 
substance,  and  dissimilarity  is  the  reverse  of  this.44 

Mind,  soul,  and  body,  this  trinity,  called  person,  resteth  on  union 
like  three  sticks  (standing  with  one  another’s  support.)  Upon  that 
(trinity)  everything  rests.f45  That  is  also  called  purusha  or  Being. 
It  is  also  animate.  That  is  also  regarded  as  the  subject  matter  of 
this  Science ;  and  it  is  also  for  the  sake  of  that,  that  this  Science  is 
promulgated.46 

Those  having  ether  for  the  first  (i.e.,  ether, '  air,  fire,  water, 
and  earth),  soul,  mind,  and  the  quarters,  are  constituent  elements 
(of  all  things)  United  with  the  senses,  elements  are  called 
animate;  without  the  senses,  they  are  called  inanimate.^  4T 

The  properties  (of  vision,  taste,  scent,  touch,  and  hearing), 
pairs  of  opposites  (such  as  heavy  and  light,  heat  and  cold,  &c.), 
the  intellect,  pleasure  and  pain,  and  desire  and  aversion  and  will,  and 
the  qualities  of  dissimilarity  and  others  (i.e.,  dissimilarity,  con¬ 
trariety,  union,  number,  composition,  division,  separateness,  measure, 
inertia  and  contiguity)  are  called  attributes,  while  all  functions  such 
as  (of  the  mind  in)  will,  are  called  action .§48 


*  This  is  regarded  as  almost  the  basis  of  the  Science  of  Life.  “  Similarity  is  the 
cause  of  increase,” — as  water  or  any  watery  substance,  coming  in  contact  with  water, 
increases  the  latter.  Heat,  being  dissimilar  to  water,  decreases  the  latter.  All  things, 
again,  have  a  tendency  to  increase  or  decrease. — T. 

+  “  Upon  that  everything  rests”  is  explained  by  the  commentator  as  meaning  that 
it  is  the  union  of  three  things,  called  person,  which  enjoys  or  suffers  the  fruit  of 
actions  both  of  this  and  previous  existences. — T. 

j  Difah  are  the  cardinal  and  subsidiary  directions.  Some  translators  from 
Sanskrit  wish  to  render  the  word  as  “  points  of  the  compass.”  Even  if  the  anachronism 
involved  in  the  expression  when  put  into  the  mouth  of  a  Rishi  be  overlooked,  it 
would  be  inaccurate,  for  in  Sanskrit  it  implies  the  zenith  and  the  nadir  besides  the 
eight  ordinary  points  of  the  compass.  I  think  the  word  quarters  would  be  a  better- 
substitute  for  directions. — T. 

§  The  word  rendered  properties  is  artha.  They  are,  as  explained  by  the  commen¬ 
tator,  the  sensations,  viz.,  vision,  taste,  touch,  scent,  and  hearing,  corresponding  to 
the  five  elemental  objective  existences,  viz.,  light,  water,  air,  earth,  and  space,  respee- 


CHA  RARA-SAMHITA. 


5 


The  co-existence  of  objects  such  as  earth,  &c.,  with  their  corres¬ 
ponding  properties  (of  scent  and  the  like)  is  styled  samavaya . 
That  is  permanent,  since  wherever  the  substance  is,  it  cannot  be 
that  the  property  is  not.4  9  That  in  which  actions  and  attributes  inhere, 
and  that  which  is  the  cause,  is  called  substance.  That,  on  the  other 
hand,  which  is  inherent,  and  which  is  the  passive  cause,  is  called 
attribute ,50 

That  which  is  the  cause  of  both  Union  and  Separation,  which 
inheres  to  the  substance,  and  which  represents  that  function  which 
is  to  be,  is  (called)  Action.  Action  is  independent  of  other  action.51 

Thus  is  explained  Cause  as  also  Action  or  Effect.  The  restora¬ 
tion  of  the  ingredient  humours  (of  the  human  body)  to  their  normal 
state  will  now  be  explained.  The  modes  of  restoring  the  ingredient 
humours  to  their  normal  state  have  been  said  to  be  the  object  of  this 
Science.52 

Of  all  diseases,  physical  and  mental,  the  causes  in  brief  are  of 
three  kinds,  viz.,  adverse  or  excessive  correlation  or  want  of 
correlation  of  time,  mind,  and  the  objects  of  the  senses.*53 

Body  and  mind  are  regarded  as  the  subjects  in  which  health 
and  disease  co-inhere ;  parity  of  correlation  being  the  cause  of 
health.54 

The  Soul  is  immutable  (incapable  of  being  affected  by  any¬ 
thing)  and  eternal;  faculties,  the  attributes  of  matter,  and  the 
senses,  are  the  causes  of  consciousness.  The  Soul  is  the  eternal 

tively,  so  that  the  property  of  light  is  vision,  of  water  is  taste,  &c.,  &c.  The  word 
rendered  intellect  is  buddhi,  i.e.,  the  cognitive  faculty  or  faculties  of  the  Kantian 
distribution  of  mental  phenomena.  The  next  word  is  prayatnantdk,  i.e.,  the  class 
ending  with  prayatna  or  will,  These  are,  therefore,  desire,  aversion,  and  will,  and 
pleasure  and  pain,  i.e.,  the  conative  and  the  aesthetic  phenomena  of  the  Kantian 
school.  I  am  not  sure  as  to  what  par^daya  means,  nor  am  I  sure  of  having  correctly 
understood  what  the  commentators  include  by  that  word. — T. 

*  So  far  as  the  causes  of  disease  are  concerned,  this  verse  may  be  regarded  as 
containing  an  exhaustive  enumeration  of  them  all.  Time  is  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  (i)  that 
portion  of  eternity  with  which  human  life  is  concerned  and  which  goes  on  ceaselessly, 
and  (2)  the  age  of  man,  that  is,  his  infancy,  youth,  manhood,  and  decrepitude.  The 
absence  of  correlation  or  adverse  correlation  or  excessive  correlation  of  Time  as  ex¬ 
plained  above  and  the  other  two,  is  the  fruitful  cause  of  disease.  A  person  in  a  certain 
age  and  a  certain  season  may  do  that  with  impunity  which  at  another  age  or  another 
season  would  induce  disease.  Similarly,  the  same  cause  in  respect  of  the  mind,  such  as 
exertion  of  the  mental  faculties  in  lives  unsuited  to  them,  or  excessive  exertion,  or  the 
total  absence  of  all  mental  exertion,  is  fruitful  of  disease.  As  regards  the  objects  of 
the  senses,  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  be  more  explicit. — T, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


witness,  for  it  views  all  actions  (without  being  itself  affected  by  any 
of  them).56 

Wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  have  been  said  to  be  the  causes  of  all 
bodily  diseases.  The  qualities  of  Passion  and  Darkness  have, 
again,  been  indicated  to  be  the  causes  of  mental  diseases.56 

The  first  kind  (i.e.,  bodily  disease)  is  cured  by  medicines 
founded  upon  acts  in  respect  of  the  deities  and  upon  reason*  Mental 
disease  is  cured  by  knowledge  of  the  soul,  knowledge  of  the 
scriptures,  (exercise  of)  patience  and  memory,  and  the  abstraction  of 
the  mind  from  all  worldly  objects.67 

Wind,  which  may  be  dry,  cold,  light,  subtile,  unstable,  clear, 
keen,  is  cured  by  objects  which  have  adverse  attributes.58 

Bile,  which  may  be  cold,  hot,  keen,  soft,  sour,  liquid,  and  bitter, 
is  speedily  cured  by  objects  having  adverse  attributes.69 

Heavy,  cold,  mild,  watery,  sweet,  stable,  and  slimy,  these  attri¬ 
butes  of  phlegm  are  cured  by  objects  having  adverse  attributes.80 

Those  changes  (in  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm)  that  are  curable  may 
be  set  right  by  drugs  possessing  adverse  attributes,  administered 
according  to  (considerations  of)  place,  measure,  and  time.  The 
cure  of  diseases  that  are  incurable  is  not  laid  down  here.61 

After  this,  once  again,  the  attributes  and  uses  of  the  objects 
mentioned  are  explained,63 

The  object  of  the  tongue  is  taste.  Water  and  earth  are  the  ob¬ 
jective  existences  in  which  taste  inheres.  In  its  manifestation  and 
as  regards  particular  kinds  of  it,  space,  air,  and  light,  are  also 
its  adjuncts.63 

Sweet,  sour,  salt,  pungent,  bitter,  and  astringent,  these  are 
regarded  as  the  sixfold  catalogue  of  tastes.84 

(Amonst  these)  the  sweet,  the  sour,  and  the  salt  check  wind  ; 
the  astringent,  the  sweet,  and  the  bitter  check  bile ;  the  astringent, 
the  pungent,  and  the  bitter,  check  phlegm.65 

Objects  are  of  three  kinds.  Some  cure  disorders  ;  some  affect 
the  system  injuriously,  and  some  are  regarded  as  conducive  to  ease 
or  health.66 


*  Medicines  founded  upon  acts  in  respect  of  the  deities,— i.e.,  ceremonies  and  rites  of 
propitiation,  &c.  Those  &c.  upon  reason, — i.e.,  drugs  selected  in  consequence  of  their 
action  on  particular  states  of  the  body,  —  T, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


7 


Objects  are  again  known  to  be  of  three  kinds,  viz.,  animal  pro¬ 
ducts,  vegetable  products,  and  products  appertaining  to  the  earth.67 
Honey,  vaccine  secretions,  bile,  fat,  marrow,  blood,  flesh,  excreta, 
urine,  skin,  semen,  bones,  tendons,  horns,  nails,  hoofs,  hair,  bristles, 
and  the  bright  pigment  called  Gorochana,  are  used  (as  drugs) 
among  animal  products.68  Gold,  the  ordure  of  metals,  the  five 
metals  {viz.,  silver,  copper,  lead,  tin  and  iron),  sand,  lime,  red 
arsenic,  gems,  salt,  red  chalk,  and  antimony, 6  9  are  indicated  as  drugs 
appertaining  to  the  earth.  The  vegetable  products  are  of  four  kinds, 
■viz.,  vanaspati,  virudha,  vanaspatya,  and  oshadhi.10  Trees  that 
produce  fruits  without  flowers  are  called  vanaspati-,  those  that  do 
not  produce  fruits  without  flowers  are  vanaspatya ;  those  that 
perish  upon  the  ripening  of  their  fruits  are  oshadhi ;  while  those 
that  creep  are  called  virudhas.1 1 

The  vegetable  products  are  root,  bark,  pith,  exudation,  stalk, 
juice,  sprout,  cinders,  milk,  fruit,  flower,  ashes,  oil,  thorns,  leaves, 
sheath  (of  a  bud),  bullbous  root,  and  shoots.  Of  vegetable  pro¬ 
ducts,  sixteen  are  root-bearing  and  nineteen  fruit-bearing.72-73 

(The  sage)  Punarvasu  has  indicated  that  there  are  four  kinds  of 
principal  oil,  five  kinds  of  salt,  eight  kinds  of  urine,  and  eight  kinds 
of  milk,  and  six  kinds  of  trees,  for  the  correction  of  maladies.  He 
who  knows  how  to  apply  these  in  disorders,  is  conversant  with  the 
Science  (of  Medicine.)74-76 

Hastidanti(«),  Haimavati(^),  ^yama(c),  Trivrit(<af),  Adhoguda(e), 
Sap  tala  09,  (jhvetanaman  fgj  .  Pratyak£reni(A),  Gavaksha(f),  Jyotish- 
mati(;9,  Vimbi(^),  £anapushi(/),  Vishanika(»2),  Ajagandha(w),  Dra- 
vanti(o),  and  Kshirini/j&)> — these  are  the  sixteen  plants  whose  roots 
are  used.  76-77  Of  these,  (jianapushpi  and  Vimbi  and  Haimavati  are. 


a.  Called  also  Ndgadanti :  Artemisia  vulgaris ;  identified  by  Dr.  Sircar  with 
Cucumis  inaderaspatanus. 

b.  A  kind  of  vach  or  orris  root ;  Acorus  calamus ;  indentified  by  Dr.  Sicar  with 

Zingiber  zedoarxa.  a. 

A  kind  of  Trivrit  with  black  roots'^  Panicum  frumentaceum. 

Convolvulus  TurpelKwft:  "  " 

2f  Called  also  Vriddhaddraka  ;  Argyreia  speciosa ;  syn.  Leltsomia  nervosa. 

f.  Called  also  Charmakashd  ;  Abrus precatorius  ;  identified  by  Dr.  Sircar  with  Big- 
nonia  suave-olens. 

g.  Called  also  white  Apardjita;  Clitoria  ternatea. 

h.  A  kind  of  Danti  ;  Beliospcrmum  Montanum  ;  identified  by  Dr.  Wise  with  Croton 
poliandrum  ;  by  Dr.  Sircar  and  Udaya  Chand  Dutta  with  Salvinia  cucullata. 

i.  Called  also  Goraksha-karkati  or  Rakhdle  Sasha ;  Momordica  umbellata. 

j.  Called  also  Nawdphatki ;  Cardiospernium  halicacabum. 

k.  Called  also  Telakachu  ;  Coccinea  Indica  ;  syn.  Momordica  monodelpha. 

l.  Called  also  Ghantarava  ;  Crotalaria  verrucosa 

m.  Called  also  Avartani  ;  believed  by  Or.  Wise  to  be  Isclepias  geminata. 

n.  Called  also  Faukandi  Yamani  ;  Ptychotis  Aj-noan 

o.  A  species  of  Danti;  identified  by  Dr.  Wise  will  luthcricum  tuberosutn. 

p.  Called  also  Dugdhikd  ;  identified  by  Udaya  Cha  1  Dutta  with  Oxystelma  esculen- 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


used  as  emetics.  Cweta  and  Jyotishmati,  as  cerebral  purgatives' 
(errhines.)78  The  eleven  that  remain  are  applied  as  purgatives. 
Having  enumerated,  with  their  names  and  actions,  the  plants 
whose  roots  are  used,  listen  to  those  whose  fruits  are  used.79 
(^ankhini(d:),  Vidanga(£),  Trapusha(c),  Madana(af),  Klitaka(e),  which 
is  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  the  aquatic  and  the  land  varieties,80  Dhamar- 
gava(/),  Ikshaku(^),  Jimuta(A),  Kritavedhana(z'),  Prakiryya(/), 
Udakiryya(^),  Pratyakpushpi(Z),  Abhaya(zzz),81  Antahkotara- 
pushpi(zz),  the  autumnal  Hastiparni(o),  Kampillaka^),  Aragvadha(y), 
and  Kutaja(r) ; — of  these  the  fruits  are  used.82  Of  these  Dhamar- 
gava,  Ikshaku,  Jimuta,  Kritavedhana,  Madana,  Kutaja,  Trapusha, 
and  Hastiparni,83 — these  are  used  as  emetics  and  in  enemata. 
Pratyakpushpi  is  prescribed  as  an  errhine.84  The  ten  that  remain 
have  been  enumerated  as  purgatives.  The  nineteen  kinds  of  plants 
whose  fruits  are  used  are  thus  enumerated  by  name  and  action.85 
Clarified  butter,  oil,  fat,  and  marrow, — these  four  kinds  of  oil  are 
seen.  These  may  be  administered  internally,  or  used  as  enemata, 
or  as  errhines,  alone  or  in  combination.86  These  act  as  emollientsr 


a.  Called  also  Chorapushpi;  identified  by  Udaya  Chand  Dutt  with  Andropogon  aci- 
cularis  ;  by  Dr.  Wise  with  Cissampelos  hexandra. 

b.  Embelia  ribes. 

c.  Cucumis  sativus. 

d.  Identified  by  Udaya  Chand  Dutt  with  Randia  dumetorum ;  by  Drs.  Wise  and 
Sircar,  with  Vangueria  spinosa. 

e.  Called  also  Jashti-madhu ;  liquorice  ;  Glycerrhiza. 

f  Called  Ghosh-kalta ;  a  species  of  Apdng  (Bengali.)  Achyranthes  aspera. 

g.  A  kind  of  bitter  gourd. 

h.  Called  also  Mutha  (in  Bengali);  Cyperus  rotundus  ;  identified  by  Dr.  Wise  with 
Andropogon  serratus. 

i.  Called  also  Koshdlaki  or  Jyotsnikd ;  identified  by  Udaya  Chand  Dutt  with  Luffa 
amara. 

j.  Called  also  Nata-karanja  or  Rite  (Bengali);  Cisalpina  bonducella. 

k.  Called  also  Dahar-karanja ;  identified  by  Udaya  Chand  Dutt  with  Pongamia 
glabra  ;  syn.  Galedupa  Indica. 

l.  Achyranthes  aspera. 

m.  Called  also  Haritaki ;  Terminalia  Chehilla. 

n.  Called  also  Nila-Buhnd. 

o.  Called  also  Morata  ;  identified  by  Dr.  Sircar  with  Momordica  mixta  ;  by  Dr. 
Wise  with  Hyperanthera  morunga. 

p.  A  kind  of  convolvulus  turpethum. ;  identified  by  Udaya  Chand  Dutt  with  Mai- 
lotus  Philippensis. 

q.  Called  also  Sondali ;  Cassia  fistula. 

r.  Called  also  Kurchi  ;  Holarrhena  antidysenterica  ;  syn.  Echites  antidysenterica. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


prolong  life,  improve  the  complexion,  and  increase  strength  and 
fat.  These  are  also  used  because  they  destroy  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm.87  Sauvarchala,  Saindhava,  Vit,  Audbhida,  with  Samudra, 
are  the  five  kinds  of  Salt.*88  They  are  cooling,  heating,  irritating, 
and  highly  capable  of  promoting  the  appetite.  They  are  used  for 
external  application,  as  emollients,  as  diaphoretics,89  as  emetics  and 
purgatives,  in  enemata  (with  or  without  oils),  for  anointing,  as  con¬ 
diments,  as  cerebral  purgatives,90  for  application  to  wounds  after 
operation,  for  injections  into  the  urethra,  for  collyrium,  for  rubbing 
upwards,  in  indigestion,  in  retention  of  stools  and  urine,  in  pains 
caused  by  obstruction  of  wind,  in  colic,  and  in  abdominal  dropsy. 9 1 

The  Salts  have  been  mentioned  above.  Listen  now  to  me  as  I 
indicate  the  eight  varieties  of  Urine,  viz.,  all  those  eight  principal 
varieties  that  have  been  mentioned  by  the  son  of  Atri.92  These 
are  the  urine  of  the  sheep,  the  goat,  the  cow,  the  buffalo,  the 
elephant,  the  camel,  the  horse,  and  the  ass.93  The  urines  are  hot, 
pungent,  possessed  of  drying  attributes,  bitter,  and  contain  saline 
ingredients.  Urine  is  used  in  rubbing,  in  plasters,94  in  enemata 
and  (other)  purgatives.  It  is  used  also  for  producing  perspiration, 
in  cases  of  suppression  of  stools  and  urine,  in  antidotes  (to  poison),95 
in  abdominal  dropsy,  in  piles,  in  grandular  enlargements  in  the 
abdomen,  in  lucoderma,  in  blotches  on  the  skin.  It  is  also  used  in 
unguents  (for  wounds  and  sores)  as  also  in  fomentation.  It  is  also 
said  to  promote  the  appetite  and  destroy  poison  and  worms.96  It  is 
also  said  to  be  good  in  every  way  for  persons  affected  with  jaundice 
and  anaemia  and  other  diseases  producing  paleness  of  color.  If 
drunk,  it  checks  phlegm  and  regulates  wind.97  It  also  forces  bile 
downwards.  I  have  indicated  here,  in  brief,  the  properties  of  Urine 
in  general;  the  separate  properties  of  each  variety  are  mentioned 
as  follows.98 

Tne  urine  of  sheep  is  bitter,  cooling,  and  neutral  in  respect  of 
bile.  The  urine  of  the  goat  is  astringent,  sweet,  wholesome,  and 
corrects  all  diseases  (of  phlegm,  bile,  and  wind).99  The  urine  of 
the  cow  is  slightly  sweet,  corrective  of  disorders,  distroys  worms, 
and  cures  lucoderma.  If  drunk,  it  cures  itching,  and  is  highly 

*  Sauvarchala,  Prof.  Wilson  says,  is  so  called  from  the  district  where  it  abounds.  He 
thinks  the  substance  is  Natron.  Saindhftva  is  rock-salt,  and  Vit  is  black  salt  with  a 
strong  odor.  Audbhida  is  evidenty  salt  manufactured  from  vegetable  substances.  The 
name,  however,  is  sometimes  applied  to  Sambhari  salt.  Samudra  is,  of  course,  the 
sea  salt. — T. 


2 


10 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


beneficial  in  abdominal  dropsy.100  The  urine  of  the  buffalo  cures 
piles,  swellings  and  dropsy,  and  is  alkaline  and  purgative.-  The 
urine  of  the  elephant  is  saltish  and  is  good  for  persons  having 
worms  and  lucoderma,101  in  rentention  of  stools  and  urine, 
in  poisoning,  in  diseases  of  the  phlegm,  and  for  piles.  The 
urine  of  the  camel  is  bitter  and  is  said  to  cure  asthma,  cough,  and 
piles.102  The  urine  of  horses  is  bitter  and  pungent,  and  is  a 
remedy  for  lucoderma,  carbuncle,  and  poisoning.  The  urine  of 
the  ass  cures  epilepsy,  insanity,  and  diseases  due  to  malignant 
stars.*103 

Thus  have  been  mentioned  the  several  varieties  of  Urine 
according  to  their  properties.  The  varieties  of  Milk  are  now  to 
be  mentioned,  as  also  their  properties  and  functions,104  The 
varieties  of  milk  are  those  of  the  sheep,  the  goat  the  cow,  the 
buffalo,  the  camel,  the  elephant,  the  horse,  and  women,105  Almost 
all  varieties  of  milk  are  sweet,  oily,  cooling,  glactiphorous,  refresh¬ 
ing,  nutritious,  and  aphrodisiac ;  strengthen  memory,  body,  and 
mind;106  promote  vitality,  relieve  fatigue,  cure  asthma  and 
cough,  heal  hemorrhages  caused  by  disorders  of  the  bile,  aid  the 
the  cure  of  wounds  and  fractures,107  wholesome  unto  all  living 
beings,  soothe  and  correct  all  disorders  (of  bile,  wind,  and 
phlegm),  allay  thirst,  promote  the  appetite,  and  highly  beneficial 
in  cases  of  weakness  and  ulcers.108  It  is  prescribed  in  jaundice 
and  anaemia,  in  cases  of  acidity  and  biliousness,  pulmonary  con¬ 
sumption,  glandular  enlargements  in  the  abdomen,  abdominal 
dropsy,  diarrhoea,  fevers,  burning  of  the  skin,  and  swellings.109 
It  is  also  used  as  a  remedy  in  disorders  of  the  (female)  generative 
organs,  of  the  the  semen,  and  of  urine  ;  in  leucorrhcea,  in  cases  of 
scybalas,  and  in  disorders  of  wind  and  bile.  110  It  is  used  also  in 
errhines,  plasters,  and  baths;  for  producing  vomiting,  with  enemata, 
in  purgatives,  liniments,  and  for  diverse  other  purposes.111  Here  I 
have  not  mentioned  the  properties  of  each  separate  variety  of 
milk.  I  shall  once  more  mention  them  in  detail  in  the]  Lesson  on 
Food  and  Drinks.113 

There  are  three  other  trees  different  from  those  whose  fruits 
and  roots  are  used.  They  are  Snuhi(a),  Arka(^),  and  Afmantaka(c) . 


*  Hysteria  and  the  like. — T. 

a.  Called  also  Manasa ;  Euphorbia  meriifolia. 

1.  Called  also  Akanda  ;  Calatropis  gigantea  or  procera ;  syn.  Asclepias  gigantea. 
c.  Identified  by  Dr.  Sircar  with  Plectranthus  aromaticus. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


11 


The  actions  of  these  are  as  follows.113  Afmantaka  is  used  as 
an  emetic ;  the  milk  of  Snuhi  is  used  in  purgatives.  The  milk  of 
the  Arka,  it  should  be  known,  is  used  both  in  emetics  and 
purgatives.114 

Three  other  trees,  as  follows,  are  mentioned,  whose  barks  are 
beneficial.  They  are  Putika(rz),  Krishnagandha(<5),  and  Tillaka(c).115 
Both  Putika  and  Tillaka  should  be  applied  in  purgatives;  Krishna* 
gandha  is  directed  to  be  used  in  erysipelas,  swellings,  and  piles.110 
A  wise  physician  should  know  that  these  three  trees  with  the  three 
mentioned  above  are  also  remedies  in  psoriosis,  phlegmonoid  in- 
flamations,  boils  of  the  lymphatic  glands,  leprosy,  and  the  diseases 
called  Alaji *11T 

Thus  are  described  the  trees  whose  fruits  and  roots  are  used, 
the  Oils,  the  Salts,  the  Urines,  the  Milks,  and  the  six  trees  whose 
juices  and  barks  are  used.118 

The  goat-herds,  the  shepherds,  and  the  cow-herds,  who 
frequently  go  to  the  woods,  and  those  that  live  in  the  woods,  know 
plants  by  name  and  appearance.119  It  is  not,  however,  by  mere 
knowledge  of  names  and  appearance  that  one  can  be  said  to  know 
the  plants  completely.120  He  who  knows  the  names  and  appear¬ 
ances  of  plants  and  can  combine  them  (according  to  their  proper¬ 
ties)  is  said  to  be  a  knower  of  plants  (pharmaceutist).  But  he  who 
knows  plants  fully  (i.e.,  their  names,  appearances,  properties, 
actions,  applications,  &c., )  is  a  physician.121  But  he  who  is 
acquainted  with  their  applications  according  to  considerations  of 
time  and  place,  after  having  observed  (their  effects  on)  individual 
patients,  should  be  known  as  the  best  of  physicians.122 

An  unknown  drug  is  like  poison  or  weapon  or  fire  or  thunder, 
while  a  known  drug  is  like  nectar  ( amrita ).123  Drugs  unknown 
by  name,  appearance,  and  properties,  or  misapplied  even  if  known, 
produce  mischief.124  Well-applied,  a  virulent  poison  even  may 
become  an  excellent  medicine,  while  a  medicine  misapplied  be¬ 
comes  a  virulent  poison.125  An  intelligent  man,  therefore,  whodesires 

a.  Called  also  Natakaranja ;  Gtiilandina  bonducetta. 

b.  Called  also  Cobhanjana;  Moringa  pterygosperma. 

t.  Called  also  Lodhra ;  Symplocos  raceniosa. 

*  Vidradhikd  is  identified  by  Prof.  Wilson  with  phlegmonoid  inflamations,  especially 
of  a  deep-seated  nature.  Alaji  as  used  here  is  difficult  to  identify,  the  name  being  applied 
to  several  kinds  of  diseases.  Dr.  Sircar  supposes  it  to  mean  gangrenous  abscesses.  I  do 
not  know  what  his  authority  is. — T. 


12 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA \ 


life  and  health,  should  not  take  a  medicine  prescribed  by  a  physician 
unskilled  in  applying  medicines.  1 2  8  The  thunderbolt  of  Vasava, 
falling  upon  the  head,  may  leave  a  hope  of  life,  but  a  medicine 
prescribed  by  an  ignorant  person  will  not  leave  a  patient  hope  of 
life.1 2  T  A  person  by  even  conversing  with  that  conceited  man  who 
administers  medicine,  without  knowing  its  properties,  to  a  suffering, 
bed-ridden,  and  trustful  patient,  and  who  (on  that  account)  is 
regarded  to  be  an  irreligious,  sinful  and  wicked-souled  wight  and 
like  unto  the  Destroyer  himself,  falls  into  hell.128-*9 

It  is  better  to  drink  the  poison  of  the  snake  or  the  solution  of 
copper,  or  swallow  red-hot  balls  of  iron,  than  assume  the  garb  of  a 
learned  man  and  take  food  and  drink  and  money  from  one  afflicted 
with  diseases  and  soliciting  relief.*1 3  0-31  Hence  that  intelligent 
person  who  desires  to  be  a  physician  should  take  great  care  in 
respect  of  his  qualities,  so  that  he  may  become  the  giver  of  the 
life-breaths  of  men.t133 

That  is  the  right  medicine  which  can  cure,  and  he  is  the  best 
of  physicians  who  brings  about  recovery.133 

Success  in  producing  the  intended  results  proves  the  right 
application  (of  a  medicine),  and  success  (in  bringing  about  re¬ 
covery)  proves  the  physi  cian  to  be  endowed  with  every  qualification 
and  the  foremost  of  his  class.1 3  * 

{Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary ), 

The  origin  of  the  Science  of  Life,  its  cause,  its  publication,  the 
permission  (to  Agnive^a  and  others)  for  composing  its  aphorisms, 
the  ascertainment  of  its  nature, J1,1 5  causes  and  effects  in  full,  the 
necessity  of  the  Science  of  Life,  diseases  and  their  causes,  and 
remedies  in  brief, ^3 6  taste  and  the  objects  in  which  it  inheres,  the 
three  great  divisions  of  the  objects  of  Nature,  the  plants  whose 
roots  and  fruits  are  used,  the  oils  and  the  salts, l;3?  the  urines,  the  milks, 
the  six  kinds  of  plants  whose  milk  and  bark  are  used,  the  actions  of 
all  these,  their  application  and  misapplication  and  consequences 
beneficial  and  otherwise,1®3  the  defects  and  qualifications  of 


*  Misled  by  an  incorrect  reading,  viz.,  bibhratah  (ablative)  for  bibhratd  (instrumental) 
Dr.  Sircar  has  wrongly  rendered  verse  131  ( vide  pp.  478-79  of  the  Calcutta  Journal  of 
Medicine,  vol.  III.,  for  i87o).  The  ablative,  besides,  would  yield  a  meaning  not  in 
harmony  lyith  the  context. — T, 

t  I.  e.,  “Should  strive  his  best  for  improving  himself  and  acquiring  the  necessary 
qualifications  of  a  physician.” — T. 

J  I,  e,,  its  definition. — f. 


CHAR  AKAr-S AM  HIT  A.  13 

physicians,— all  these  have  been  stated  in  this  Lesson  by  the  great 
Rishi.139 

Thus  the  first  Lesson,  called  Dirghanjivitiya  (about  Longevity), 
in  the  treatise  by  Agnivefa  as  revised  by  Charaka, 


LESSON  II. 

And  now  we  shall  expound  the  Lesson  on  Apamarga-tundaliya. 
Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri. 

The  seeds  of  Apamarga(a),  long  pepper,  round  pepper, 
Vidanga(^),  Sigru(c),  mustard  seeds,  Tumvuru(^)1  Ajajin(^),  Aja- 
gandha^,  Pilu(^),  Ela(A),  Harenuka(z'),  Prithvika,(/),  Surasa(/&), 
Cweta(/),  Kutheraka(w),  Phanijjhaka(«),2  the  seed  of  Cirisha(o), 
garlic,  Haridra  of  two  species(/>),  salts  of  two  varieties  (y),  Jyotish- 
mati(r),  and  Nagara(j),  are  to  be  used  as  cerebral  purgatives 
(errhines).8  In  heaviness  of  the  head,  in  headache,  in  catarrh 
affecting  the  nose,  in  hemicrania,  in  worms,  jn  epilepsy,  in  loss  of 
scent,  in  fainting  fits,4  Madana(7),  liquorice,  Nimba(a),  Jimuta(w), 


a.  Achyrantlies  aspera. 

b.  jdmbeliq  ribes. 

c.  Moringa  pterygosperma  ;  syn.  Hyperanthera  moringa. 

d.  Called  also  Nepali  Dhania  ;  Zanthoxylum  alatum  ;  syn.  Z.  hostile . 

e.  A  species  of  Krishnajiraka  ;  a  species  of  Nigella  sativa. 

f.  Called  also  Vana-yamani ;  Ocymum  gratissimum. 

g.  Salvadora  persica. 

h.  Large  cardamom. 

i.  Called  also  Renuka ;  Udaya  Chand  Dutt  supposes  t  to  be  identifiable  with 

Piper  aurantiacum. 

j.  Galled  also  Krishnajira  ;  Nigella  sativa. 

k.  Called  also  Tulasi ;  Ocirnum  basilocum, 

l.  The  white  Aparajita  ;  Clitoria  ternatea. 

m.  The  black  Tulasi ;  Ocimum  Sanitum. 

n.  A  species  of  Tulasi  or  Ocimum. 

o.  Albizzia  lebbek. 

p.  Circuma  longa  and  Berberis  asiaticq. 

q.  Rock  salt  and  sea  salt. 

r.  Cardiospermum  halicacabum. 

s.  Called  also  Sunt;  dry  ginger, 

t.  Randia  dumetorum. 

U.  Melia  Azadirachta. 
p.  Vide  note  h,  p.  8, 


14 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Kritavedhana(a),  Pippali(b),  Kutaja(c),  Ikshaku(d),  large  carda¬ 
moms,  and  Dhamargava(e),  should  be  used.6 

These  the  physician  should  use,  without  injuring  the  system,  as 
emetics,  in  disorders  of  the  phlegm  and  bile,  as  also  in  diseases  of 
the  stomach.6 

Trivit(f),  the  three-fold  fruits(g),.  Danti(h),  Nilini(i),  Saptala(j), 
Vacha(k),  Kampillaka(l),  Gavakshi(m),  Kshirini(n),  Udakiryya(o), 
Pilu(p),  Aragbadha(q),  dried  grapes,  Dravanti(r),  and  Nichula(s), 
should  be  used  as  purgatives  in  diseases  of  the  intestinal  canal.7-8 

Patala(t),  Agmmantha(u),  Vilwa(v),  Cyonaka(w),  Kafmarya(x), 
Calaparni(y),  Prishniparni(z),  Nidigdhika(a),9  Vala(£),  Afwa- 
dangshtra(c),  Vrihati(^),  Eranda(e),  Punarnava(/),  Yava(^), 

a.  Vide  note  i,  p.  8. 

b.  Long  pepper. 

o.  Vide  note  r,  p.  8. 

d.  Vide  note  g,  p.  8. 

e.  Vide  note  f  p.  8. 

f.  Convolvulus  turpethum. 

g.  Terminalia  chebula,  Phyllanthus  emblica,  and  a  fruit  called  boyra  in  Bengali, 

h.  Baliospermum  montanum ;  syn.  Croton  polyandrum 

i.  A  species  of  Turpethum. 

j.  Vide  note  /  in  p.  7. 

_  k.  Zingiber  zedoaria. 

l.  Mallotus  philippensis, 

m.  Momordica,  umbellata. 

n.  Vide  note  p  in  p.  7. 

o.  Vide  note  k  in  p.  8. 

p.  Salvadora  persica. 

q.  Vide  note  q  in  p.  8. 

r.  Vide  note  0  in  p.  7. 

s.  Identified  by  Udaya  Chand  Dutt  with  Baringtonia  acutangula ;  syn.  Eugenia 
acutangula. 

t.  Called  also  Parula.  Stereospermum  suave-olens;  syn.  Bignonia  suave-olens, 

u.  Identified  by  Udaya  Chand  Dutt  with  Premna  Serratifolia. 

v.  ZEgle  marmelos. 

w.  Calosanthes  Indica. 

x.  Called  also  Gambhari ;  Gmelina  arborea. 

y.  Desmodium  gangeticum. 

z.  Identified  by  Udaya  Chand  Dutt  with  Uraria  logopodioides ;  syn.  Doodia 

lagopodioides. 

a.  Solanum  Xanthocarpum  ;  syn.  Solanum  Jacquinii. 

b.  Called  also  Berela  ;  Si  da  cordifolia. 

c.  Called  also  Gokshuri ;  Tribulus  terrestris  ;  syn.  Tributes  lanuginosus, 

d.  Called  also  Vyakur ;  Solanum  indicnm, 

e.  Ricinus  communis, 

f.  Boerhavia  diffusa. 

gr-  Hordeum  hexastichnm. 


charakasamhita. 


15 


Kulattha(tf)  Kola(3),Guduchi(c)  Madana(^),10  Pala£a(e),  Kattrina(/), 
all  the  Oils  and  all  the  Salts,  should  be  used  in  udavarta  (diseases 
arising  from  disorders  of  the  wind),  in  suppression  of  stools  and 
urine, and  in  enemata;11 

From  the  list  of  these  drugs  enemata  of  the  oily  variety  should 
be  made  up  for  curing  disorders  of  the  wind. 

Thus  have  been  mentioned  in  brief  the  drugs  that  promote  the 
five  kinds  of  action  or  evacuation.*12 

When  disorders  have  happened,  these  five  operations  (J.e., 
purgation,  vomiting,  &c.,)  should  be  caused,  after  use  of  emollients 
and  diaphoretics,  upon  consideration  of  dose  and  time.18  The 
right  application  (of  medicines)  rests  upon  dose  and  time,  and 
success  rests  upon  right  application.  The  physician  conversant 
with  the  right  application  of  medicines  occupies  a  place  above  that 
of  persons  conversant  with  the  mere  properties  of  drugs.1 1 

After  this  I  shall  now  speak  of  gruels  prepared  with  the  aid  of 
diverse  drugs  for  the  cure  of  diverse  diseases  curable  by  such 
prepartions.16 

Gruels  prepared  with  long  pepper,  the  root  of  long  pepper, 
Chavya(^),  Chitraka(A),  and  dry  ginger,  promotes  the  appetite  and 
relieves  colic  pains.16 

Gruel  prepared  with  Dadithva(z),  Vilwa(y),  Changeri(^),  whey, 
and  Dadima(  / ),  promotes  digestion  and  is  astringent.  In  diarrhoea 
coupled  with  disorders  of  the  wind,  gruel  prepared  with  the  five 
roots  should  be  taken.f17 

a.  Dolichos  unijlorus  ;  syn.  Dolichos  biflorus. 

b.  Zizyphus  Jujuba. 

c.  Tinospora  cordifolla ;  syn.  Menispermum  cordifolium. 

d.  Randia  dumetorum. 

e.  Butea  frondosa. 

f  A  fragrant  grass. 

*  These  are  (l)  those  used  as  purgatives,  (2)  those  used  as  emetics,  (3)  those  used  as 
errhines,  (4)  those  called  niruha  (asthapana),  and  (5)  those  used  as  anuvasana.  The  last 
two  are  enemata  with  this  difference  that  the  first  is  not  all  oily,  while  the  second  is 
entirely  oily. 

g.  Called  in  Bengali  Chai ;  Piper  chaba. 

h .  Called  in  Bengali  Chita ;  Plumbago  Zeylanica, 

i.  Called  also  Kapithva ;  Feronia  elephantum ,  or  the  wood  apple. 

/.  Aigle  Marmelos. 

k.  Called  Amrul  in  Bengali ;  Oxalis  corniculata, 

l.  Pomegranates  ;  Punica  Granatum. 

t  The  five  roots  referred  to  here  are  those  of  the  Aigle  marmelos,  Sona,  Gmelina 
arbor ea,  Stereosmpermum  suave-olens  and  Premna,  serratifolia.—T. 


16 


CHARAKA-SAMHITI. 


Gruel  prepared  with  Calaparni(«),  Vala  (£),  Vilwa(c),  and  Prishni- 
parni  (d),  and  mixed  with  (the  juice  of)  acid  pomegranates, 
should  be  taken  in  cases  of  diarrhoea  from  bile  and  phlegm.  18 

Gruel  prepared  with  diluted  goat’s  milk,  the  proportion  being  half 
milk  and  half  water,  and  Hrivera(^),  Utpala(y)  Nagara(^),  and 
Prishniparni(A),  should  taken  as  a  remedy  for  dysentery.19 

In  (mucous)  diarrhoea,  gruel  prepared  with  Ativisha( z), 
Nagara (/),  and  some  acid  juice  (of  pomegrantes)  sould  be  given. 

In  dysuria,  gruel  prepared  with  Cwadangshtra(^),  and  Kantakari 
(/,)  and  mixed  with  Phanita(w),  should  be  given.20 

Gruel  prepared  with  Vidanga(rc),  the  root  of  long  pepper,  Sigru 
(o),  and  round  pepper,  mixed  with  whey  and  Suvarchikaf /),  is 
used  as  an  anthelmintic  or  vermifuge. 2  1 

Gruel  prepared  with  Mridvika  (q),  Cariva  (r),  fried  paddy,  long 
pepper,  honey,  and  dry  ginger,  allays  thirst.  That  prepared  with 
Somoraja  (s)  destroys  poison.22 

Gruel  prepared  with  decoctio  n  of  the  flesh  of  the  (wild)  boar 
promotes  nutrition. 

Gruel  prepared  with  fried  Gavedhuka(^),  mixed  with  honey, 
reduces  corpulency.23 

а.  Desmodium  gangeticum. 

б.  Sida  cordijolia. 

c.  Mgle  marmelos. 

d.  Uraria  lagopodioides  ;  syn.  Doodia  lagopodioides. 

e.  Called  in  Bengali,  Bala  ;  Pavonia  odoralq. 

/.  The  blue  lotos  ;  Pfymphcea  stellatq. 

g.  Cyperus  partenuis. 

Ji.  Vide  note  d  above, 

i.  Aconitum  heterophyllum. 

j.  Dry  ginger. 

k.  Called  also  Gokshuri;  Tribulus  terreslris, 

l.  Solarium.  Xanthocarpum. 

m.  Liquid  treacle,  or  juice  of  sugar-cane  not  much  thickened  by  boiling. 

n.  Embellia  rides. 

o.  Moringa  pterygosperma. 

p.  A  kind  of  saline  substance.  Vide  note  p  in  p.  9. 

q.  Raisins. 

Called  Cyamalata  in  Bengali ;  Ichnocarpus  frutescens  ;  syn.  Echites  frutescens. 

It  is  also  identified  with  Ananta  or  Anantamula  or  Hemidesmus  Indicus. 

s.  Vernonia  anlhelmintica  ;  syn.  Serratula  anthelmintica. 

t.  Called  in  Bengali  Qargare  paddy.  It  is  a  species  o.f  coix, — T. 


I 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


17 


Gruel  prepared  with  clarified  butter,  with  Tila  ( a )  used  largely, 
and  mixed  with  salt,  is  cooling, 

Gruel  prepared  with  the  decoction  of  Ku9a  ( b )  and  Amlaka(c) 
and  £yamaka \d),  is  drying.24 

Gruel  prepared  with  the  ten  roots  cures  cough,  hiccough, 
asthma,  and  phlegm, 

Gruel  prepared  with  clarified  butter  and  oil,  mixed  with  spirits, 
relieves  stomachic  (intestinal)  disorders.25 

Gruel  prepared  with  potherbs,  meat,  Tila(<?),  and  Masha (f)f 
is  laxative, 

Gruel  prepared  with  Jambu(^-),  Mango  seeds,  Dadhitva(A),  acids, 
and  Vilwa,  (i),  is  regarded  as  astringent.26 

Gruel  prepared  with  Yavakshara^f),  Chitraka(i),  Hinga(/), 
and  Amlavetasa(w),  is  regarded  as  purgative. 

Gruel  prepared  with  Abhaya(rc),  the  root  of  long  pepper, 
and  dried  ginger,  promotes  excretions  and  favors  their  dis¬ 
charge.*27 

Gruel  prepared  with  whey  is  a  remedy  in  disorders  arising  from 
the  excessive  use  of  buttery  food,  while  in  disorders  arising  from 


a.  Sessamum  Indicum. 

b.  Poa  cynosuroides. 

c.  Phyllanthus  emblica ;  syn.  Emblica  officinalis. 

d.  The  common  paddy  known  as  Cyamaka  ;  Panicum  frumentacium , 

e.  Vide  note  a  above. 

f.  Phaselous  Roxburghii ;  syn.  Phaselous  radiatus. 

g.  Eugenia  Jambolana ;  syn.  Syzygium  Jambolanum, 

h.  Feronia  elephantum, 

i.  VEgle  marmelos. 

j.  “  Yavakshdra  is  prepared  by  reducing  to  ashes  the  green  spikes  of  the  barley 
( Hordeum  hexastichum ),  dissolving  the  ashes  in  water,  straining  the  solution  through  thick 
cloth,  and  evaporating  it  over  the  fire.  The  resulting  salt  is  a  clear  amorphous  powder 
with  a  saline  and  partly  acid  taste.  Chemically  it  is  carbonate  of  potash  with  some 
impurities.” — Materia  Medica  of  the  Hindus,  by  U.  C.  Dutt. 

k.  Phtmbago  Zeylanica. 

l.  Assafcetida. 

m.  Called  in  Bengali  Chuka  palang.  Ruimx  vesicarius. 

n.  Terminalia  chebula. 

*  “  Anulomana  are  medicines  which  digest  the  humours  and  set  them  free,  that  is, 
promote  excretions  and  fayor  their  discharge.” — Materia  Medica  of  the  Hindus,  by 
U.  C.  Dutt. 


3 


18 


CH A  RAKA-SA  M HI  TA. 


the  excessive  use  of  oily  food,  that  prepared  with  whey  and  paste 
of  Sessamum  Indicum  is  regarded  as  beneficial.28 

-  Gruel  prepared  with  decoction  of  beef,  mixed  with  some  acid, 
cures  intermittent  fevers  of  an  inveterate  kind. 

Gruel  of  barley  fried  in  ghee  and  oil  and  mixed  with  long 
pepper  and  Amlaka(tz)  is  a  remedy  in  diseases  of  the  throat.*29 
Gruel  prepared  with  decoction  of  meat  of  the  cock  relieves 
disorders  of  the  urethra.  That  prepared  of  Mashavidala(^)  with 
ghee  and  milk  increases  the  semen.30 

Gruel  prepared  with  Upodika(c)  and  curds,  dispels  the  stimu¬ 
lation  produced  by  poison  and  fever  and  alcohol. (t) 

Gruel  prepared  of  the  seeds  of  Apamarga(^)  with  milk  and 
decoction  of  Godha  (the  iguana)  destroy  (abnormal)  hunger.31 

(Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary.) 

Thus  have  been  mentioned  the  eight  and  twenty  varieties  of 
Gruel.  The  drugs,  in  brief,  have  also  been  spoken  of,  that  are  used 
in  the  five  acts,  {viz.,  purgation,  vomiting,  &c.).32 

Those  drugs  that  were  spoken  of  before  for  imparting  a 
knowledge  of  roots  and  fruits  have  been  mentioned  again  for  im¬ 
parting  a  knowledge  of  how  they  are  used  in  connection  with  the 
five  acts.33 

Only  a  physician  who  is  possessed  of  memory,  who  is  conversant 
with  causes  and  applications  (of  drugs),  who  has  his  passions  under 
control,  and  who  has  quickness  of  decision,  should,  by  the  appli¬ 
cation  of  drugs,  treat  diseases.  (%)  3  4 

Thus  ends  the  Second  Lesson  called  Apamarga-Tundaliya  in 
Agnivefa’s  treatise  revised  by  Charaka. 


a.  Phyllanthus  Emblica  ;  syn.  Emblica  officinalis. 

*  The  word  Yamaha  is  a  technical  term  meaning  ghee  and  oil.  ( Vide  verse  25 
above.)  Yavandm  Yamake,  therefore,  does  not  mean  “two  sorts  of  barley”  as 
rendered  by  Dr.  Sircar,  but  “gruel  of  Yava  (fried  or  boiled)  in  ghee  and  oil.” — T. 

b.  Phaselous  Roxburghii  ;  syn.  Phaselous  radiatus.  Vidala  is  a  general  name 
for  pulses,  or  it  may  mean  broken  grains. — T. 

c.  Called  also  Putika  ;  Basella  rubra. 

t  Mada  is  explained  by  the  commentator  thus. 

d.  Achyranthes  aspera. 

+  Pratipattiman  is  explained  by  the  commentator  as  one  who  can  readily  decide 
what  is  to  be  done  in  view  of  distressful  contingencies  that  may  arise.— T. 


LESSON  III. 


And  now  we  shall  expound  the  Lesson  called  Aragbadhiya. 
Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri. 

Aragvadha(ffl).  Edagaja(^),  Karanja(c),  Vasa(^),  Guduchi(^), 
Madana(y),  the  two  varieties  of  Haridra(^); 

£rahva(^),  Surahva(  z),  Khadira(/),  Dhava(^),  Nimba(7), 
Vidanga(w),  and  the  bark  of  Karavira(w); 

Knots  of  Bhurjja(o),  Garlic,  £irisha(/),  Saloma5a(y),  Guggula(r), 
Krishnagandha(j),  Phanijjhaka  (f),  Vatsaka  (u).,  Saptaparna  (v), 
Pilu(OT),  Kushtha(^r),  young  shoots  of  Sumanas(jj/);2 

a.  Cassia  fistula. 

b.  Called  also  Chakramardda  ;  in  Bengali,  Chakunde  or  Edanchi.  Cassia  tora. 
Some  authorities  identify  it  with  Dadrumarddana  or  Dadrughna,  or  Cassia  alata. 

c.  Vide  note  k  in  p.  8. 

d.  Called  also  Vasaka ;  in  Bengali,  Vakasa.  Justicia  Adhatoda ;  syn.  Adhatoda 
vasica. 

e.  Tinospora  cor  difolia.  Vide  note  c.  in  p.  15. 

f.  Vide  note  d  in  p.  15, 

g.  Vide  note  p  in  p.  13. 

h.  Called  also,  according  to  the  commentator,  Navanitakhoti,  i.e.,  the  Gum  olibanum 
tree. 

i.  Believed  to  be  Devadaru.  Cedrus  Deodara ;  syn.  Pinus  Deodara. 

j.  Acacia  Catechu  ;  syn.  Mimosa  Catechu. 

k.  Anogeissus  latifolia  ;  syn.  Conocarpus  latifolia. 

l.  Vide  note  u  in  p.  13. 

7)i.  Vide  note  b  in  p.  13. 

«.  The  sweet-scented  Oleander  or  Nerium  odorum. 

0.  Granthischa  Bhaurjja  means  the  Granthi  of  Bhurjja  leaves  or  the  leaves  of  Betula 
Bhojpatra.  Dr,  Sircar  is  in  error  in  taking  Granthi  to  be  a  separate  plant.  Vide 
Chakradatta’s  commentary. 

p.  Albizsia  Lebbek ;  syn.  Mimosa  Sirissa. 

q.  Following  Prof.  Wilson,  Dr.  Sircar  supposes  it  to  be  the  plant  called  Malidmada. 
The  commentator  thinks  it  to  be  sulphate  of  iron,  or  leaves  of  the  Laurus  Cassia.— T . 

r.  Balsamodendron  Mukul  or  Balsamodendron  Pubescens. 

s.  Vide  note  5  in  p.  II. 

t.  Vide  note  n  in  p.  13. 

u.  Called  also  Kutaja  or  Kurchi.  Vide  note  r.  in  p.  8. 

v.  Called  also  Saptacchada  ;  Cchatim  in  Bengali.  Alstonia  soholaris ;  syn.  Echites 
scholaris. 

w.  Vide  note  g  in  p.  1 3. 

x.  Saussurea  auriculata ;  syn.  Aplotaxis  auriculala. 

y.  Called  also  Jati  or  Chameli,  Jasminum  grandi/lorum. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Vacha(«),  Harenu(<5),  Trivit(c),  Nikumbha(^),  Bhallataka(e), 
Gairika(_/),  Anjana(^)'; 

Manahfila^),  Ala(«),  Grihadhuma  (j),  Ela(£),  Ka<ji9a(/),  Lo- 
dhra(w),  Arjuna(^),  Musta(o),  and  Sarjjas(/);3 

These  six  lists  of  drugs,  mentioned  in  each  of  the  above  half 
slokas,  soaked  in  cow’s  bile  till  they  become  yellow,  and  pounded 
again  and  then  mixed  with  oil  of  mustard  seeds,  should  be  used  by 
a  physician  either  as  a  paste  or  simply  as  powder,  being  highly 
efficacious  (in  the  following  diseases),4 

These  would  speedily  cure  even  difficult  cases  of  leprosy,  recent 
leucoderma,  baldness  of  the  head,  the  eruptions  called  Kitimax 
herpes,  fistula  in  ano,  piles,  scrofulous  enlargements  of  the  glands 
of  the  neck,  and  the  cutaneous  eruptions  called  Pama.s 

Kushtha(y),  the  two  kinds  of  Haridra(r),  Surasa(j),  Patola(^), 
Nimba  (u),  Afwagandha  (v),  Su radar u  ( w ),  Sigru  (x),  Tumvura, 


a.  Vide  note  k  in  p.  14. 

b.  Vide  note  i  in  p.  13, 

c.  Vide  note  d  in  p.  7. 

d.  Called  also  Danti.  Vide  note  h  in  p.  14. 

e.  Called  Bhela  in  Bengali.  Semecarpus  Anacardium. 
f  Red  chalk. 

g.  Galena  or  sulphide  of  lead.  It  is  not  Rasdnjana,  which  is  prepared  from  extract 
of  the  root  called  Berberis  Asiatica. — T. 

h.  Realgar. 

i.  Orpiment  (of  the  yellow  variety). 

j.  The  house-smoke,  i, e. ,  soot. 

k.  Cardamoms. 

l.  Sulphate  of  iron. 

in.  Symplocos  racemosa. 

11.  Terminalia  Arjun  ;  syn.  Pentaptera  A rjun. 

0.  Vide  note  h  in  p.  8. 

p.  The  resin  of  the  Shorea  robusta. 

q.  Saussurea  auriculata  ;  syn.  Aplotaxis  auriculata, 

r.  Vide  note/  in  p.  13. 

s.  Vide  note  k  in  p.  13. 

t.  Trichosanthes  dioica. 

u.  Vide  note  u  in  p.  13. 

v.  Withania  somnifera  ;  syn.  Physalis  flexuosa. 
zo.  Cedrus  deodara  ;  syn.  Pintle  deodara, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


21 


dhanya  (a),  Vanya  (£),  and  Chanda  ( c ),  these  taken  in  equal  parts 
should  be  reduced  to  powder.8 

They  should  then  be  pounded  with  whey  and  then  rubbed  over 
the  body  previously  anointed  with  oil.  This  will  relieve  one’s 
itching,  pimples,  urticaria,  the  several  varities  of  leprosy,  and  in¬ 
flammatory  swellings.*7 

Kushtha  ( d ),  Amirtasanga  (e),  Katankateri  (f),  Kagigaka  (g), 
Kampillaka  (A),  Mustha  (z),  Lodhra  (/),  Saugandhika  (k),  Sarj- 
jarasa  (/),  Vidanga  (m),  Manah9ila(«),  Ala(o),  the  bark  of  Karavira 
( ' p ),8  these  being  reduced  to  powder  should  be  given  for  sprink¬ 
ling  over,  the  body  being  previously  oiled.  Ringworm,  with  itching, 
keloid,  eczema,  and  psoriasis,  are  relieved  by  such  treatment.*9 

Manahsila  (y),  Ala  (r),  round  pepper,  mustard  oil,  and  milk  of 
Arka  (s),  (pounded  and  applied)  as  an  ointment,  cures  leprosy. 


a.  Vide  note  rfinp.  13, 

b.  Called  also  Kaivarta  mustaka  or  Kasuraka.  Scirpus  Kysoor. 

c.  Called  also  Chorepushpi.  Andropogon  acicularis . 

*  Kotha  is  a  variety  of  cutaneous  disease  in  which  large  round  spots  of  a  red  color 
are  visible,  like  to  what  happens  when  one  is  stung  by  the  nettle,  The  symptoms  are 
those  of  urticaria  evanida, — T. 

d.  Aplotaxis  auriculata. 

e.  Called  in  Bengali  Tunte.  Sulphate  of  copper, 

/.  Btrberis  asiatica. 

g.  Sulphate  of  iron. 

h .  Vide  note  p  in  p.  8. 

i.  Vide  note  h  in  p.  8. 

j.  Symplocos  racemosa. 

k.  Called  also  Gandhatrina  or  Bhustrina.  Andropogon  Schcenanthus,  The  com¬ 
mentator  supposes  that  it  may  also  mean  Gandhaka  or  sulphur, 

/.  Resin  of  the  Shorea  robusta. 

m.  Vide  note  b  in  p.  8, 

n.  Realgar, 

0.  Orpiment  (of  the  yellow  variety). 

p.  Nerium  odorum. 

t  In  identifying  these  cutaneous  diseases  I  have  followed  Udaya  Chand  Dutt,  ( Vide 
ffidana,  p.  1 79). 

q.  Vide  note  n  above. 

r.  Vide  note  0  above. 

f.  Vide  note  b  in  p.  10, 


22 


charaka-samhitA. 


Sulphate  of  copper,  Vidanga  (a),  round  pepper,  Kushtha(<5), 
Lodhra  (c),  and  Manahfila^),  applied  in  the  same  way,  will  pro¬ 
duce  the  same  result.  10 

Rasanjana  ( e ),  with  seeds  of  Prapunnada(/),  mixed  with  the 
juice  of  Kapithwa  (g),  applied  as  a  plaster  (cures  leprosy). 

The  seeds  of  Karanja  ( h ),  Edagaja  (2),  with  Kushtha  (/), 
pounded  with  cow’s  urine,  forms  an  excellent  ointment  for  the  same 
disease.  11 

The  two  kinds  of  Haridra  ( k ),  the  seeds  of  Karanja  (/),  the 
shoots  of  Sumanas  ( m ),  the  bark,  with  the  pith,  of  Hayamaraka  (ri), 
mixed  with  the  alkaline  ashes  of  Sessamum  Indicum ,  may  also  be 
applied  in  leprosy.12 

Manafila(0),  the  bark  of  Kutaja  (p),  Kushtha  ( q ),  with  Loma9a 
(r),  and  Edahgaja,  (s),  Karanja,  (j),  the  knots  of  Bhurjja  leaves, 


a.  Vide  note  b  in  p.  8. 

b.  Vide  note  d  in  p.  21. 

c.  Vide  note  j  in  p.  21. 

d.  Vide  note  n  in  p.  21. 

e.  Rasanja  is  the  extract  of  the  Berberis  Asiatica,  and  not  sulphide  of  lead  or 
crude  antimony  as  rendered  by  Dr.  Sircar.  Baboo  U.  C.  Dutt  correctly  observes, 
“Galena  or  the  sulphide  of  lead  ore  is  sometimes  called  rasanjana  in  Sanskrit,  and 
some  physicians  in  Bengal  use  the  lead  ore  for  rasanjana,  whenever  this  term  occurs 
in  a  prescription.  In  the  Upper  Provinces,  however,  rasanjana  is  invariably  translated 
rasot  in  the  vernacular.  This,  no  doubt,  is  the  correct  practice.  The  mistake  on  the 
part  of  the  Bengal  physicians  probably  occurred  from  their  not  being  acquainted  with 
rasot,  which  is  the  produce  of  plants  indigenous  to  the  Himalayan  range.”  Mat.  Med. 
of  the  Hindus,  p.  107. 

f.  Called  aso  Chakramardda  ;  Chakunde  in  Bengali.  Cassia  tora  ;  syn.  Sena  tora. 

g.  Vide  note  i  in  p.  15. 

h.  Vide  note  k  in  p.  8. 

i.  The  same  plant  as  Prapunnada  or  Chakramarddana  or  Chakunde.  Vide  note  f 

j.  Vide  note  d  in  p.  21. 

k.  Vide  note  p  in  p.  13. 

l.  Vide  note  h  above. 

m.  Vide  note  y  in  p.  19. 

n.  Nerium  odorum  ;  the  sweet-scented  ©leander. 

0.  Realgar. 

p.  Vide  note  r  in  p.  8. 

q.  Vide  note  b  above. 

r.  Vide  note  q  in  p.  19, 

s.  Vide  note  i  above. 

t.  Vide  note  h  above. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


23 


the  root  of  Karavira(a),  each  taken  of  the  weight  of  a  karsha  (6), 
Well  powered  and  boiled  in  an  Adakaic )  of  the  fermented  gruel  of 
unhusked  barley  and  an  Adaka  of  the  hot  juice  of  Palaca(^),  to 
such  a  consistency  that  it  may  stick  to  the  stirring  spoon,  forms  a 
plaster  highly  efficacious  for  the  cure  of  leprosy.13"14 

The  leaves  of  Chaturangula  (e),  made  into  a  paste  with  whey, 
or  those  of  KakamSchya  (/),  similarly  made  into  a  paste,  or  those 
of  AfWahana^)  made  in  the  same  manner  into  a  paste,  will 
cure  leprosy  if  applied  on  the  skin  previously  anointed  with 
(mustard)  oil.1  s 

Kola  (h),  Kulattha  (i),  Suradaru  (/),  Rasna  (k),  Masha  (/), 
Abhaya  ( m ),  oily  seeds,  Kustha  («),  Vacha  (o),  £atahva  (/>),  pow¬ 
dered  barley,  mixed  together  and  made  into  a  paste  with  Kanji 
and  then  warmed,  forms  a  good  plaster  for  persons  afflicted  with 
disorders  of  the  wind.16 

The  flesh  of  animals  living  in  marshy  regions  (such  as  the 
rhinoceros,  the  buffalo,  &c.,)  and  of  fish,  pounded  and  made  into 
a  paste  after  being  mixed  with  vesavara  (q),  and  warmed  on  fire, 
forms  an  ointment  that  destroys  diseases  of  the  wind. 

The  paste  also  that  is  mads  of  •  the  ten  roots  boiled  with  the 

a.  Vide  note  p  in  p.  21. 

b.  A  karsha  is  equal  to  2  tolahs, 

.  c.  An  adaka  is  equal  to  8  seers.  (Vide  Ayurvedartha  Chandrika). 

d.  Vide  note  e  in  p.  15.  The  juice  is  to  be  taken  by  cutting  the  principal  root  and 
setting  fire  to  the  trunk. 

e.  Called  also  Aragbadha  or  Sondal.  Cassia  fistula. 

fi  Called  in  Bengal  Gudakamye.  Solatium  nigrum. 

g.  Called  also  Karavira.  Nerium  odorum  or  the  sweet-scented  oleander. 

h.  Vide  note  b  in  p.  15. 

Vide  note  a  in  p.  15. 

j.  Vide  note  w  in  p.  20. 

k.  Vanda  Roxburghii  ;  syn.  Cymbidium  tessaloides. 

l.  Vide  note  J  in  p.  17. 

tn.  Vide  note  n  in  p.  17. 

n.  Vide  note  d  in  p.  21. 

0.  Vide  note  k  in  p.  i4. 

p.  Called  also  Misreya  or  Calupha.  Peucedinun  Sowa. 

q.  Chakrapanidatta,  quoting  Rajaballabha,  explains  that  vedavdra  means  “flesh 
well  detached  from  bones,  then  pounded  and  boiled,  and  then  mixed  with  treacle  and 
clarified  butter,  and  black  pepper.”  Cugruta  gives  a  different  recipe  for  making  what 
is  called  Vesavara.—  T. 


24 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA. 


four  kinds  of  oil  or  of  the  aromatic  drugs  boiled  in  the  same,  would 
form  a  plaster  that  would  cure  the  diseases  of  the  wind.*17 

Powdered  barley  and  the  alkaline  ashes  of  barley  stalks,  mixed 
with  whey  and  heated  on  fire,  would  destroy  (when  applied  as  a 
plaster)  the  disorders  of  the  stomach. 

Kushtha  (a),  (^atahva  (3),  Vacha  (c),  and  powdered  barley, 
mixed  with  oil  and  some  kind  of  acid,  is  said  to  be  a  remedy  in 
disorders  of  the  wind.18 

The  two  varieties  of  £atahva  id),  liquorice,  Madhuka  (e),  Vala 
(_/"),  Piyala  (g),  Ka^raka  ( h ),  clarified  butter,  Vidari(z’),  and 
crystalized  lump  sugar,  would  form  a  good  plaster  in  disorders  of 
the  blood  with  wind.19 

Rasna,  (/),  Guduchi  ik),  Madhuka  (l),  the  two  varieries  of  Vala  (m), 
with  Jivaka  («),  and  Rishabhaka  (o),  and  milk,  and  clarified  butter; 
and  wax,  mixed  and  boiled  together,  and  used  as  a  plaster,  would 
cure  disorders  of  the  blood  arising  from  wind.20 

Powdered  wheat,  and  goat’s  milk,  and  clarified  butter,  mixed 
together,  may  be  applied  as  a  plaster  in  disorders  of  the  blood  from 
wind. 

Nata  ( p ),  Utpala  ( q ),  sandalwood,  with  Kushtha  (r),  and  clarified 
butter,  mixed  together,  may  be  used  as  a  plaster  in  headaches.21 

*  The  ten  roots  and  the  aromatic  drugs  are  indicated  in  the  lessop  on  fevers, 

a.  Vide  note  d  in  p.  21. 

b.  Vide  note  f  in  p.  23. 

c.  Vide  note  k  in  p.  14, 

d.  Vide  note  p  in  p.  23, 

e.  Bassia  latifolia, 

f  Sida  cardifolia. 

g.  Buchanania  latifolia. 

h.  Scirpus  kysoor. 

i.  Called  Bhumi  Kumra  in  Bengali.  Batatas  paniculata.  syn.  Convolvulus  panicttlatus, 

}.  Vide  note  k  in  p.  23. 

i.  Vide  note  fin  13. 

/.  Liquorice. 

m.  Vide  note  f  above. 

».  Difficult  to  Identify.  The  Ayurveda  Chandrlka,  quoting  authorities,  describes 
it  as  a  plant  growing  on  the  summits  of  the  Himalayas,  having  a  bulbous  root  like  garlics 
and  having  leaves  that  on  round  and  long.  It  has  many  other  names  such  Jivana, 
Pranada,  & c., 

0.  Difficult  to  identify ;  said  to  grow  on  the  summits  of  the  Himalayas,  having 
leaves  like  bull's  horns, 

p.  Called  also  Tagarapadika  ,  not  identifiable  now. 

q.  Called  Nilasundi  in  Bengali,  Nymphcea  cerula. 

r.  Vide  note  d  in  p.  21. 


NOTICE. 


The  English  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  will  be  issued 
in  successive  fascicules  of  4  forms,  Royal  octavo,  each  ;  12 
fascicules  will  be  issued  every  year.  Under  favorable  circum¬ 
stances,  the  number  of  fascicules  or  the  number  of  forms  in 
each  fascicule  may  be  increased.  For  subscribers  paying  in 
advance,  the  charge  is  Rs.  32  for  the  whole  work. 

(This  amount  may  be  paid  in  four  instalments  if  subs¬ 
cribers  like). 


Manager  of  Charak  Samhita  &  Sustruta  Samhita, 

200,  Cornwallis’  Street, 


CALCUTTA. 


The  following  publications  relating  to  Hindu  Medical  Science 
may  he  had  at  No.  200,  Cornwalis'  Street, 
Calcutta,  India. 


1.  Charaka-Samhita  in  original,  with  Chakrapanidatta’s  Com¬ 
mentary  ;  edited  by  Pandit  Abinash  Chandra  Kaviratna 
(published  in  Devanagara  character  in  successive  fascicules). 
Price  Rs.  20  in  advance. 

2.  Susruta  Samhita  (in  original)  with  Dallanacharya’s  com¬ 
mentary,  edited  by  Pundit  Abinash  Chandra  Kaviratna 
(published  in  Devanagara  character  in  successive  fasci¬ 
cules).  Price  Rs.  19  in  advance. 

3.  Bengali  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  with  the  original 
text  (complete)  in  the  Bengali  character.  Price  Rs.  12. 

4.  Hindi  translation  of  Ditto  (  published  in  successive'  fasci¬ 
cules).  Price  Rs.  16  in  advance. 

5.  Bengali  translation  of  Susruta  Samhita  (published  in  suc¬ 
cessive  fascicules).  Price  Rs,  10  in  advance. 

6.  Hindi  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive  fasci¬ 
cules).  Price  Rs.  15  in  advance. 

7.  Chikitsa-Sammilani,  (a  monthly  medical  journal  in  Ben-  • 
gali).  Subscription  in  advance  for  one  year  Rs.  3^6  ;  for 
the  poorer  classes,  Rs.  2-6.  (Back  volumes  for  seven  years 
may  be  had  for  Rs.  21,  or  Rs.  3  for  each  volume  en\bracing 
12  numbers.) 


47,3  57 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


Published  by 

ABINASH  CHANDRA  KAV1RATNA, 

Editor  of  Caharaka  Samhita  and  of  Susruta  Samhita 

(in  original)  WITH  COMMENTARIES;  BENGALI  AND 

Hindi  translator  of  Charaka  Samhita  and 
.  of  Susruta  Samhita  ;  editor  of  Chikitsa- 
SAMMILANI  (  Medical  Journal  in 
Bengali) ;  PRACTITIONER  OF 

the  Hindu  System 
of  Medicine, 

&c.,  &c.,  &c. 


Calcutta ; 

Printed  by  D.  C.  Dass  &  Co., 
“Corinthian  Press,”  33,  New  China  Bazar 

AND 

Published  at 
200,  Cornwallis  Street. 

1892. 


(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved. ) 


ERRATA. 

In  page  1,  3rd  line  of  the 
first  note,  for 

Vakhyasyamah  read  Vyakhyasyamah 

In  ditto,  5th  line  of  the 
1  first  note,  for 

Bhagamana  read  Bhagavan  (Norn,  sing,  of  Bhagaval) 
In  page  10,  note  a,  for 

meriifolia  read  neriifolia. 

In  page  i  t,  note  c,  for 

raceniosa  read  racemosa. 

In  page  22,  note  e,  first  line,  for 

Rasanja  read  Rasanjana. 

In  page  23,  note  q ,  first  line,  for 

Vedavara  read  Vesavars. 


47,3  57 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


25 


Prapaundarika  (a),  Suradaru(^),  Kushtha(c),  Yashti(a?),  Ela(<?). 
Kamala(y),  and  Utpala(^),  Loha(A),  Eraka(z'),  Padmakastha(/),  and 
Choraka(^),  may  be  applied,  with  clarified  butter,  as  a  plaster,  in 
headaches.22 


Rasna(/j,  the  two  kinds  of  Haridra(»z),  Nalada(«),  the  two 
varieties  of  ^atahva(o),  Devadaruf/),  Sitopala(y),  the  root  of 
Jivanti(r),  with  clarified  butter  and  oil  of  sesamum,  may  be  applied, 
while  warm,  as  a  plaster  in  pleurisy.*23 

Moss,  lotus,  Utpala(j),  Vetra(^),  Tunga(w),  Prapaundarika(w), 
Amrinala(w),  Lodhra(x),  Priangu(y),  Kaleyaka(a),  and  sandal 
wood,  with  clarified  butter,  form  a  plaster  that  relieves  burning  of 
the  skin.2* 


a.  Root-stock  of  Nyinphoea  Lotus.  Dr.  Sircar  was  misled  by  his  Kaviraj  into  the 

supposition  that  this  is  an  unidentifiable  plant. 

b.  Cedrus  deodar  a  ;  Syn.  Pinus  deodara. 

c.  Saussurca  auriculata  ;  syn.  Aplotaxis  auriculata. 

d.  Liquorice. 

e.  Cardamoms  (large). 

f.  Nilumbium  Speciosum. 

g.  Nymphaa  stellata. 

h.  Called  also  A  guru  ;  Aquilaria  agallocha. 

i.  Typha  angustifolia;  syn.  Typha  elephantina. 

j.  The  same  as  Prapaundarika ;  vide  note  a  above. 

k.  Called  also  Chorepushpi  (vide  Comment  ary  J.  Andropogan  acicularis. 

l.  Vanda  Roxburghii  ;  syn.  Cymbidium  tassaloides. 

m.  Circumlonga  and  Berberis  Asiatica. 

n.  Called  also  Jatamansi  or  Mangsi.  Valeriana  Jatamansi ;  syn.  Nardostachys 

Jatamansi. 

o.  The  two  varieties  are  called  by  the  names  of  Catapushpi  and  Madhurika.  The 

former  is  sometimes  called  Calupha  or  Misreya,  Pucedanium  Sovia  and  Fani- 
culum  Vulgare. 

p.  Vide  note  b  above. 

q.  Candied  sugar. 

r.  Calogyne  ovalis. 

s.  Vide  note  g  above. 

t.  Called  also  Vetasa.  Calamus  rotang ;  syn.  Calamus  Roxburghii. 

u.  Called  also  Punnaga.  Calophyllum  inophyllum.  Following  Roxburgh  and 

Brandis  both  of  whom  erroneously  identified  Kampilla  with  Punnaga,  Dr.  Sir- 
car  gives  Rottlera  tinctoria  as  the  name  of  Punnaga.  Kampilla’  or  Kampillaka 
is  an  altogether  different  tree  from  Punnaga.  Vide  Ayuvedartha  Chandrika. 

v.  Vide  note  a  above. 

w.  Called  also  Ucira  (vide  Commentary^;  in  Bengali,  Benamul  or  khas-khas.  An- 

dropogon  muricatum. 

x.  Symplocos  racemosa. 

y.  Aglaia  Roxburghiana. 

z.  The  Commentator  identifies  it  with  Kaliya-wood ;  a  kind  of  dark,  or  rather, 

brown  Sandal  wood.  The  word  is  sometimes  used  for  Berberis  asiatica. 


4 


2Q  CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITl. 

Sita(«),  Lata (6),  Vetasa(e),  Padmaka(^),  liquorice,  Aindri(<?), 
lotus,  Durva(/),  the  root  of  Yavasa(^),  of  Kufa(A),  of  Kafa(f), 
Jala  (  j ),  and  Eraka(/£),  form  a  plaster  that  relieves  burning  of 
the  skin,25 

£aileya(/),  Ela (m),  Aguru(«),  Kushtha(o),  Chanda (/ ),  Nata(y), 
Tvak(r),  Suradaru(j),  Rasna(^),  £irisha(  u  ),  Sindhuvara(  v),  form  a 
plaster  which,  if  applied  cold,  would  soon  destroy  the  effects  of 
poision  (f,  venomous  bites),25 

£irisha(a/),  Namajjaka(jf),  Hema(y),  and  Lodhra(^),  if  pounded 
into  dust  and  rubbed,  destroy  diseases  qf  the  skin  and  check 
excessive  sweat, 


a.  The  \yord  stands  sometimes  for  Vidari  ( Convolvulus  paniculatus ) ,  as  also  for 
sugar;  the  Bengal  physicians  understand  hy  it  the  white  Durva  or  Panicum 
dactylon.  The  ordinary  Durva  may  be  made  to  assume  a  white  color  by 
causing  it  to  grow  under  cover  of  a  large  basket. 

k.  Identified  by  the  Commentator  \yith  hfanjishtha.  Rubia  cordifolia  ;  syn.  Rubia 
manjishta. 

c.  Calamus  rotang. 

d.  Root-stock  of  Nymphtza  Lotus. 

e.  Called  also  Qorakshakarkati  or  Rakhale  Sasha.  Momordica  umballata. 

f.  Panicum  dactylon  ;  syn.  Cynodon  dactylon. 

g.  Called  also  Duralava  (vide  Commentary).  3edysarum.Alha.gi;  syn.  Alkqgi 

Maurorum. 

h.  Poa  Cynosuroides. 

i.  Saccharum  spontaneum. 

j.  Called  also  Vata  (vide  Commentary). 

k.  Typha  angustifolia  ;  syn.  Typha  elefihantinq. 

l.  Called  also  Cailaja.  A  species  of  Lichen. 

m.  Cardamoms  (large). 

».  Aquilaria  Agallocha. 

a.  Saussurea  auriculata  ;  syn.  Aplotaxis  auriculata. 

p.  Called  also  Ohorepushpi.  Andropogon  acicularif. 

q.  Called  also  Tagarapadika  or  Tagarapaduka. 

r.  Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum. 

s.  Cedrus  deodar  a. 

t.  Vanda  Roxburghii ;  syn.  Cymbidium  tessaloides. 

u.  Albizzia  Lebbek  ;  syn.  Mimosa  Sirissa. 

v.  Called  also  Nirgunthi  (vide  Commentary);  as  also  Nishinda.  The  Commentator 

explains  that  Cirisha  and  Sindhuvara  form  a  separate  applicatio  n. 

w.  Vide  note  u  above. 

x.  Called  also  Ucira  ( vide  Commentary)  Andropogon  muricatum. 

y.  Called  also  Nagakecara,  Mesua  ferrea. 

*.  Symplocos  racemosa. 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA . 


27 


Patra  [a),  Amvu  (b),  Lodhra  (c),  Abhaya  (d),  and  sandal  wood, 
form  a  plaster  that  cures  the  offensive  smell  of  the  skin.87 

Here  is  a  verse  containing  a  summary. 

In  this  lesson,  Aragbadhiya,  Atri’s  son,  revered  by  Siddhas  and 
great  Rishis,  said,  for  the  benefit  of  the  world,  unto  many  ascetics 
crowned  with  high  success,  of  two  and  thirty  kinds  of  powders 
and- plasters  that  destroy  diverse  kinds  of  diseases,88 


LESSON  IV. 

And  now  we  shall  explain  the  Lesson  having  for  its  topic  the 
six  centuries  of  Purgatives.  Thus  said  the  son  of  Atri. 

In.  this  Lesson  six  centuries  of  Purgatives  ( e )  verily  occur. 

They  depend  for  their  action  upon  six  kinds  of  vegetableproduce(/). 
Astringents  are  five  hundred  in  number.  They  are  of  five  species(g). 
There  are,  again,  five  processes  for  preparing  them.  The  number 
of  per-eminently  astringent  objects  is  fifty.  This  is  a  brief  enu¬ 
meration.1  The  six  hundred  Purgatives  of  which  we  have  spoken 
will  be  mentioned  briefly  in  this  lesson.  We  shall  describe  them 
fully  in  that  part  of  the  work  where  instructions  will  be  laid  down 
about  the  processes  of  preparing  them.8 

One  hundred  and  thirty-three  kinds  of  Purgatives  are  prepared 
from  fruits(/?) ;  39  kinds  from  Jimutaka  (i) ;  45  kinds  from  Ikshwaku 
(/)  ;  with  Dhamargava  ( k )  60  kinds  are  made  ;  Kutaja  (/)  enters 
into  18  kinds  ;  Kritavedhana  ( m )  makes  60  kinds  ;  with  black  Trivrit 


6.  Pavonia  odorata. 

,  c.  Symplocos  racemosa. 

d.  The  loots  of  Andropogon  muricatum. 

e.  The  word  Vhechana  in  the  original,  as  used  here,  signifies  purgatives  proper, 

emetics,  errhines,  diaphoretics,  and  enemata  of  both  varieties, 

/.  These  are  gum,  root,  bark,  leaves,  flower,  and  fruit. 

g.  Yoni  is  explained  by  the  Commentator  as  equivalent  to  Jciti. 

h.  The  kind  of  fruits  used  is  Madana  or  Randia  dumetorum. 

i.  The  Ayurvedartha  Chandrika  identifies  it  with  the  Devatada  or  A  ndropogon  serratus . 

Bengal  physicians  use  the  Ghoshaphal. 
i.  A  kind  of  bitter  gourd. 

k.  Called  also  Ghosalraiita.  The  red  variety  of  Achyranthes  aspera . 

l.  Vide  note  r  in  p.  8. 

m.  Vide  note  i  in  p.  8. 


28 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


( a )  no  kinds  are  prepared;  Chaturangula  ( b )  enters  into  12  kinds  ; 
Lodhra  (c)  enters  into  the  composition  of  16  kinds;  Mahavriksha 
(< d )  makes  20  kinds  ;  with  Saptala  ( e )  and  £ankhini  (f)  39  kinds 
are  prepared ;  and  with  Danti  ( g)  and  Dravanti  ( h )  48  kinds  are 
made.  These  are  the  six  hundred  kinds  of  Purgatives.  The  six 
kinds  of  vegetable  produce  upon  which  Purgatives  depend  for  their 
action  are  milk  (gum  or  exudation),  root,  bark,  leaves,  flower,  and 
fruit.  The  five  varieties  of  Astringents  are  sweet-astringents,  sour- 
astringents,  pungent-astringents,  bitter-astringents,  and  astringent- 
astringents,  as  indicated  in  the  compilation  (called  Science  of  Life).3 

Astringents  have  five  processes  of  preparation.  These  are — 

Swarasa  (2'),  Kalka  ( j),  Grit  a  (k),  Cita  (/),  and  Phanta  (m). 

The  strength  of  these  five  is  according  to  their  order  of  enu¬ 
meration  ( n ). 

Astringents  (thus  prepared)  are  to  be  used  according  to  the 
strength  or  weakness  of  the  disease.  All  are  not  to  be  applied  in 
all  diseases.4 

The  fifty  Astringents  par  excellence  that  have  been  spoken  of 
shall  now  be  indicated.  They  are  as  follows 

Six  of  them  are  Jivaniya  ( 0 ),  Vrinhaniya  (p),  Lekhaniya  (q),  Bhe- 
daniya  (r),  Sandhaniya  (j),and  Dipaniya  ( t ). 

a.  Convolvulus  Turpethum ;  syn.  Ipomoea  Turpethum. 

b.  Called  also  Aiagbadha.  Vide  note  q  in  p.  8. 

c.  Symplocos  racemosa. 

d.  Called  also  Snuhi  or  Manasa.  Euphorbia  neriifolia  ;  Syn,  Euphorbia  ligularia. 

e.  Vide  note  /  in  p.  7. 

f.  Vide  note  a  in  p.  8. 

g.  Baliospermum  Montanum  ;  Syn.  Croton  Polyandrum. 

h.  Vide  note  a  in  p.  7. 

i.  The  juice  that  is  extracted  from  an  article  by  pressing  it  in  a  machine  is  called 

Swarasa. 

j.  When  a  thing  is  pounded  into  a  soft  paste,  such  soft  paste  is  so-called. 

k.  Crita  is  obtained  by  boiling  an  article  in  hot  water  and  then  straining  it  through 

a  thick  cloth.  Hence,  decoction. 

l.  Cita  is  obtained  by  steeping  an  article  in  cold  water  and  exposing  it  to  the  night 

dew  and  then  straining  the  water  through  a  thick  cloth.  Hence,  a  cold  infusion. 

m.  Infusion  in  hot  water. 

n.  Swarasa  is  stronger  than  Kalka ;  Kalka  is  stronger  than  Crita  ;  and  so  on. 

0.  Prolonging  life. 

p.  Nutritive  and  promoting  corpulency. 

q.  Thinning  the  tissues  or  reducing  corpulency. 

r.  Promoting  excretions. 

s.  Promoting  the  union  of  fractured  parts. 

t.  Promoting  appetite  and  digestion, 


CM  A  PA  KA  -  SA  MH I  Tl. 


29 


Pour  of  them  are  Valya  ( a ),  Varnya  (b),  Kanthya  (c),  and 
Hridya  (d). 

Six  are  Triptighna  ( e ),  Argaghna  (f),  Kusthaghna  (g),  Kandu- 
ghna  (h),  Krimighna  (z)>  and  Vishaghna  (/). 

Four  are  Stanya-janana  (k),  Stanya-godhana  (/),  Cukra-janana 
(m),  and  Cukra-godhana  (n). 

Seven  are  Swedopaga  (o),  Snehopaga  (p),  Vamanopaga  (q), 
Virechanopaga  (r),  Asthapanopaga  (s),  Anuvashanopaga  (l),  and 
Cirovirechanopaga  (u). 

Three  are  Cchardinigrahana  (v),  Trishnanigrahana  (w),  and 
Hiccanigrahana  (x). 

Five  are  Purisha-sangrahaniya  (y ),  Purishaviraj aniya  (z), 
Mutrasangrahaniya  (a),  Mutraviraj aniya  (b),  and  Mutravire- 
chaniya  (c). 


a.  Increasing  strength.  (Tonic). 

i.  Improving  the  complexion. 

c.  Improving  the  voice  (curing  hoarseness). 

d.  Promoting  cheerfulness  or  relish. 

e.  Removing  phlegm  that  causes  a  sensation  of  satiety. 

f.  Curing  piles. 

g.  Curing  skin-diseases. 

h.  Curing  pruritus. 

i.  Anthelmintic  or  vermifuge. 

j.  Neutralising  poison. 

k.  Glactiphorous. 

l.  Improving  the  quality  of  milk. 

m.  Increasing  the  secretion  of  semen. 

n.  Purifying  the  semen. 

o.  Diaphoretic. 

p.  Emollient, 
y.  Emetic. 

r.  Purgative. 

s.  Enemata. 

t.  Oily  enamata. 

u.  Errhines. 

v.  Relieving  vomiting; 

w.  Relieving  thirst. 

x.  Relieving  hiccup. 

y.  Rendering  the  feces  consistent. 

*.  Altering  the  color  of  the  faces. 

a.  Reducing  secretion  of  the  urine. 

b.  Altering  the  color  of  the  urine. 

c.  Increasing  secretion  of  urine. 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITl. 


Five  ar eKusahard  (a),  Swasahara  (6),  Cothahdra  (c),  Jwarahara 
( d ),  and  Cramahara  ( e ). 

Five  are  Dahapraqamana  (f),  Citapraqamana  (g  ,  Vdarddapra- 
pamana  (h),  Angamardda-pragamana  (i),  and  Culapra$amana  (j). 

Five  are  Conitasthapana  {kj,  Vedanasthlapana  </),  Sajndsthd- 
pana  ( m ),  Prajastkapana  (n),  and  V'ayasthapana  ( o ), 

These  are  the  fifty  Astringents  par  excellence, 8 

They  are  as  follows : — • 

Jivaka  {p),  Rishabhaka  (q),  Meda,  (r),  Mahameda  (s),  Kakoli  (t), 
Kshirakakoli  (  u  Mudgaparni  (v),  Mashapama  (w), ,  Jivanti  (x), 
and  liquorice, — ,these  ten  belong  to  the  class  Jivaniya,7 


a.  Curing  cough. 

b.  Curing  difficult  breathing  or  asthma, 

c.  Curing  anasarca  or  dropsical  spellings. 

d.  Febrifuge. 

e.  Removing  fatigue. 

f.  Relieving  heat  of  the  body  or  burning  of  th?  ship, 

g.  Relieving  sensation  of  coldness. 

h.  Curing  urticaria. 

i.  Relieving  pain  in  the  limbs, 

j.  Curing  pain  in  the  bowels. 

k.  Styptics- 

l.  Anodynes. 

m.  Restoring  consciousness,, 

n.  Curing  sterility. 

o.  Preventing  the  effects  of  age. 

p.  This  plant  has  ipany  paipes  in  Sanskrit,  chief  amongst  which  are  Jivana,  Chira- 

jivana,  Chiranjiva,  &c.  Identified  by  Pitjdington  with  Celtis  orientals. 

q.  Called  also  Dhira,  Vishani,  and  Drakshya.  Probably  Vitis  vinifera. 

r.  Not  yet  identified.  It  is  described  as  “  endued  with  a  dry  bulbous  Toot,  which  is 

capable  of  being  divided  by  the  nails,  and  which,  when  so  divided,  emits  a 
secretion  like  animal  fat.”— Ayurvedartha  Chandrika. 

s.  A  plant  of  the  same  description  as  Meda  ( vide  above).  Both  are  said  to  grow 

on  the  breast  of  the  Himalayas,  particularly,  in  Morung  or  Nepal. 

/.  Not  yet  identified ;  grows  on  the  Himalyan  breast,  particularly  in  Morung  or 
Nepal. 

M.  Vide  above. 

v.  Phaselous  triloius. 

w.  Teramnus  labialisy  Syn.  Glyciric  depilis, 

X.  Calogyne  ovalis. 


CHA  RARA-SAMH/TA. 


31 

Kshirini  (a)  Rajaksharaka  (6),  Vala  (c),  Kakoli  (d),  Kshira- 
kakoli  (e),  Vaty&yani  (f),  Bhadraudani  (g ,  Bharadwaji  {h),  Paya- 
sya  (t),  and  Rishyagandha  (y),— these  ten  are  Vringhaniya.8 

Musta  (k),  Kushtha  (/),  Haridra  (m),  Daruharidra  (n),  Vacha  (o), 
Ativisha  ( p),  Katurohini  (y),  Chitraka  (r),  Chiravilla  fs),  and  Hai- 
mavati  ( t), — these  ten  are  Lekhaniya,® 

Suvaha  (u),  Arka  (v),  Uruvuka  (w),  Agnimukhi  (x),  Chitra  (y), 
Chitraka  (z),  Chiravilla  (a),  £ankhini  (b),  £akula  and  its  species  (c), 
and  Swarnakshirini  (d),^these  ten  areBhedaniya  [purgatives],10 


a.  Also  called  Kshiralata,  Haimavati,  Himaja,  &c.  Not  identified.  A  Himalayan 

plant, 

b.  Called  also  Dugdhika.  Oxystelma  esculentum  /  Syn.  Asclepias  rosea. 

c.  Cordia  latifolia  ;  syn.  sida  cordifolia. 

d.  Vide  note  t  in  p.  30.  s, 

e.  Vide  note  u  in  p.  30. 

J.  A  species  of  wliite  Vala. 
g.  A  species  of  brown  Vala, 
h  '.  Called  also  Vanakarpas.  Hibiscus  vitifoiius. 

i.  A  species  of  Vidari  or  Batatus  paniculata  ;  Syn.  Convolvulus  •pcmiculata, 

j.  Called  also  Rishijangali.  A  species  of  Vidari,  vide  note  i  above. 

k.  Cyperus  rotundus. 

l.  Saussurea  Auriculata  ;  Syn.  Aplotaxis  Auriculata. 

m.  Circuma  longa. 

n.  Berberis  Asiatica, 

0.  Acorus  Calamus, 

p.  Aconitum  Heterophyllum. 

q.  Calkd  also  Katuka.  Picrorrhiza  Kurroa. 

r.  Plumbago  Zeylanica. 

s.  Called  also  Karanja.  Pongamia  glabra ;  Syn.  Galedupa  Indica. 

t.  A  kind  of  white  Vacha,  vide  note  j  of  para.  8  above. 

u.  Called  also  Trivrit,  A  species  of  Convolvulus  turpethum. 

v.  Called  also  Akanda.  Asclepias  Gigantea  ;  Syn.  Calatropis  Giganlea  or  Procera. 

w.  Called  also  Eranda.  Ricinus  Communis. 

x.  Called  also  Langalia.  Gloriosa  superba. 

y.  Called  also  Manjishta.  Rubia  Cordifolia  ;  Syn.  Rubia  Manjishta. 
x.  Plumbago  Zeylanica. 

a.  Vide  note  s  above. 

{3.  Called  also  Swetavuhna,  or  Chorepushpi,  or  Bhantui  in  Bengali.  Atuiropogon 
Acicularis. 

c.  The  gaipe  as  Katurohini,  vide  note  q  above. 

d.  Cleome  felina  ;  Syn.  Polanisia  felina. 


32 


charara-samhitZ 


Liquorice,  Madhuparni  {a),  Prishniparni  (6),  Amvashtaki  (c), 
Samanga  ( d ),  Mocharasa  ( e ),  Dhataki  (f),  Lodhra  (g),  Priyangu  (h), 
and  Katphala  (i), — these  ten  are  Sandhaniya.11 

Pippali  (j),  Pippali-mula  (k),  Chavya  (/),  Chitraka  (m),  rin ga¬ 
ve  ra  ( n ),  Amlavetasa  (o),  Maricha  (p),  Ajamoda  (q),  the  seeds  of 
Bhallataki  ( r ),  and  the  exhudation  of  Hinga  (y), — these  ten  are 
Dipaniya .12 

Here  ends  the  first  six  aggregates  of  Astngents. 

Aindri  (t),  Rishabhi  («),  Atirasa  (v),  Rishyaprokta  (w),  Payasya 
(x),  Afwagandha  (y),  Sthira  {z),  Rohini  (a),  Vala  (b),  and  Ativala 
(c), — these  ten  are  Valya  (invigorating).13 


a.  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  Indigo  plant  or  the  Tinosfiora  cordifolia  (Guduchi  or 

Golancha  in  Bengali)  is  meant. 

b.  Called  also  Chakule.  Uraria  Lagopo  dioides  ;  Syn.  Doodia  lagopodioides. 

c.  Called  also  Akarnaviddha.  In  Bengali,  Aknadi.  Stephania  hernandifolia. 

d.  Ailed  also  Varaha-kranta  or  Lajjavati.  Minosa  pudica,  or  the  Sensitive  plant. 

e.  The  exhudation  of  the  Salmali  or  Simula,  i.e,,  Bombax  Malabaricum  or  Bombax 

peptaphylla. 

f  Called  in  Bengali  Dhainphul.  Woofordia  Jloribunda;  Syn.  Grislea  tomentosa. 

g.  Symplocos  racemosa. 

h.  Aglaia  Roxburghiana. 

i.  Myrica  sapida. 

j.  Piper  lougum  ;  Syn.  Chavica  Roxburghii. 

k.  The  root  of  the  above. 

l.  Called  also  Chavika  or  Chai.  Piper  chava  ;  Syn.  Chavica  officinarum. 
vi.  Plumbago  Zeylanica. 

n.  Called  also  Shunthi,  i.e.,  dry  ginger. 

o.  Called  also  Chukra  or  Chukapalang.  Rumex  visicarius.  The  country  sorrel. 

p.  Piper  nigravi  or  Black  pepper. 

q.  Ajamoda  is  not  Yawani  but  Randhani  (in  Bengali).  Pimpinella  involucrata ; 

Syn.  Apium  involucrata. 

r.  Called  also  Bhela  (in  Bengali).  Semecarpus  anacardium  or  the  marking  nut  tree. 

s.  Ferula  Assafcetida. 

t.  Called  also  Goraksha-karkati  or  Rakhale  sasa  vide  note  e  p.  26. 

«.  Called  also  Kapikachchha  or  Cukacimvi,  i.e.,  Alkuci  (in  Bengali/  Carpopogan 
pruriens;  Syn.  Mucuna  prurient. 

v.  Called  also  Satavari  or  Satamuli.  Asparagus  racemosus. 

w.  It  is  a  name  used  both  for  Catamuli  and  Cukacimvi  or  Alkuci, 

x.  Called  also  Vidari.  Convolvulus  paniculatus. 

y.  Withania  somnifera  ;  Syn.  Physalis  flexuosa. 

z.  Called  also  Calaparni ;  Desmodium  Gangeticum. 

a.  Picrorrhiza  Kurroa. 

b.  Sida  cordifolia. 

c.  Sida  rhombifoila. 


CHA  RAKA  -SA  MEITl. 


33 


Chandana  (a),  Tunga  (6),  Padmaka  (c),  U^ra  (d),  Madhuka  (e), 
Manjishtha  (f),  Sariva  (g),  Payasya  ( h ),  Sita  (z‘),  and  Lata  (/),— 
these  ten  are  Varnya  or  improve  the  complexion.14 

Sariva  ( k ),  Ikshumula  (/),  Madhuka  (m),  Pippali  («),  Draksha- 
(o),  Vidari  (/),  Kaitarya  (y),  Hansapadi  (r),  Vrihati  (s),  and  Kanta- 
kari  (t), — these  ten  are  Kanthya  or  improve  the  voice  and  cure 
hoarseness.15 

Amra  (u),  Amrataka  (v),  Nikucha  (w),  Karamardda  (x),  Vriksh- 
amla  (y),  Amlavetasa  {z\  Kuvala(a),  Vadara  (b),  Dadima  (c),  Matu- 
lunga  (d), — these  ten  are  Hridya  or  promote  cheerfulness.16 

(Here  ends  the  second  four  aggregates  of  Astringents.) 


a.  Red  sandal  wood.  Pterocarpus  santalinns . 

b.  Called  also  Punnaga  ;  Calophyllum  inophyllum. 

c.  The  root-stock  of  Nymphsea  Lotus. 

d.  The  root  of  Andropogon  muricatum. 

e.  Liquorice. 

f  Rttbia  Cordifolia. 

g.  Called  also  Anantamul  in  Bengali.  Hemidesmus  Indicus  ;  syn.  Asclepias  pseudo - 

sarsa.  It  is  sometimes  indentified  with  Syamalata  or  Ichnocarpus  frutescens. 

h.  Convolvulus  paniculatus. 

i.  Kankars. 

/.  The  commentator  is  silent  as  to  what  is  intended  by  the  word.  Kavirajes,  how¬ 
ever,  use  the  Panicum  dactylm  in  such  compounds. 

k.  Vide  note  g  above. 

l.  The  roots  of  the  Sugarcane.  Saccharum  Officinarum. 
vi.  Liqorice. 

n.  Piper  Longum  ;  syn.  Chavica  Roxburghii. 

o.  Called  in  the  Hindi  Kishmish.  Uvce  Passes. 

p.  Convolvulus  paniculatus  ;  syn.  Batatas  paniculata. 

q.  Called  Katphal  in  Bengali.  Myrica  Sapida. 

r.  Generally  identified  with  Thulkuree  (Bengali).  Hydrocotile  Asiatica. 

s.  Called  also  Byakur.  Solanum  Indicum. 

t.  Solanum  Xanthocarpum  ;  syn.  Solanum  Jacquinii. 

u.  Mangifera  Indica. 

V.  Spondius  mangifera, 

w.  Madar  in  Bengali.  Artocarpus  Lakucha. 

x.  Karamcha  in  Bengali.  Carissa  carandas  ;  syn.  Carissa  congesta. 

y.  The  commentator  calls  it  Vrihadamla.  Amrul  (Beng.);  some  identify  it  with 

tamarind. 

a.  Called  also  Chukra.  Rumex  Vesicarius, 

a.  The  larger  variety  of  Indian  plums. 

b.  The  smaller  variety  of  Indian  plums. 

c.  Punica  granatum, 

d.  Called  Chchholanga  Lebu  in  Bengali..  Citrus  medica. 


34 


GHA  RA  K A  -8 A  ME  I TA. 


Nagara  {a),  Chitraka  (b),  Chavya  (c\  Vidanga  (d),  Murva  (e), 
-Guduchi  ( f),  Vacha  (g),  Musta  {h),  Pippali  (i\  and  Patola  (j), 
— these  ten  are  Triptighna  [remove  phlegm  that  causes  a  sensa¬ 
tion  of  satiety].17 

Kutaja  {k),  Vilwa  (/),  Chitraka  (m),  Nagara  («),  Ativisha  (o), 
Abhaya  Dhanwayasaka  (q),  Daruharidra  (r),  Vacha  (s),  and 
Chavya  (t), — these  ten  are  Argaghna  [cure  piles].18 

Khadira  (u),  Abhaya  (v),  Amlaka  (w),  Haridra  (x),  Arushkara  iy), 
Saptaparna  (z),  Aragvadha  (a),  Karavira  (b),  Vidanga  (c),  and  the 
sprouts  of  Jati  (d), — these  ten  are  Kusthaghna  [cure  skin-diseases].10 


a.  This  is  not  Nagarmutha  but  Sunt,  i.e.,  dry  ginger. 

b.  Plumbago  Zeylanica. 

c.  Called  also  Chavika ;  Chai  in  Bengali  and  Hindi,  piper  Chaba. 

d.  Embelia  Ribes  ;  syn.  E.  glandulifera. 

e.  Sanseviera  Zeylanica  ;  syn.  Sanseviera  Roxburghiana. 

f.  Tinospora  cordifolium  ;  syn.  Menispermum  cordifoliutn. 

g.  Acorus  calamus, 

k.  Cyperus  rotundas. 

i.  Piper  longum  ;  syn.  Chavica  Roxburghii. 

j.  Trichosanth.es  dioiea. 

k.  Holarrhena  antidysenterica ;  syn.  Echites  antidysenterica. 

l.  ZEgle  Marmelos. 

m.  Vide  note  b  above. 

«.  Vide  note  a  above. 

o.  Aconitum  heterophyllum, 

p.  Terminalia  chebula. 

q.  Called  also  Duralabha.  Alhagi  Maurorum  ;  syn.  Hedysarum  Alhagi. 

r.  Berberis  Asiatica. 

s.  Vide  note  g  above. 

t.  Vide  note  c  above. 

u.  Acacia  Catechu;  syn,  Mimosa  Catechu. 

v.  Vide  note  p  above. 

w.  Phyllanthus  Emblica ;  syn.  Emblica  officinalis. 

x.  Circuma  longa. 

y.  Called  also  Bhallataka.  Semecarpus  Anacardium.  The  marking-nut  tree.  Called 

Bhela  in  Bengali. 

z.  Alslonia  scholaris  ;  syn.  Echites  scholaris. 

a.  Called  also  Sondali  (Beng. )  Cassia  fistula. 

b.  Nerittm  odorurn. 

c.  Embelia  Ribes  ;  syn.  Embelia  glandulifera. 

d.  Jsaminum  grandiflorum. 


CHA  RAKA  -SAMHITJ, 


35 


Chandana  (a),  Nalada  (b),  Kritamala  (e),  Naktamala  (d),  Nimva 
( e ),  Kutaja  (/),  Sarsapa  (g),  Liquorice,  Daruharidra  (h),  and  Muska 
( i ), — these  ten  are  Kandughna  [cure  pruritus].20 

Akhira  (/),  Maricha  (k),  Gandira  (/),  Kevuka  (m),  Nirgunthi  ( n ), 
Vidanga  (o),  Kinihi  (/>),  Aewadangshtra  ( q ),  Vrishaparni  (r),  and 
Akhuparni  (j), — these  ten  are  Krimighna  [anthelmintic].21 

Haridra(^),  Manjishtha(w),  Suvaha(w),  small  cardamoms,  Palin- 
di  ( w ),  Chandana  (x),  Kataka'  (y),  ([irisha  (z),  Sindhuvara  (a),  and 
^leshmataka  (b), — these  ten  are  Vishaghna  (destroy  poisons).22 

(Here  ends  the  third  six  aggregates  of  Astringents.) 


a.  The  red  variety  is  used.  Pterocarpus  santalimis. 

b.  Called  also  Jatamanshi  or  Hanshi.  Nardostachys  Jatamansi;  syn.  Valeriana 

c.  Called  also  Suvarnahali.  The  same  as  Aragbadha  or  Sondali.  Cassia  Fistula. 

d.  Called  also  Karanja.  Pongamia  glabra  ;  syn.  Galedupa  Indica. 

e.  Afelia  Azadirachta  ;  syn.  Azadirachta  Indica. 

f.  Holarrhena  antidysenterica. 

g.  Mustard  seeds. 

h.  Berberis  Asiatica. 

i.  Cyperus  rotundas. 

j.  Called  also  ^obhanjana.  Moringa  pterigosperma. 

k.  Piper  nigrum.  Black  pepper. 

l.  Called  also  Camatha-Caka.  Difficult  to  identify. 

m.  Called  also  Kemuka.  Keu  in  Bengali.  Castus  speciosus. 

n.  Called  also  Sindhuvara.  Vitex  Nigundo. 

o.  Embelia  Ribes. 

p.  Called  also  Katabhi  or  Apamarga.  Apang  in  Bengali.  Achyranthes  aspera. 

q.  Called  also  Gokhuri.  Tribulus  terrestris ;  syn.  Tribulus  lanuginosus. 

r.  Called  Bamanhati  in  Bengali.  Clerodetulron  siphonanthus . 

s.  Called  also  Mushikaparni,  Indurkani  (Bengali).  Salvinia  cucullata. 

t.  Circuma,  longa. 

u.  Rubio,  cordifolia  ;  syn.  Rubia  Manjista. 

v.  The  commentator  says  that  it  is  either  Rasna  or  Apharmali.  If  the  former,  it  is 

Vanda  Roxburghii ;  syn.  Cymbidium  tessaloides  ;  if  the  latter,  it  is  Vallaris 
die koto mos  ;  syn.  Echites  dichotomos. 

w.  Called  also  Cyamalata.  Ichnocarpus  frutescens  ;  syn.  Echites  frulescens. 

x.  The  red  variety,  viz.,  Pterocarpus  santalimis, 

y.  Strychnos  potatorum. 

i.  A  Ibizzia  Lebbek  ;  syn.  Mimosa  Sirisa. 

a.  Vitex  Nigundo. 

b.  Called  also  Vahuvara.  Cordia  Myxa. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Virana  (a),  £ali  (6),  Shastika  (c),  Ikshuvalika  (d),  the  roots  of 
Darbha  ( e ),  of  Kuga  ( f),  and  of  Kaga  (g),  Gundra  ( h ),  and  the  roots 
of  Itkata  (i),  and  of  Kattrina  (/), — these  ten  are  Stanyajanana  or 
glactiphorous.23 

Patha  (k),  Mahaushadha  (/),  Suradaru  (m),  Must  a  («),  Murva  {o) 
Guduchi  ( p ),  Vatsakaphala  (  q),  Kiratatikta  (r),  Katurohini  (s),  and 
Sariva  (i), — these  are  Stanyaqodhana  [improve  the  quality  of  the 
milk].24 

Jivaka  ( u ),  Rishavaka  (v),  Kakoli  (w),-  Kshirakakoli  (x).  Mudga- 
parni  (7),  Mashaparni  (*),  Meda  (a),  Vriddharuha  (b),  Jatila  (c),  and 
Kulinga  (d), — these  ten  are  £ ukrajanana  [increase  the  semen].2® 


a.  Andropogon  muricatum. 

h.  The  autumnal  paddy. 

<v  A  kind  of  paddy  supposed  to  ripen  in  60  days  from  the  day  of  planting. 

d.  Called  also  Swagarika.  A  variety  of  Sacchantm. 

e.  Saccharwn.  cylindricttm. 

f.  Poa  Cynosuroides. 

g.  Saccharum  spontaneum.  \ 

h.  Called  also  Guduchi.  Gulancha  in  Bengali.  Tinospora  cordifolia. 

i.  Called  Okra  in  Bengali. 

j.  A  kind  of  frgrant  grass.  Supposed  by  Wilson  to  be  Hemionites  cordifolia 

£,  Called  alsos  Aknadi  or  Nimuka.  Stephania  hernandifolia ;  syn.  Cissampelds 
•  hernandifolia.  f- ..  . 

l.  Dry  ginger. 

m.  Cedrus  deodara. 

n.  Cyperus  rotundas. 

0.  Sanseviera  Zeylanica  ;  syn.  Sanseviera  Roxburghiana. 

p.  Tinospora  cordifolia. 

q.  Called  also  Indrayava.  The  seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica. 

r.  Called  also  Chireta.  Agathotes  cherayta. 

s.  Called  also  Katuka.  Picorrhiza  kurroa. 

t.  Called  also  Anantamul.  Hemidesmus  Indicus  ;  syn.  Aclepias  pseudosarsa. 

u.  Vide  note  p  in  p.  30. 

v.  Vide  note  q  in  p.  30, 

U>,  Vide  note  t  in  p.  30. 

Vide  note  u  in  p.  30. 

y.  Vide  note  v  in  p.  30. 

z.  Vide  note  w  in  p.  30. 

a.  Vide  note  r  in  p.  30. 

b.  Called  also  Catavari  or  Catamuli.  Asparagus  raeemosus. 

c.  Called  also  Jatamanshi.  Nardostachys  fatamansi  ;  syn.  Valeriana  Jatamansi. 

The  commentator  identifies  it  with  Uchchata  or  Bhuml-amlaki,  i.e.,  Pkyllan . 
thus  Niruri. 

d.  The  commentator  calls  it  a  species  of  the  above.  Bengal  physicians  call  it  Kan- 

kra-fringi  or  Rhus  succedania  ;  syn.  Rhus  acuminata , 


CH A  RAKA -SA  M HIT  A. 


37 


Kushtha  ( a ),  Elavaluka  (b),  Katphala  (c),  the  froth  of  the  sea, 
the  exudation  of  Kadamva  (d),  Ikshu  ( e ),  Kandekshu  (f), 
Ikshuraka  (g),  Vasuka  (h),  and  l^ira  (i), — these  ten  ar e.  ().ukra- 
<podhana  [improve  the  semen]  ,a  6 

( Here  ends  the  fourth  four  aggregates  of  Astringents.) 

Mridvika  (/),  Liquorice,  Madhuparni  ( k ),  Meda  (/),  Vidari  ( m ), 
Kakoli(ra),  Kshirakakoli  (o),  Jivaka  (/>),  Jivanti(^),  and  £alaparni  ( r ), 
— these  ten  an  Snehopoga  [emollients].27 

^obhanjana  (s),  Ekaranda  (t),  Arka  (u),  Vrischira  ( v ), 
Punarnava  (w),  Yava  ( x ),  Sesame,  Kulathwa  (_y),  Masha  (a),  and 
Vadara  (a), — these  ten  are  Swedopoga  [diaphoretics].28 


a.  Saussurea  auriculala  ;  syn.  Apolotaxis  aunculata. 

b.  A  kind  of  red  powder  made  of  some  seeds  obtainable  of  every  native  druggist. 

Not  identified. 

c.  Myrica  sapida. 

d.  Anthocephaltis  Cadamba ;  syn.  Nauclea  Cadamba. 

e.  The  ordinary  sugar-cane. 

/.  Called  also  Kokilaksha  (in  Bengali  Kulekhara).  Hyqrophila  spinosa ;  syn, 
Ruellia  longifolia. 

g.  A  plant  very  similar  to  the  above. 

h.  Called  also  Yak.  Sesbania  grandiflora  ;  syn.  Aeschynomem  grandiflora. 

i.  The  roots  of  Andropogon  muricatum. 

/.  UvsePassse.  The  ordinary  Kishmish  or  dried  grapes. 

k.  Tinospora  cordifolia. 

l.  Vide  note  r  in  p.  30. 
vi.  Convolvulus  paniculata. 
n.  Vide  note  t  in  p.  30. 

0.  Vide  note  u  in  p.  3o. 

p.  Vide  note  p  in  p.  30. 

q.  Ccelogyne  ovalis. 

r.  Desmodium  Gangelicum  ;  syn.  Hedysarum  Gangeticum. 

s.  Moringa  pterigosperma. 

t.  Ricimus  communis. 

u.  Calatropis  gigantea  or  procera  ;  syn.  Asclepias  gigantea. 

v.  The  white  variety  of  Boerhavia  diffusa;  syn.  B.  procumbens  and  erccta. 

w.  The  red  variety  of  the  above. 

x.  Hordium  hexaslichum. 

y.  Dolichos  biflorus. 

z.  Phaseolus  Roxburghii ;  syn.  Phaselous  radiatus. 
a.  Zhyphus  Jujuba. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MH/Tj. 


Mel,  Liquorice,  Kovidara  (a),  Karvudara  (5),  Nipa(c),  Vidulafr/,) 
Vimbi  (e),  £anapushpi  {/),  Sadapusphi  (g),  and  Pratyakpushpi  (A), 
—these  ten  are  Vamanopaga  [emetics].29 

Drakhsa  (z'),  Kacmarya  (/),  Parushaka  (k),  Abhaya  (/), 
Amlaka  (m),  Vibhitaka  (n),  Kuvala  (o),  Vadara  (p),  Karkandu  (  q), 
and  Pilu  (r), — these  ten  are  purgatives.30 

Trivrit  ( s ),  Vilwa  ( t ),  Pippali  («),  Kushtha  (w),  mustard  seeds, 
Vacha  ( w ),  the  fruits  of  Vatsaka  ( x ),  £atapushpa  (y),  Liquorice,  and 
Madanaphala  ( z ), — these  ten  are  used  in  Asthapana  [enemata].31 


a.  Called  also  Rakta-kanchana.  BauJiinia  variegata. 

b.  Bauhinia  acummata. 

c.  Another  name  of  Kadamva.  Anthocephalus  cadamba  ;  syn.  Nauclea  cadamla. 

d.  Called  also  Amvuvetasa.  Calamus  fascirulatus.  U.  C.  Dutt  {Mat.  Med.  of  the 

ffindus)  says  that  the  identification  by  Roxburgh  of  Amvuvetasa  with  Calamus 
fasciculatus  is,  perhaps,  doubtful.  Amvuvetasa  implies  that  it  is  rattan  or 
some  rattan-like  plant  that  grows  in  water.  Calamus  fasciculatus ,  how¬ 
ever,  grows  as  well  on  dry  land  as  in  water. 

e.  Coccinea  Indica  ;  syn.  Mamordica  monodelpha. 

f.  Crotalaria  verrucosa. 

g.  Another  name  for  Arka  or  Akanda.  Calatropis  gigantea  ;  syn.  Asclepias  gigan- 

h.  Another  name  for  Apamarga.  Achyranthes  aspera;  syn.  Achyranthes  bidentatn. 

i.  Kishmish.  Uvae  Passse. 

j.  Another  name  of  Gambhari.  Gmelina  arborea. 

k.  Called  in  Bengali  Phyalsa-  Grewia  Asiatic q 

l.  Terminalia  chebula. 
vi.  Phyllanthus  Emblica. 

«.  Terminalia  Bellerica. 

o.  A  variety  of  Zizyphns  fujuba. 

p.  Zizypkus  fujuba. 

q.  Called  also  Srigalakoli  or  Siakul.  Zizypkus  cenoplia. 

r.  Salvadora  Persica  or  Salvadora  Indica.  Its  fruits  are  said  to  be  very  much  ljke<} 

.  by  elephants. 

s.  Ipomcea  turpethum  ;  syn.  Convolvulus  turpethum. 

t.  yEgle  marmelos, 

u.  Piper  longum  ;  syn.  Chavica  Roxbiirghii, 

v.  Holarrhena  antidysehterica. 

w.  Acorus  calamus. 

x.  Called  also  Indrayava.  The  seeds  of  Holarrhena  anttdy  fentcricQ. 

y.  Called  also  Misreya.  Pucedanum  Sowa. 

z.  The  fruits  of  Randia  dutnetorum , 


CHARAKA-SA  MH I TA. 


Rasna  (a),  Suradaru  ( b ),  Vilwa  (e),  Madana  (d),  £atapushpa  ( e ), 
Vrischira  (f),  Punarnava  ( g ),  Afwadangshtra  ( h ),  Agnimantha 
0),  and  Sonaka  (j), — these  ten  an  used  for  Anuvasana  [oily 
enemata].32 

Jyotishmati  (k),  Kshavaka  (/),  Maricha  (m),  Pippali  (n), 
Vidanga  (o),  Sigru  (/),  mustard  seeds,  the  seed  of  Apamarga(f), 
Pweta  [r),  and  Mahacweta  (s), — these  ten  are  used  for  Cirovirechana 
(errhines),33 

( Here  ends  the  fifth  seven  aggregates  of  Astrtgents.) 

The  leaves  of  Jamvu  (t),  and  of  Amra  ( u ),  Matulunga  ( v ), 
Amla-vadara  (w),  Dadima  (x),  Yava  (y),  Liquorice,  Utjira  («), 
Mrid  (a),  and  fried  paddy, — -these  ten  relieve  vomiting.®* 


a.  Vanda  Roxburghii ;  syn.  Cymbedium  tessaloides. 

b.  Cedrus  dcodara  ;  syn.  Pmus  deodara. 

c.  ALgle  marmelos. 

d.  Randia  dumetorum. 

e.  Called  also  Misreya.  Pucedanum  sowa. 

f.  The  white  variety  of  Boerhavia  diffusa. 

g.  The  red  variety  of  Boerhavia  diffusa. 

h.  Called  also  Gokhuri.  Tribulus  terrestris  ;  Syn.  Tribulus  ianuginosus , 
f.  Premna  serratifolia  ;  syn.  Premna  spinosa. 

j.  Calosanthes  Indica  ;  syn.  Bignonia  Indica. 

k.  Cardiospermum  Halicacabum. 

l.  Called  in  Bengali  Hanchooti.  Myriogyne  lamtginosifs. 

Vi.  Piper  nigrum. 

?i.  piper  longutn. 

0.  Embelia  Ribes ;  syn.  Embelia  glandulifera. 

p.  Moringa  pterygosperma. 

q.  Achyranthes  aspera  ;  or  Achyranthes  bidentata, 

r.  Clitorea  ternatea  (the  white  variety), 
f.  Clitpria  ternatea  (the  red  variety), 

(.  Eugenia  Jambolana  ;  syn.  Syzygium  Jambolanum, 
ft.  Mangifera  Indica.  (The  mango  tree. ) 

V.  Citrus  niedica. 

ft).  A  sour  variety  of  Zizyphus  Jujuba. 

X.  Punicum  granatum. 

y.  Hordeum  hexastichum. 

z.  The  roots  of  Andropogon  muricatum. 

a.  4  kind  of  earth  taken  from  the  country  of  Sourashtra  (Surat), 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Nagara  {a),  Dhanwa-yavasaka  ( b ),  Afusta  (c),  Parppataka  (d), 
Chandana  ( e ),  Kirata-tiktaka  (f),  Guduchi  (g),  Hrivera  (k), 
Dhanya (/),  and  Patola  (/),— these  ten  allay  thirst.3® 

£athi  ( k ),  Pushkaramula  (l),  the  seeds  of  Vadara  (m),  Kanta- 
karika  (n),  Vrihati  (o),  Vriksharuha  (/>),  Abhaya  (q),  Pippali  (r), 
Duralabha  (s),  and  Kulirafringi  {t), — these  ten  relieve  hiccup.30 

Priangu  ( u ),  Ananta  (v),  the  seeds  of  Amra  ( w ).,  Katwanga 
( x ),  Lodhra  (j),  Mocharasa  (z),  Samanga  (a),  Dhatakipushpa  (b), 
Padma  (c),  and  the  filaments  of  the  lotus, -^-th.ese  ten  are  Purisha- 
sangrahaniya  (render  the  faeces  consistent).37 


a.  Cyperus  pertenuis. 

b.  Called  also  Duralabha.  Alkagi  Maurorum  ;  syn.  Hedysarum  Alhagi. 

c.  Cyperus  rotundus.  Some  physicians  use  dry  ginger. 

d.  Oldentanaia  herbacea  ;  syn.  Oldenlandia  biflora. 
c.  Red  sandal  wood.  Pterocaryus  santahnus. 

f  Agathotes  cherayta. 

g.  Tinospora  cordifolia  ;  syn.  Menispermum  cordifolium. 

h.  Called  also  Bala.  Pavonia  odorata. 

i.  Coriandrum  sativum. 

j.  Trichosanthes  dioica.  (The  juice  of  the  plant  is  used.) 

k.  Circuma  Zerumbet. 

l.  The  roots  of  an  acquatic  plant  occurring  in  the  lake  of  Pushkara  in  Cashmere. 

Hindu  physicians  generally  use  (in  the  absence  of  this  drug)  the  roots  of  the 
Holarrhena  antidysentrica. 

m.  Zizyphus  Jujuba. 

n.  Solatium  Xanthocarpum  ;  syn.  Solatium  Jacquinii, 

o.  Solatium  Indicum. 

p.  A  kind  of  parasitical  plant. 

q.  Terminalia  chebula. 

r.  Piper  longtim. 

s.  Alhagi  Maurorum. 

t.  Rhus  succedania  ;  syn.  Rhus  acuminata. 

u.  Aglaia  Roxburghiana. 

v.  Hemidesmus  Indicus ;  syn.  Asclepias  pseudosarsa. 

w.  Mango  seeds. 

x. '  Another  name  of  Syonaka.  Colosanthes  Indica. 

y.  Symplocos  racemosa. 

2.  The  exudation  of  Calmali  or  Bombax  Malabaricum;  syn.  Bombax  heptaphylla. 

a.  Called  also  Varakranta.  The  sensitiye  plant.  Mimosa  pudica. 

b.  Woodfordia  floribunda  ;  syn.  Grislea  tomentosa. 

c.  Called  also  Bamanhati.  Clerodendron  siphonanthus ;  syn.  Siphonanlhus  Indica. 


CflA  RA  KA  -.SAM HIT  A 


41 


The  bark  of  Jamvu  ( a ),  that  of  £allaki  (6),  Kachchhura  (c), 
Liquorice,  £almali  (d),  £riveshtaka  (e),  burnt  earth,  Payasya  (f), 
Utpala  ( g ),  and  husked  sesame  seeds — these  ten  are  Purisha- 
virajaniya  (alter  the  color  of  the  faeces).  38 

The  bark  of  Jamvu  (Ji),  Amra  (z),  Plaksha  (/),  Vata  (k),  Kapi- 
tana  (/),  Udumvara  (m),  Afwathwa  («),  Bhallataka  (<?),  Agmantaka 
(p),  and  Somavalka  (f),— these  ten  reduce  secretion  of  urine.39 

Vrikshadani  (r),  and  A9wadangshtra  (s),  and  Vasuka  (if),  and 


a.  Eugenia  Jambokinum. 

b.  Boswellia  Serrata. 

c.  The  commentator  identifies  It  with  Cukafimvi  or  Alku<ji.  Mumna  fruriens  ;  syn. 

Carpogon  pruriens. 

d.  The  exudation  is  intended  of  Bombax  Malabaricum. 

e.  The  Commentator  says  that  this  is  used  for  Navanitakhoti,  which  is  the  exuda¬ 

tion  of  the  Pinus  longifolia.  U.  C.  Dutt  says,  — “This  tree  yields  an  oleo- 
resin  called  Sa > a’adrava,  Srivdsa,  and  Kh ira  in  Sanskrit.  In  the  vernacular 
it  is  Called  Gandhabiroza.  Dr.  Royle  remarked  that  ‘the  chir  (as  the  Finns 
longifolia  is  called  in  Hindi)  exudes  or  yields  to  incisions  a  very  fine  turpentine. 
This  is  chiefly  valued  by  the  natives  for  its  resin,  and  as  the  latter  is  only  ob¬ 
tained  by  exposing  the  turpentine  to  heat,  the  oil,  the  more  valuable  product, 
is  dissipated  to  procure  the  resin  ;  but  by  adopting  a  very  simple  still,  resin 
was  obtained  as  good  as  ever  for  the  purposes  of  the  natives,  while  the  oil  of 
turpentine  distilled  over  was  pronounced,  on  being  sent  to  the  General 
Hospital  of  Calcutta,  to  be  of  very  superior  quality.’  ” — Mat..  Med.  of  ike  Hindus, 
f  Batatas  paniculatus. 

g.  Nymphos  a  sie/lata. 

h.  Eugenia  Jambolannm. 

i.  Man  gif  era  Indica. 

j.  Ficus  infectoria. 

k.  Ficus  Bengalensis  ;  syn.  Ficus  Indica. 

l.  The  Commentator  identifies  it  with  Gandhamunda  or  Gandhibhat  (in  Bengali). 

Bengal  physicians  use  for  it  the  bark  of  the  Amrataka  (Amra)  or  the  Ho 
jjlum,  i,  e.,  Spondias  mangifera. 

m.  Ficus  glomerata  ;  syn.  Covellia  glomerate. 

«.  Ficus  religiosa. 

0.  Semecarpus  Anacardjum.  The  marking  nut  tree. 

p.  Called  also  Amlakucha  or  Andocha. 

q.  Called  also  Khadira.  Acacia  Catechu  ;  syn.  Mimosa  Catechu. 

r.  A  kind  of  parasitical  plant  called  Alakalata. 

r.  Called  also  Gokhuri.  Tributes  terrestris  ;  syn.  Tributes  tanuginosus. 
t.  Sesbania  grandiflora. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Vashira  (a),  Pashanabheda  (6),  Darbha(c),  Ku$a  (d),  Ka^a  (e) 
Gundra  (f),  Itkataumla  (g), — these  ten  promote  secretion  of 
urine.  4° 

Padma  (  k\  Utpala  (z),  Nalina(/),  Kumuda  (£),  Saugandhika  (7), 
Pundarika  (m),  £atapatra  ( n ),  Liquorice,  Priyangu  (o),  and  Dhataki- 
pushpa  (p), — these  ten  alter  the  color  of  the  urine.41 

( Here  ends  the  seventh  jive  aggregates  of  Astringents .) 

Draksha.  (y),  Abhaya  (r),  Amlaka  (j),  Pippali  (t),  Duralabha  (u), 
riringi  (v),  Kantakarika  (w),  Vriychira  (x),  Punarnava  ( _y),  and 
Tamlakya  (z), — these  ten  cure  coughs.42 

£athi  (a),  Pushkaramula  (b),  Amlavetasa  (c),  large  cardamoms, 


a.  The  Commentator  identifies  it  with  Jamatri  (called  Hurhure  in  Bengali).  In 

Sanskrit  it  has  many  other  names,  chief  amongst  which  are  Suryavarta  and 
Adityabhakta.  Cleome  viscosa  ;  syn  Polanisia  icosandra. 

b.  Called  in  Bengali  Patharkucha  or  Patharchur.  Coleus  Amboinitus-. 

c.  Imferata  cylindrica.  syn.  Saccharum  cylindricum , 

d.  Poa  cynosuroides. 

e.  Saccharum  spontaneum. 

f.  Panicum  uliginosum. 

g.  Called  Khalcra  in  Bengali.  A  large  variety  of  Saccharum  sponlaneum. 

h.  Nelumbium  speciosum  ;  (the  white  variety  is  used). 

i.  Nymphcea  stellata  (of  the  blue  variety). 

j.  Ditto  of  the  white  variety. 

k.  Ditto  of  the  red  variety. 

l.  Nymphcea  Lotus. 

m  The  large-sized  Nelumbium  speciosum. 

n.  Ditto  (having  the  largest  number  of  petals). 

o.  Aglaia  Roxburghiana. 

p.  Woodfordia  Jloribunda  ;  syn.  Grislea  tomentosa. 

q.  Uvce  Passes. 

r.  Chebulic  myrobalan. 

s.  Phyllanthus  Emblica ;  syn.  Emblica  officinalis. 

t.  Piper  longum. 

u.  Alhagi  Maurorum;  syn.  Hedysarum  Alhagi. 

v.  Rhus  succeedanea  ;  syn.  Rhus  accuminata. 

w.  Solatium  Xanthocarpum.  syn.  Solatium  Jacquinii. 

x.  Boerhavia  diffusa  (of  the  red  variety). 

y.  Boerhavia  diffusa  (of  the  white  variety). 

z.  Called  also  Bhumyamlaki.  Phyllanthus  Niruri. 

a.  Circuma  Zerumbet. 

b.  This  root  is  not  generally  available.  Instead,  Aplotaxis  auriculata  is  used. 

c.  Rtimex  vesicarius.  The  country  sorrel  or  Chukra  or  Chukapalang. 


CH A  RA  KA  -  SA  M HIT  A .  43 

Hingu  {a),  Agura  (3),  Surasa  (<?),  Tamlaki  ( d ),  Jivanti  (e),  and 
Chanda  (_/), — these  ten  cure  difficult  breathing  or  asthma.43 

Patala  (g),  Agnimantha  (A),  Vilwa  (f),  Syonaka  (/),  Kaijmaryya 
( k ),  Kantakarika  (/),  Vrihati  {in',  ^alaparni  («),  Prishniparni  {o), 
and  Gokshuraka  (/>), — these  ten  cure  anasarca  or  swellings.44 

£ariva  (q),  Carkara  (r),  Patha  ( s ),  Manjishtha  (^i,  Draksha  («), 
Pilu  (v),  Parushaka  (w),  Abhaya  (x),  Amlaka  (y),  and  Vibhitaka  (z), 
— these  ten  cure  fevers.4' 

Draksha 'a),  and  Kharjjura  (b),  and  Piyala  (c),  and  Vadara  (d), 


a.  Ferula.  Assafcetida. 

b.  Aquilaria  Agallocha. 

c.  This  name  stands  for  various  plants  chief  amongst  which  is  the  Ocimum  sanctum. 

Many  Bengal  physicians,  however,  take  it  for  Rasna  or  Vanda  Roxlmrghii. 

d.  Pkyllanthus  Niruri. 
c.  Calogyne  ovalis. 

f.  Chorepushpi,  Chorehuli,  or  Bhantui.  Andropogon  acicularis. 

g.  Called  also  Parula.  Stereospernmm  suaveolcns ;  syn.  Bigtionia  suaveolens. 

h.  Premna  scrralifolia  ;  syn.  Premna  spinosa. 

i.  AEgle  marmelos. 

j.  Colosanthes  Indica  ;  syn.  Bignonia  Indica. 

k.  Called  also  Gambhari.  Gmelina  arborea. 

l.  Solatium  Xanthocatpum  ;  Solanum  Jacquinii. 

m.  Solanum  Indicum. 

n.  Desmodium  gangeticum  ;  syn.  Hedysarum  gangeticum. 

o.  Uraria  lagopodioides ;  syn.  Doodia  lagopodioides. 

p.  Trilmlus  terrestris  ;  syn.  Tribulus  lanuginosus. 

q.  This  name  stands  for  both  Anantamula  and  Syamalata.  Bengal  physicians  use  the 

former,  i.  c.,  Hemidcsmus  Indicus  ;  syn.  Asclcpias  pseudosarsa.  If  it  means 
Syamalata,  it  is  Ichnocarpus  frutescens,  syn.  Echites  frutescens. 

r.  Sugarcandy. 

s.  Stcphania  hernandifolia  ;  syn.  Cissampelos  liernandifolia. 

t.  Rubia  Cordifolia  ;  syn.  Rubia  Munjishta. 

u.  Utmz  Passes. 

v.  Salvadora  Persica  or  Indica. 
tv.  Greuna  Asiatica. 

x.  Chebula  myrobalan. 

y.  Phyllanthus  Emblica  ;  syn.  Emblica  officinalis. 

z.  Terminalia  Bellerica. 

a.  Vide  note  u  above. 

b.  Phoenix  Sylvestris.  (Wild  date  palm). 

c.  Buchanania  latijolia. 

d.  Zizyphus  Jujuba. 


44  CHARAKA-SA  MHITA. 

and  Dadima  (a),  Phalgu  (b),  Parushaka  (c),  Ikshu  (d),  Yava  (e),  and 
Shashtika  (fi),  — these  ten  relieve  fatigue.46 

{Here  ends  the  Eighth  five  aggregates  of  Astringents). 

Laja  (g\  Chandana  (h),  Kafmaryaphala  (i),  Liquorice,  £arkara 
(/),  Nilotpala  (h),  Utjira  (/),  (^ariva  (m),  Guduchi  («),  and  Hrivera 
(o), — these  ten  relieve  burning  or  heat  of  the  body.47 

Tagara  (/>),  Aguru  (q),  Dhanyaka  (r),  (^ringavera  (s),  Bhutika 
(t)  Vacha  (u),  Kantakarika,  (v),  A,gnimantha  (w),  £yonaka  (x),  and 
Pippali  ( y ), — these  ten  relieve  the  sense  of  coldness.48 

Tinduka  (z),  Piyala  fa),  Vadara  fb),  Khadira  (c),  Kadara  (d). 


a.  Punica  Granatum. 

b.  Ficus  glomeratq, 

c.  Grewia  Asiatica. 

d.  Saccharunt  officinarum. 
c.  Hordeum  hexastichum. 

f  A  kind  of  paddy  that  is  believed  to  ripen  in  60  days.  Shete  dhan  (in  Bengali). 

g.  Fried  paddy. 

h.  Santalanum  album.  (White  Sandal  wood). 

The  fruits  of  Gmelina  arborea. 

j.  Sugarcandy 

k.  Nymphcea  stellate?, 

l.  The  roots  of  Andropogon  muricatnm. 

m.  Vide  note  q  in  p/43. 

n.  Tinospora  cordifolia  ;  syn.  Menispertnum  cotdifolbum. 

q.  Pavonia  odorata. 

p.  Difficult  to  identify  it.  More  than  one  plant  is  known  by  this  name.  The 

Ayurvedartha  Chandrika  says  that  it  is  an  acquatie  plant.  It  is  sometimes 
called  Tagarapadika  or  paduka.  It  is  not  the  flower  plant  of  that  name,  viz. , 
Tabemcemonlana  coronaria 

q.  Aquilqria.  Agallochq. 

r.  Coriandrum  sativum. 

s.  Zingiber  officinale.  (Dry  ginger,  called  Sunthi). 

t.  Called  also  Yamani.  Ptychotis  A/owan  ;  syn.  Ligusticum  Ajqwan. 

V,  Acqrtif  calamus. 

v.  Solatium  Xanthocarpum  ;  syn.  Solqfiftm  Jacquinii. 

■w.  Premna  serratifolia  ;  syn.  Premna  sptnosa. 

x.  Colosanth.es  Indica  ;  syn.  Bignonia  Indica. 

y.  Piper  longum  ;  syn.  Chavica  Roxburghii. 

z.  It  is  another  name  of  Gab  or  Diospyros  Embryopteris ,  syn.  Diospyros  glutinosa. 

The  commentator,  however,  identifies  it  with  Kendu  or  the  Ebony  tree,  that  is,, 
Diospyros.  melanoxylon. 

a.  Buchanania  latifolia. 

b.  Zizyphtis  Jujuba, 

c.  Acacia  catechu  ;  syn.  Mimosa  catechu, 

d.  A  variety  of  the  above,  called  V it-khadira,. 


CHA  RAKA -SAM  HIT  A. 


45 

Saptaparna  (a),  A§wakarna  (6),  Arjuna  ( c ),  A9ana  (d),  and  Arimeda 
(e), — these  ten  cure  urticaria.49 

Vidarigandha  {f)r  Prishniparni  (g),  Vrihati  (h),  Kantakari  (i), 
Kairanda  (i),  Kakoli  (k),  Chandana  (/),  Uir§a  ( m ),  large  cardamoms, 
and  Liquorice, — these  ten  relieve  pains  cashed  by  pressure  on 
the  body.50 

Pippali  ( n ),  the  roots  of  Pippali  ( o ),  Chavya  ( p ),  Chitraka  ( q ), 
(^ringavera  (r),  Maricha  (s),  Ajamoda  (t),  Ajagandha  («),  Ajaji  (v), 
and  Gandira  (w), — these  ten  cure  pain  in  the  bowels.51 

(Here  ends  tfie  ninth  five  aggregates  of  Astringents.) 

Mel,  Liquorice,  Rudhira  ( x ),  Mocharasa  (y),  burnt  earth,  Lodhra 
(2)  red  chalk,  Priyangu  (a),  Sugarcandy,  and  fried  paddy, — these  ten 
are  styptics.52 

a.  Alstonia  scholaris  ;  syn.  Ec kites  scholaris. 

b.  Shorea  robusta. 

c.  Terminalia  Arjuna  ;  syn.  Pentaptera  Arjuna,. 

d.  Called  also  Piyasala  or  Pitasala.  Terminalia  tamenlosa ;  syn.  Pentaptera 

tomentosa. 

e.  Acacia  Farnesiana  ;  syn.  Mimosa  Farnesiana. 

/.  Called  also  Calaparni.  Desmodium  gangeticuni  ;  syn.  Hedysarum  gangelicum. 

g.  Uraria  logopodioides  ;  syn.  Doodia  logopodioides . 

h.  Solatium  Indicum. 

i.  Solanum  Xanthocarpum. 

j.  Ricinus  communis. 

h.  Not  identified.  A  root  brought  from  Morung  in  Nepal, 

l,  Santalanum  album. 

tn.  The  roots  of  Andropogon  muricatum. 

n.  Piper  longum  ;  syn.  Chavica  Roxburghii. 

0.  The  roots  of  the  above, 

p.  Piper  Chaba  ;  syn.  Chavica  officinarum. 

q.  Plumbago  Zeylanica. 

r.  Dry  ginger. 

s.  Piper  nigrum.  Black  pepper. 

r.  Called  also  Randhani,  Pimpinella  involucrata  ;  syn.  Apium  involucratuxn, 

u.  Called  also  Vanayamani.  Seseli  Indicum  ;  syn.  Cnidium  diffttsum. 

v.  Cuminum  cyminum.  Cummin  seeds. 

w.  Called  also  Calincha.  Allenanthera  sessilis  ;  syn.  Achyranlhes  triandra \ 

x.  Crocus  salivas.  Saffron. 

y.  The  exudation  of  Bombax  Malabaricum. 

z.  Symplocos  racemosx. 

a.  Aglaia  Roxburgh ianq. 


46 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Qala  {a),  Kntphala  (£),  Kadamva  (zd,  Padmaka  (d),  Tunga  (e), 
Mocharasa  (/)  f^irisha  ( g ),  Vanjula  ( h ),  Elavaluka  (z‘),  and  A^oka  (/) 
ese  ten  are  anodynes.53 

Hingu  {k),  Kaitaryya  (/),  Arimeda  (m),  Vacha  ( n ),  Choraka 
(o),  Vayastha  (p),  Golomi  (q),  Jatila  Palankasha  (r),  Aqoka,  (s), 
and  Rohini  ( t ), — these  ten  restore  consciousness.54 

Aindri{«),  Brahmi(zt),  (^ataviryya  (w),  Sahasraviryya  ( x ),  Amogha  [y), 


a.  Shorea  robusta. 

b.  Myrica  Sapida. 

c.  Anthocephalus  Cadamba  ;  syn.  Nauclca  Cadamba. 

d.  The  root-stock  of  Nymp/uea  lotus. 

e.  Calophylhim  mop hy llum. 

f.  Exudation  of  Bombas  Malabaricum. 

g.  Albizzia  lebbek  ;  syn.  Mimosa  sirisa. 

h.  Called  also  Vetasa.  Calamus  rotang ;  syn.  Calamus  Roxburghii. 

i.  A  red  powder  sold  under  this  name.  The  seed  of  some  plant  not  known. 

/.  Samoa  Indica  ;  syn.  Joncsia  Asoka. 

k.  Ferula  Assafcetida. 

l.  The  Commentator  says  this  is  not  ICatphala  or  Mytica  Sapida  but  Parvatanimva 

or  Mahanimva,  i.  e.,  Melia  Azedarach  ;  syn.  Melia  sempervirens. 

m.  Acacia  Farnesiuna  ;  syn.  Mimosa  Farnesiana. 

7i.  Acorns  Calamus. 

o.  A  ndropogpn  acicularis. 

p.  Called  also  Brahmi.  Herpesies  monnicria  ;  syn.  Gratiola  monnieria. 

q.  Called  also  Bhutakeiji.  Corydaiis  Govaniaria. 

r.  If  Jatila  and  Palankasha  be  taken  to  be  two  different  plants,  then  the  total 

number  would  become  eleven  instead  of  ten.  The  Commentator  says  that 
Palankasha  means  either  Gulgulu  or  Jatamansi.  I  incline  to  the  belief  that 
Jatila- Palankasha  is  one  plant,  i.  e.,  a  variety  of  Jatamansi  or  Nardostachys 
Jatamansi  ;  syn.  Valeriana  Jatamansi. 

s.  Saraca  Indica. 

t.  Picrorrhiza  kurroa. 

u.  Called  Rakhal  sasha  (in  Bengali) .  Karima  umbellata. 

v.  Herpestes  monnieria  •  syn.  Gratiola  monnieria. 

w.  Cynodon  Dactylon  ;  syn.  Panicum  Dactylon. 

x.  The  white  variety  of  the  above. 

y.  The  Commentator  is  doubtful  as  to  what  is  meant  by  it.  He  says  it  is  Patala 

or  Amlaki,  i.  e.,  Steriospermum  suaveolens,  or  Pbyllanthus  Emblica. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


47 


Avyatha  (a),  £iva  (h),  Arishta  (c),  Vatyapushpi  (d),  and  Vicwak- 
senakranta  (e), — these  ten  cure  sterility.  55 

Amrita  ( f),  Abhaya  (g),  Dhattri  (h),  Mukta  (i),  £weta  (/), 
Jivanti  (k),  Atirasa  (/),  Mandukaparni  ( m ),  Sthira  ( n  ,  and  Punar- 
nava  ( o ), — these  ten  prevent  the  effects  of  age  (being  visible  on 
the  body). 5  4 

( Here  ends  the  tenth  five  aggregates  of  Astringents.) 

Thus  then  are  the  five  centuries  of  Astringents  expounded  ai  d 
then  the  fifty  Astringents  par  excellence ,  as  classified  into  aggre¬ 
gates  (each  of  which  consists  of  ten  astringents  possessing  the 
same  virtue),  and  thus  the  virtues  of  the  last  for  examples’  sake.57 
No  limits  can  be  assigned  to  an  elaborate  mention.  A  brief  men¬ 
tion  again  is  not  calculated  to  suit  the  capacities  of  persons  of  little 


a.  The  Commentator  is  doubtful  as  to  what  is  exactly  meant  by  this.  He  thinks  it  is 

Kadali,  Guduchi,  Haritaki,  i.  e.,  Musa  sapient  urn,  or  Tinospora  cordi- 
folium,  or  Chebula  myrobalan. 

b.  It  is  doubtful  what  is  meant  by  this.  The  name  stands  for  Chebula  myrobalan, 

for  Phyllanthus  Emblica,  for  Batatas  Paniculata,  for  a  variety  of  Panicum 
Daclylon,  and  for  Acacia  suma. 

c.  Called  also  ICaturohini.  PUrocrhiza  Kurroa. 

d.  Sida  Cordifolia. 

e.  Another  name  for  Priyangu.  Aglaia  Roxburghiana. 

f.  Tinospora  Cordifolia ;  syn.  Mtnispermum  Cordl/oliam. 

g.  Chebulic  myrobaian. 

h.  Phyllanthus  Emblica ;  syn.  Emblica  officinalis. 

i.  Another  name  of  Rasna.  Vanda  RoxbUrghii  ;  syn.  Cymbidium  tessaloides. 

j.  It  is  difficult  to  say  that  particular  plant  is  meant  here.  The  name  Cweta  stands 

for  many  different  plants.  Many  physicians,  however,  think  that  the 
Panicum  Dactylon  is  intended.  From  green  the  color  may  be  changed  into' 
white  by  the  simple  contrivance  of  making  it  grow  under  a  cover.  Some 
physicians  use  the  white  variety  of  the  Clitoria  ternatea.  The  Commentator 
says  that  some  texts  read  Creyasi  for  Cweta.  The  former  is  a  variety  of 
Rasna  or  Vanda  Roxburgkii. 

It.  Calogync  ovalis. 

l.  A  variety  of  Rasna.  Some  ’physicianshise  Anantamula  ( Hemidesmus  Indica) 

for  Atirasa. 

m.  Called  Thulkttri.  Hydrocotyle  Asiatica. 

n.  Called  also  Calaparni.  Dcsmodium  gangeticum  ;  syn.  Hcdysarum  gangelicum. 

o.  Bocrhavia  diffusa  ;  syn.  Boerhavia  procumbent  and  erect  a. 


48  CHARAKA-SAMHITA 

intelligence.  For  this  reason,  they  have  been  set  forth  without 
much  brevity  and  without  much  length.  Such  mention  will  enable 
persons  of  little  intelligence  to  apply  them,  while  it  will  aid  those 
that  are  endiied  with  intelligence  and  skilled  in  reasons  and  in 
inferences  from  the  virtues  (as  stated)  of  each  group,  in  under¬ 
standing  matters  that  have  not  been  expressly  stated.*58 

Unto  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  who  was  saying  this,  Agnivefa 
said,— “  O  illustrious  Riski,  in  this  enumeration  the  tale  is  not 
complete  of  five  hundred  Astringents.  In  the  several  groups  of 
Astringents  par  excellence  (mentioned  by  you)  enter  names  of  the 
same  Astringents.”t39 

Unto  him  said  the  son  of  Atri, — “  O  Agnive9a,  a  person 
possessed  of  intelligence  will  not  see  this  to  which  thou  referest. 
Even  one  object  receives  many  names  in  consequence  of  its  dis¬ 
charging  many  functions.  This  is  even  as  follows  :  a  person  is 
capable  of  doing  various  acts.  He  receives  special  names  derived 
from  the  attribute  of  agency,  of  instrumentality,  and  of  effect  in 
respect  of  whatever  acts  he  does.  J  Drugs  alsp  should  be  viewed 
similarly.  If  we  could  get  some  one  article  possessed  of  such  virtue 
as  to  be  efficacious  in  the  performance  of  every  act,  who  is  there 
that  would  then  wish  to  retain  in  his  own  memory  or  to  impart  to  his 
disciples  (a  knowledge  of)  any  other  article  ?”  50 

( Here  are  some  verses.) 

There  are  six  hundred  Purgatives.  They  have  been  spoken  of 
in  brief.  The  articles  with  which  they  are  made,  and  how  many  of 
them  are  made  from  which,  have  also  been  indicated.  Those  six 


*  Smalakshanyanumana  &*c.,  is  explained  by  the  Commentator  as  Swalakshanasya 
blidvah,  tenet  anumanxm,  &c.  —  T. 

t  Thus  Kakoli  and  Kshirakakoli  occur  in  groups  7  and  8,  p.  p.  30  and  31,  and  so 
on. — T. 

X  Thus  (as  the  Commentator  explains)  one  that  does  the  act  of  cooking  is  called  a 
cook.  Here  there  is  agency  in  respect  of  the  work.  One  that  plays  on  the  fiddle  is  called 
a  fiddler.  Here  the  attribute  of  instrumentality  enters  into  the  name.  Again,  one 
is  called  a  potter,  from  the  effect  of  his  act,  viz.,  the  pots  he  makes.  There  is  nothing 
to  prevent  even  the  same  person  being  called  by  these  three  different  names  in  respect  of 
these  three  different  acts  all  of  which  he  may  happen  to  do. — T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHITA. 


hundred  Purgatives  have  for  their  refuge  the  six  different  kinds  of 
tasteP^  The  tastes  with  the  exception  of  the  saltish  have  been 
tailed  Astringent  (for  the  purposes  of  the  work).  Hence  all 
astringent  substances  are  said  to  be  of  five  species.8 

•Again  the  five  kinds  of  processes  of  their  preparation  have 
been  spoken  of.  The  fifty  kinds  of  Astringents  par  excellence  have 
also  been  described.3  The  five  centuries  also  of  Astringents  have 
Ibeen  mentioned  distributively.  No  limits  can  be  assigned  to  an 
'elaborate  or  lengthy  mention  of  their  properties.4  A  very  brief 
’account,  again,  does  not  suit  the  capacities  of  persons  of  little 
intelligence.  Astringents,  therefore,  have  been  mentioned,  as  above, 
-neither  very  briefly  nor  at  great  length.5  For  application  by  persons, 
'of  little  intelligence  and  for  the  sharpening  of  the  understandings 
of  intelligent  men,  these  fifty  groups  of  Astringents  have  been 
mentioned.6  He  is  the  foremost  of  physicians  who  knows,  in 
respect  of  both  their  internal  and  external  applications,  the  measure 
of  each  article  to  be  employed,  and  the  time  of  using  the  appli¬ 
cations.^ 

Thus  ends  the  Fourth  Lesson  upon  the  topic  of  six 
centuries  of  Purgatives.  . 


LESSON  V. 

And  now  we  shall  expound  the  Lesson  called  Matrafitlyafpro- 
'per  measure  in  respect  of  diet).  Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of 
Atri. 

One  should  take  a  proper  measure  of  food.  One's  measure  of? 
food  is  dependent  upon  the  power  of  one’s  digestive  fire  1  That 
should  be  regarded  the  standard  of  one’s  proper  measure  of  food 
which  when  taken  is  digested  in  due  time  without  injuring  one's 


*  The  six  kinds  of  taste  are  sweet,  sour,  pungent,  astringent,  bitter,  and  saltish. — T». 
t  That  is,  their  combinations  and  occasions.— T. 


50 


CHA  RAKA-SA  M  HIT  A. 


constitution.2  On  this  head,  £ali,  (a),  Shashtika  ( b ),  Mudga  (c), 
Lava  (d),  Kapinjala  ( e ),  Ena  (/),  (^aga  (g),  (jlarabha  ( h ),  £amvara 
(/),  and  other  articles  of  diet  of  a  similar  kind,  though  naturally  light, 
should  still  be  taken  in  measured  quantity.  Again,  cakes  of  differ¬ 
ent  kinds,  and  all  the  products  manufactured  from  sugarcane  and 
milk,*  Masha  (/),  the  meat  of  amphibious  and  aquatic  animals,  and 
other  articles  of  diet  of  a  similar  kind,  though  naturally  heavy,  may 
notwithstanding  be  taken  in  measured  quantity.  It  must  be  re¬ 
garded  that  the  distinction,  heavy  and  light,  made  between  articles 
of  diet  is  not  without  reason.  The  articles  called  light  contain 
largely  the  properties  of  wind  and  heat.  Those  called  heavy  contain 
largely  the  properties  of  earth  and  the  moon.  For  this  reason  all 
kinds  of  light  food  being,  in  consequence  of  their  natural  properties, 
endued  with  the  capacity  of  enhancing  the  digestive  fire,  are  said 
to  be  less  injurious,  even  when  taken  to  satiety.  All  kinds  of 
heavy  food,  however,  in  consequence  of  their  dissimilarity,  are  in¬ 
capable  of  promoting  the  digestive  fire.  Hence  these  become  very 
injurious  when  taken  to  the  point  of  gratification  (of  hunger).* 

This,  however,  happens  elsewhere  than  when  the  strength  of 
the  digestive  fire  is  enhanced  by  exercise.  The  measure  of  food, 
therefore,  of  which  we  were  speaking,  is  dependant  on  the  strength 
of  the  digestive  fire.  It  is  not  the  case  again  that  it  does  not 
depend  upon  the  (quality  of  the)  article  (used  as  food).  In  conse¬ 
quence  of  this  dependance  upon  the  (quality  of  the)  article,  it  is 
laid  down  in  respect  of  all  heavy  kinds  of  food  that  the  gratifica¬ 
tion  of  hunger  should  be  sought  to  the  extent  of  only  three  quarters 


a.  Red  paddy,  i.  e  ,  the  paddy  that  is  gathered  at  the  end  of  autumn.  This  is  men¬ 
tioned  first  because  it  forms  the  staple  food  of  the  country. 
i.  Called  Acu  dhanya,  >'■  e  ,  the  paddy  which  grows  on  comparatively  higher  soil 
and  is  gathered  in  September.  It  ripens  in  a  very  short  time. 

c.  Phaseolus  Mungo. 

d.  A  species  of  quail.  Wilson  identifies  it  with  the  Perdix  Chinensis. 

e.  A  kind  of  bird  ;  otherwise  called  Gauratittiri.  Probably  the  Francoline  partridges. 

(  Vide  Wilson’s  Diet.) 

/.  The  black  antelope. 

g.  A  kind  of  small  deer.  The  word,  however,  is  commonly  used  for  hare. 

h.  A  species  of  deer  having  large  horns. 

»,  A  species  of  deer. 

).  Vikriti  is  connected  with  all  the  three  that  precede  it.  ( Vide  Commentary). 


CH  A  RAKA-SA  MHI T A. 


51 


or  a  half.  A.s  regards  all  kinds  of  light  food  even,  they  should  not 
be  taken  to  satiety  for  the  sake  of  enabling  the  digestive  fire  to  keep 
up  the  measure  of  its  own  energy.  The  food  that  is  taken  in  due 
measure,  without  injuring  the  constitution,  certainly  bestows  upon 
the  person  taking  it  strength,  color,  health,  and  length  of  days.*4 

Of  this,  more  in  detail. 

One  should  not,  with  a  loaded  stomach,  take  such  heavy  diet  as 
cakes  and  similar  preparations,  and  flattened  rice.f  With  even  an 
empty  stomach,  these  should  be  taken  in  proper  measure.1  Dried 
meat,  dried  potherbs,  esculent  roots  of  the  nymphcea  lotus  and  the 
stalk  of  the  water  lily,  should  not  be  taken  as  habitual  diet  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  these  being  heavy.  Nor  should  one  take  the  meat  of 
a  lean,  diseased,  or  dead  animal. J3 

Inspissated  milk,  coagulated  milk,  pork,  beef,  fish,  curds 


*  In  the  original,  the  whole  of  this  passage  is  in  prose.  Dr.  Sircar’s  version  given 
in  p.p  275  and  76  of  Vol.  IV.,  No.  7,  of  thej  Calcutta  Journal  of  Medicine ,  is  charac¬ 
terised  by  many  material  errors.  The  word  Sauhitya  does  not,  as  he  erroneously  takes 
it,  mean,  wherever  it  occurs,  ‘  satiety,’  but  except  in  one  place,  it  has  throughout  been 
used,  in  this  passage,  in  the  sense  of  ‘  gratification  of  hunger,’  or,  as  the  Commentator 
expressly  states  triptimdtram.  The  distinction  between  light  and  heavy  food  is  shewn 
antithetically,  by  stating  that  the  former,  even  when  taken  to  satiety,  is  not  very  injuri¬ 
ous,  whereas  the  latter,  even  when  taken'  to  the  point  of  only  gratification  of  hunger,  is 
fraught  with  great  injury.  Of  course,  atisauhityam,  in  connection  with  light  food, 
means  ‘  satiety,’  in  consequence  of  the  particle  ati.  Then  again  tribhagasauhityam  and 
arddhasauhityam  do  not  mean,  as  Dr.  Sircar  renders  them,  “  a  third  or  half  is  to  be  taken 
as  the  measure  of  satiety  ”  but  have  reference  to  the  measure  of  gratification  which  is 
directed  to  be  sought  not  in  full  but  by  three-fourths  or  a  half.— T. 

t  In  this  country,  paddy  unhusked  is  boiled,  and  while  still  soft,  is  flattened  by  pres¬ 
sure.  It  is  then  exposed  to  the  sun  and  dried.  The  Sanskrit  word  for  this  preparation  is 
Chipitaka  and  the  Vernacular  is  Chira.— T. 

+  Dr.  Sircar  makes  a  blunder,  due  only  to  carelessness,  in  translating  the  second  half 
of  the  second  line  of  this  verse.  The  passage  does  not  mean  that  ‘  *  meat  should  not  be 
given  to  those  who  have  become  emaciated  through  starvation.”  The  Commentator 
explains  kricam  as  afushtam,  and  lest  any  one  should  still  miss  the  right  meaning,  he 
adds  rogdduparatamrigddisambhavam.  I  think  Dr.  Sircar’s  Kaviraj  was  misled  by  the 
causal  form  of  the  final  verb.— T. 


52  CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITl. 

phaseolus  radiatus,  the  paddy  called  yavaka,  should  not  be  used  as 
habitual  diet.*8 

The  paddy  called  Shashthika,  and  £ali,  phaseolus  mungo,  rock 
salt,  emblic  myrobalans,  barley,  rain-water  and  dew,  clarified  butter, 
meat  of  wild  fowl  and  animals,  and  honey,  should  be  made  habitual 
food.* 

That  should  every  day  be  used  as  diet  which  is  subservient  to 
he.ilth,  and  which  prevents  the  development  of  unborn  diseases,* 

After  this,  purposing  the  keeping  up  of  health,  we  shall  speak, 
according  to  their  qualities,  of  collyria  and  such  other  things 
which  should  certainly  be  used  for  the  body.f8 

That  collyrium  which  is  known  by  the  name  of  Sauvira  is 
beneficial  for  the  eyes  and  should  be  applied  every  day.  On  every 
fifth  or  the  eighth  night,  Rasanjana  should  be  applied  for  causing 
discharge  from  the  eyes,JT  The  eyes  of  one  who  uses  collyrium 
acquire  strength.  Such  a  person,  again,  becomes  especially  free 


*  Yavaka  is  not  ICulathwa  lcalai  as  Dr.  Sircar  supposes,  but  a  kind  of  paddy  that 
yields  a  very  hard  and.  undigestible  rice. — T. 

t  Kdryam  is  explained  as  avacyam  karaniyam. — T. 

%  “  Galena  or  sulphide  of  lead  is  called  Anjana  or  Sauvirdnjana  in  Sanskrit,  and 
Krishna  surma  in  Vernacular.  It  is  called  anjana ,  which  literally  means  collyrium  or 
medicine  for  the  eyes,  from  the  circumstance  of  its  being  considered  the  best  application 
or  cosmetic  for  them, 

"  Sauvirdnjana  is  said  to  be  obtained  from  the  mountain  of  Sauvira,  a  country  along 
the  Indus,  whence  it  derives  its  name.  The  article  supplied  under  its  Vernacular  name 
Surma  is  the  sulphide  of  lead  ore.  Surma  is  usually  translated  as  sulphide  of  antimony, 
bat  I  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  a  single  specimen  of  the  antimonial  ore  from  the 
shops  of  Calcutta  and  of  some  other  towns.  The  sulphide  of  antimony  occurs  in  fine 
streaky,  fibrous,  crystalline  masses  of  a  radiated  texture.  The  lead  ore,  on  the  contrary, 
occurs  in  cubic  masses  destitute  of  rays  and  is  tabular  in  its  crystalline  arrangements.” 
Mat.  Med.  oftke  Hindus,  by  U.  C.  Dutt. 

To  the  above  I  should  add  that  the  Commentator  says  that  Sauvirdnjana  comes  from 
the  river  called  Suvira.  Very  probably,  Suvira  is  the  name  of  the  Indus  for  some  miles 
above  its  fall  into  the  sea. 

For  Rasanjana  vide  note  e  in  p.  22  ante.  A  misprint,  viz.,  Rasanja,  occurs  there  for 
Rasanjana, — T. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITI 


53 


from  phlegm.  During  day  time  no  kind  of  strong  or  sharp 
collyrium  should  be  used!8  Sight  that  has  already  been  weakened 
by  discharge  (of  water  and  other  matter  from  the  eyes)  becomes 
incapable  of  bearing  sunlight.  Hence  collyrium  that  causes  dis¬ 
charge  becomes  desirable  only  during  the  night.  Hence  all  opera¬ 
tions  by  which  phlegm  is  destroyed  become  beneficial  to  the  vision 
and  make  it  clear*  As  the  lustre  of  gold  and  other  metals,.  and'; 
of  gems  of  divers  kinds,  when  these  are  washed  or  rubbed  with  oil  ! 
and  cloth  and  hair,  becomes  clear  and  bright,10  after  the  same 
manner,  the  vision  of  the  eyes  of  mortals  becomes,  with  the  aid  of 
collyria  and  lotion,  dear  and  bright,  like  the  moon  in  a  clear  firma¬ 
ment.*11 

Harenuka(a),  Priyangu(5),  Prithwika(c),  Kegara(^),  Nakha(<?), 
Hrivera(/),  Chandana(g),  Patra(A),  Twak(z'),  large  cardamoms, 
U9ira(/ ),  Padmaka(£),1!1  Dhyamaka(Z),  liquorice,  Manshi(wz), 
Guggulu(«),  Aguru(o),  sugar,  good  bark  of  Nyagrodha(  p ),  of; 
Udumvara(y),  of  A§wattha(r),  of  Plaksha(r),  and  of  Lodhra(^),1* 


*  Acphotana  is,  as  explained  by  the  Commentator,  drabaushadhadanam  ;  hence  liquid : 
medicaments  or  lotions. — T. 

a.  Probably  Piper  auranticum. 

b.  Aglaia  Roxburghiana. 

c.  Nigella  sativa. 

d.  Called  also  Nagakejara.  Mesua  ferrea. 

e.  Called  Lakhi  in  Vernacular.  A  kind  of  dried  shell  obtained  from  the  sea  and; 

very  generally  used  for  perfuming  oils. 

f.  Pavonia  odorata. 

g.  Pterocarpus  santalinns.  (Red  sandal  wood.) 

h.  Cinnamomum  Tamala ;  spa.  laurus  Cassia. 

i.  Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum. 

j.  The  roots  of  Andropogon  muricatum. 

k.  Called  also  Prapaundarika.  The  root-stock  of  Nymphaa  lotus.  Under  the  name 

of  Padmaka,  however,  a  kind  of  fragrant  wood  is  sold  in  every  native 
druggist’s  shop,  brought  from  Malwa  or  Southern  India. 

/.  Called  also  Bhustrina.  Andropogon  Schcenanthus. 

m.  Nardostachys  Jatamansi ;  syn.  Valeriana  Jatamansi. 

n.  Balsamodendron  Mukul also  Balsamo  pubescens. 

o.  Aquilaria  Agallocha, 

p.  Ficus  Bengalensis ;  syn.  Ficus  Indica. 

q.  Ficus  glomerata  ;  syn.  Covelia  glomerata. 

r.  Ficus  religiosa. 

s.  Called  also  Parkati.  Ficus  infecteria. 

t.  Symplocos  racemtsa. 


54 


CHA  RAKA -SA  MH1  tA. 


Vanya  (a),  Sarjjarasa(3),  Musta(u),  £aileya(^,  Kamala(^),  Utpala(/) 
Sriveshtaka( g),  £allaki(Zr),  and  ukavarha(?),14 — these  should  be 
pounded  together  into  a  paste  which  should  then  be  plastered  over 
a  reed-stick.  The  physician  should  make  the  thickness  of  the 
cylinder  (thus  formed)  equal  to  that  of  a  barley-corn.  Its  total 
thickness  should  be  like  that  of  the  thumb,  while  its  length  should 
be  equal  to  the  space  covered  by  the  breadth  of  eight  figures.14 
Having  dried  the  plaster  and  taken  out  the  reed-stick,  the  (  hollow ) 
cylinder  thus  formed  should,  after  being  saturated  with  clarified 
butter,  be  inserted  into  a  smoking  tube,  and  setting  one  end  into 
fire,  one  should  comfortably  drink  its  smoke  every  day.18 

Making  a  similar  cylinder  with  fat,  clarified  butter,  wax,  in  due 
measure,  and  with  those  foremost  of  medicines,  viz.,  Jivaka,  Risha- 
vaka,  and  the  others  included  in  the  first  six  aggregates  of  Astrin¬ 
gents  (mentioned  before),  one  should  drink  its  cooling  smoke.*17 

The  smoke  of  a  similar  cylinder  made  of  Sweta(/),  Jyotishmati(£) 
Haritala(Z),  Manah§ila(w),  and  aromatic  substances  like  Aguru(«), 
Patra(o),  and  others,  is  used  as  a  cerebral  purgative  or  errhine.18 


a.  Called  Keot  mutha  in  Vernacular.  A  species  of  Cyperus  rotundum. 

b.  The  exudation  or  resin  of  Shorea  robusta. 


c.  Cyperus  rotundus. 

d.  A  species  of  lichen. 

e.  Nelumbium  speciosum. 

f.  Nympota  stellata. 


g.  The  exudation  of  Pinus  longifolia.  Vide  note  e  in  p.  41. 

h.  Called  in  Bengali  Salai.  Boswellia  serrata. 


C,a.lle,d  also  Granthiparni.  U.  C.  Dutt  (Mat.  Med.  of  the  Hindus )  thinks 
this  is  a  kind  of  gall  caused  by  an  insect  on  some  tree.  Many  Bengal  physicians 
understand  Grantniparni  to  mean  a  kind  of  Panicum  dactylon. 

*  The  Commentator  says  that  Varanshadhaih  is  an  adjective  of  Madhurakaih  which 
implies  the  medicines  included  in  the  first  six  aggregates  of  Astringents  mentioned 
before,  such  as  Jivaka,  Rishavaka,  &c.,  vide  p.  p.  30 — 32  ante. —  T. 

j.  The  white  variety  of  Clitoria  Ternatea . 

k.  Cardiospermum  Halicacabum . 

l.  Orpiment.  “  Orpiment  occurs  in  two  forms,  namely,  in  smooth  shining  gold- 
colored  scales  called  vanaspatri  haritdla,  and  in  yollow  opaque  masses  called  Pinda 
haritala." — Mat.  Med.  of  the  Hindtis,  by  U.  C.  Dutt. 

m.  Realgar. 

».  Aquilaria  Agallocha. 


0.  The  leaves  of  Cinnamomum  Tamala ;  syn.  Zaurus  Cassia. 


CHARAKA-SA  ME  IT  A. 


55 


Heaviness  of  the  limbs,  headache,  inflamation  of  the  Schneider¬ 
ian  membrane  (  with  loss  of  sense  of  smell  ),  hemicrania,  otalgia, 
opthalmalgia,  cough,  hicup,  asthma,  hoarseness  (of  voice  ),lfl  weak¬ 
ness  of  the  teeth,  otorroea,  discharge  from  the  nose,  discharge  from 
the  eye,  ozoena,  foetid  smell  in  the  mouth,  odontalgia,  anorexia,20 
lock-jaw,  stiff-neck,  itching,  worms,  paleness  of  the  face,  mucous 
discharges,  discordance  of  voice,  enlarged  tonsil,  inflamation  of 
the  ranula,  21  morbid  baldness,  reddish  yellowness  of  the  hair,  fall¬ 
ing  off  of  the  hair,  sneezing,  sleepiness,  dulness  of  the  understanding, 
long  sleep  or  coma,22 — all  these  are  relieved  by  inhalation  of 
the  smoke  (of  the  preparations  already  mentioned).  Such  smoke 
also  enhances  the  strength  of  the  hair,  the  forehead,  the  senses, 
and  the  voice.*28 

One  whose  forehead  has  become  red  with  the  smoke  (  of  the 
preparations  already  mentioned  ),will  never  have  disorders,  arising 
from  wind  and  phlegm,  of  the  head,  or  of  that  part  of  the  body 
which  is  above  the  collar-bone,  even  when  there  are  powerful 
causes  for  producing  those  disorders.21 

Eight  are  the  occasions  that  are  mentioned  of  inhaling  the  smoke 
every  day.  Those  are  the  times  when  disorders  are  generally 
induced,  arising  from  wind  and  phlegm.28 


*  For  those  physicians  who  practise  the  European  system  of  medicine  in  India  and 
who  desire  to  know  the  Sanskrit  names  of  the  diseases  mentioned  here  but  who,  from 
their  unacquaintance  with  Sanskrit,  are  disinclined  to  consult  the  original,  the  Sanskrit 
names  are  given  below  in  the  order  in  which  their  English  equivalents  occur : — 
Gaurava  Cirah<jula,  Pinasa,  Arddhavabhedalca,  Karnayula,  Akshifula,  Kasa,  Hikka, 
Cwasa,  Galagraha  ( in  verse  19 ),  Dantadaurvalya,  Crotasrava,  Ghranasrava, 
Akshisrava,  Putighrana,  Asyagandha,  Dantacula,  Avochaka  (in  verse  20),  Hanugraha, 
Manyagraha,  Kandu,  Krimi,  Mukliapanduta,  Clesmapraseka,  Vaiswaryya,  Galasundi, 
Upajihvika  ( in  verse  21  ),  Keqakhalitya,  Kecapinjaratya,  Keijapatana,  Khavatu, 
Tandra,  Budhimoha,  and  Atinidrata.  I  have  followed  Wilson  and  U.  C.  Dutt  in 
giving  the  English  equivalents.  —  T. 

f  The  Commentator  explains  that  although  Vrddhajatrujah  includes  ‘Cirogatah,’  yet 
the  latter  are  'trfi*  itioned  Vige  shavidhanartham.  Valinopi  is  explained  as  valavat- 
kdranani.  Dr.  Sircar’s  translation  of  this  verse  (p.  314  of  vol.  IV.  of  the  Cal. 
Journal  of  Medicine )  has  been  incomplete. — T. 


56 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA 


After  bathing,  after  eating,  after  bringing  out  the  phlegm  in  the 
throat  by  artificial  means,  after  sneezing*  after  cleansing  the  teeth, 
after  purging  the  cerebrum  by  having  taken  snuff,  after  applying 
collyrium  to  the  eyes,  and  after  waking  from  sleep,  the  man  of 
prudence  will  take  to  smoking.*5 8  By  doing  this,  the  parts  of  his 
body  above  the  collar-bone  will  not  become  liable  to  diseases  of 
the  wind  or  of  the  phlegm  or  of  both  wind  and  phlegm.  He  should, 
however,  drink  the  smoke  on  each  of  the  above  occasions  (number¬ 
ing  eight  in  all)  three  times,  and  repeat  it  three  times*2 T  As 
regards  .these  eight  occasions  of  smoke  during  the  day,  the  ftian  of 
intelligence  would  act  wisely  by  drinking  his  daily  smoke  only  twice 
in  the  day  ;  and  as  regards  his  cooling  smoke  he  should  take  that 
only  once  ;  and,  lastly,  as  regards  that  smoke  which  causes  evacu¬ 
ations,  that  should  be  taken  only  three  or  four  times.f28  The 
vindications  (effects)  of  a  proper  inhalation  of  smoke  are  the 
..cleansing  of  the  chest,  the  throat,  and  all  the  senses  ;  the  lightness 
of  the  head,  and  the  restoration  to  the  normal  condition  by  checking 
vthe  disorders  already  mentioned  ( of  the  wind,  the  phlegm  and  the 
bile)42®  Smoke  inhaled  at  improper  times  or  in  excess  causes 
ithese  disorders,  viz.,  deafness,  blindness,  dumbness,  hemorrhage, 
and  vertigo.80  If  in  consequence  of  the  disorders  arising  from 
■the  use  of  smoke  (in  excess)  the  wind  increase  so  as  to  produce 
.abnormal  action  of  the  bile,  then  in  that  case  the  drinking  of  Ghrita 
:and  the  use  of  oily  snuff  and  collyrium  and  tarpana  would  be 
beneficial.  || 81 

In  hemorrhagic  affections  from  disorders  of  bile,  cooling  snuff 
and  collyrium  and  tarpana  should  be  used  ;  while  in  disorders 
arising  from  excess  of  both  phlegm  and  bile, dry  snuff  and  collyrium 
and  tarpana  should  be  used. 


*  ‘After  sneering’  implies  sneezing  by  the  use  of  artificial  means  such  as  the  applica¬ 
tion  of  a  blade  of  grass  or  a  stiff  thread  of  cotton.  ‘After  cleansing  the  teeth’  implies 
the  morning,  for  that  is  the  time  when  the  people  of  this  country  wash  their  teeth.— T. 

t  There  are  different  kinds  of  smoke  as  already  said..  The  ‘Prayogika’  is  the  daily 
smoke ;  the  ‘Snaihika’  is  the  cooling  smoke  :  and  the  ‘Virechaka’  is  that  which  is  inhaled 
for  promoting  evacuations  of  every  kind. — T. 

X  I.  e.,  these  three  are  equalised  and  restored  to  harmony  of  action.  —  T. 

||  ‘Tarpanam’  means  the  application  of  oil  to  the  eyes.  ‘Tatra’  refers  to  ‘dhumaje 
jdoshe.’  ‘Pittanugah’ implies  ‘vriddhah.’ — T. 


NOTICE. 


The  English  translation  of  Charaka-Sapihita  will  be  issued 
in  successive  fascicules  of  4  forms,  Royal  octavo,  each;  12 
fascicules  will  be  issued  every  year.  Under  favorable  circum¬ 
stances,  the  number  of  fascicules  or  the  number  of  forms  in 
each  fascicule  may  be  increased.  For  subscribers  paying  in 
advance  the  charge  is  Rs.  32  for  the  whole  work. 

(This  amount  may  be  paid  in  four  instalments  if  subs¬ 
cribers  like). 


Manager  of  Charaka  Samhita  &  Sustruta  Samhita, 
200,  Cornwallis  Street, 


CALCUTTA. 


t  T357 


The  following  publications  relating  to  Hindu  Medical  Science 
may  be  had  at  No.  200,  Cornwalis'  Street , 
Calcutta ,  India.  . 


1.  Charaka-Samhita  in  original,  with  Chakr;  panidatta’s  Com¬ 
mentary  ;  edited  by  Pandit  Abinash  Chandra  Kaviratna  : 
(published  in  Devanagara  character  in  successive  fascicules). 
Price  Rs.  20  in  advance. 

2.  Susruta  Samhita  (in  original)  with  Dallanacharya’s  com¬ 
mentary,  edited  by  Pundit  Abinash  Chandra  Kaviratna 
(published  in  Devanagara  -  character  in  successive  fasci¬ 
cules).  Price  Rs.  19  in  advance. 

3.  Bengali  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  with  the  original 
text  (complete)  in  the  Bengali  character.  Price  Rs.  12. 

4.  Hindi  translation  of  Ditto  (  published  in'  successive  fasci¬ 
cules).  Price  Rs.  16  in  advance. 

5.  Bengali  translation  of  Susruta  Samhita  (published  in  suc¬ 
cessive  fascicules).  Price  Rs.  xo  in  advance. 

6.  Hindi  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive  fasci¬ 
cules).  Price  Rs.  15  in  advance. 

7.  Chikitsa-Sammilani,  (a  monthly  medical  journal  in  Ben¬ 
gali).  Subscription  in  advance  for  one  year  Rs.  3-6  ;  foi 
the1  poorer  classes,  Rs.  2-6.  (Back  volumes  for  seven  years 
may  be  had  for  Rs.  2,1,  or  Rs.  3  for  each  volume-  embracing 
xi  numbers.) 


«  ‘OO  ( 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

DITOR  OF  CAHARAKA  SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA  SAMHITA 
( in  original  )  WITH  COMMENTARIES  ;  Bengali  AND 
Hindi  translator  of  Charaka  Samhita  and 
of  Susruta  Samhita  ;  editor  of  Chikitsa- 
Sammilani  (  Medical  Journal  in 
Bengali) ;  Practitioner  of 
the  Hindu  System 
of  Medicine^ 


(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved. ) 


OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS 


EMINENT  MEN. 

7,  Norham  Gardens,  Oxford, 

21 st  September  1888. 

Dear  Sir, 

I  received  your  editions  of  Susruta  and  Charaka  and 
beg  to  convey  my  best  thanks  to  you  at  once.  I  am  just 
going  to  take  a  short  holiday  and  must  leave  the  study  of 
your  books  till  I  return.  However,  I  have  seen  enough 
of  them  to  know  that  they  will  prove  very  useful.  When¬ 
ever  your  countrymen  take  the  trouble  to  print  a  good 
Sanscrit  commentary  with  the  texts,  they  enable  us- to 
understand  the  texts  as  well  as  if  we  were  in  India,  per¬ 
haps  even  better,  provided  that  the  commentators  were 
better  informed  than  any  one  now  living. 

But  I  have  no  doubt  that  you  ought  to  publish  an 
English  translation  of  Charaka.  It  is  more  important 
even  than  Susruta.  *  *  *  The  book  is  of  great  im¬ 

portance  both  to  Sanscrit  scholars  and  to  medical  men 
who  take  an  interest  in  the  historical  development  of 
medicine. 

I  have  to  write  in  a  great  hurry,  and  I  can  only  add 
that  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you  in  any  way  you  may 
wish. 

I  am  yours  sincerely, 

!>'.  MAX  MULLER. 


(  2  ) 

88,  Onslow  Gardens, 
London ,  S.  W. 

Dear  Sir, 

I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive  parts 
of  the  Susruta  and  Charaka  Samhita,  and  am  greatly 
obliged  to  you.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to 
my  Library. 

I  take  this  opportunity  of  informing  you  that  I  have 
how  retired  from  Oxford  and  live  in  London  at  the  above 
address. 

I  am,  Dear  Sir, 

Yours  faithfully 

MONIER  WILLIAMS,  k.  c.  i.  e. 

New  York,  U.  S.  A. 
Sep.  14,  1891. 

My  Dear  Sir, 

I  have  received  and  read  with  much  pleasure  the 
1st  fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  “Charaka  Samhita” 
and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the  rest  of  the  work  It 
cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  pro-, 
fession,  which  will  be  under  great  obligations  to  you  for 
your  labour  of  love.  With  best  wishes, 

Yours  very  truly, 

(Sd)  AUSTIN  FLINT. 


(  3  ) 


[Dear  Sir, 


Gothenburg,  Sweden, 
Od.  8,  1891. 


I  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything  Indian,  and  I  need 
l  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  what¬ 
ever  insight  I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your 
valuable  translation.  I  wish  you  success  in  this  important 
work. 


Yours  very  respectfully, 

(Sd)  A.  H.  EDGREN. 


Columbia  College 
New  York,  u.  s.  a 
Od.  5,  1891. 

Dear  Sir, 

It  is  delightful  to  see  one  interested,  in  so  broad 
minded  a  way,  in  giving  back  to  the  modern  world  the 
treasures  of  the  ancient  books.  It  is  pleasing  to  seethe 
earnest  energy  which  the  Hindus  are  putting  forth  to  give 
those  in  the  West  greater  advantages  to  study  their  litera¬ 
ture  of  the  past  in  which  we  take  so  warm  an  interest. 
I  must  congratulate  you,  dear  Pandit,  with  true  apprecia¬ 
tion  of  your  efforts. 

As  I  have  also  expressed  to  some  of  my  Parsi  cor¬ 
respondence  friends,  it  is  pleasing  in  return  to  know  that 
you  in  the  East  appreciate  our  studies  and  interest. 


(  4  ) 


I  should  very  much  like  to  make  a  little  note,  in  one 
of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing. 

Be  assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation 
and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and  antique  lore. 

With  many  thanks  for  the  compliment  and  best 
wishes  for  your  success, 

Believe  me, 

Yours  faithfully, 

(Sd)  A.  V.  WILLIAMS  JACKSON, 

Prof.  Columbia  College. 

Paris, 

20 th  December ,  1891. 

Sir, 

Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of 
ancient  literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to 
the  Oriental  scholar  and  to  the  man  of  medicine,  are  very 
praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to 
the  notice  of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those 
who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches.  From  this 
moment  I  beg  that  you  will  put  me  down  as  a  subscriber 
to  your  edition  of  Charaka  written  in  Devanagri. 

(Sd)  A.  BARTH. 
Paris, 

12nd  December ,  1891. 

Dear  Sir, 

I  have  received  your  letter  with  its  enclosed  pamphlet. 
I  thank  you  for  the  same.  I  praise  you  on  uyour  nder- 


(  5  ) 


taking  and  wish  you  all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest 
to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the  com¬ 
mentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  Utility.  I 
will  put  in  a  notice  in  the  “  Journal  des  Savants”  as  soon 
as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Accept,  dear  sir,  all  my  good  wishes  for  your  success. 

Yours  sincerely, 

(Sd)  B.  St.  HILAIRE. 


Bonn,  Germany, 

2  2nd  January ,  1892. 

Dear  Sir, 

I  beg  to  thank  you  for  the  first  fasciculus  of  your 
translation  of  Charaka  Samhita.  The  work  you  have 
undertaken  will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical 
men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science.  I  shall  not 
fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians 
whom  I  know  personally,  to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka 
as  soon  as  your  translation  of  it  has  proceeded  far  enough 
to  allow  them  to  form  an  opinion  on  the  intrinsic  value 
and  the  position,  in  the  development  of  medical  science 
o  Charaka  Samhita.  Wishing  you  success  in  your  work 

I  remain,  Dear  Sir, 

Your  Sincerely, 

(Sd)  H.  JACOBI, 
Sanskrit  Professor 


(  6  ) 


16  Prinzenstrasse. 

Konigsberg,  Germany, 
January  1  oih,  1892. 

Dear  Sir, 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  kindly  sending  me  a 
'  opy  of  the  first  fasciculus  of  your  English  translation  o 
Charaka  Samhitd,  which  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  ar 
historical  point. of  view,  the  most  important  work  of  the 
medicinal  literature  of  your  country.  I  congratulate  you 
sincerely  on  this  undertaking  by  which  the  great  merits 
you  have  already  acquired  in  this  line  of  Indian  literature 
are  highly  augmented. 

I  shall  do  what  I  privately  can  to  call  the  attention  o 
scholars  and  medical  men  to  your  translation. 

Yours  sincerely, 

(Sd)  R.  GARBE' 

Westminster, 
Maryland,  u.  s.  a. 

January  8 th,  1892 

Dear  Sir, 

Your  letter  and  Part  1.  of  your  English  version  o 
Charaka  Samhitd  reached  me  yesterday.  I  hasten  to  ex¬ 
tend  to  you  my  thanks  for  both  and  to  say  that  I  have 
already  gone  through  the  first  fasciculus  with  great  interesl 
and  that  I  shall  be  delighted  to  receive  the  other  numbers 
which  you  so  kindly  offer  to  send  me.  You  have  under¬ 
taken  a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to 


(  7  ) 


me,  deserves  the  approbation  and  encouragement  of  all 
who  care  to  know  what  wisemen  of  the  past  ages  thought 
and  taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of 
health  and  the  cure  of  desease.  I  confess  to  a  very  eager 
curiosity  as  to  everything  about  India  :  its  history,  its 
literature,  its  antiquities,  and  I  rejoice  at  every  attempt 
made  by  properly  qualified  scholars  to  bring  its  buried 
treasures  to  light. 

Very  respectfully  yours, 

(Sd)  JAMES  W.  REESE. 


Philadelphia,  u.  s.  a., 
February  \th,  1892. 

My  Dear  Sir, 

Do  not  think,  pray,  that  my  silence,  in  any  way 
indicated  lack  of  interest  in  your  most  valuable  work  ;  far 
from  it  !  I  think,  on  the  contrary,  that  you  are  entitled  to 
the  greatest  praise.  The  delay  was  due  to  the  fact  that 
neither  of  the  journals  under  my  direction  possessed  a 
department  for  reviews.  I  could  not  tell  you  when  I 
could  allude  to  your  labours  and  so  waited  until  it  would 
be  possible  for  me  to  give  you  some  idea  of  the  time 
when  I  should  be  able  to  do  you  justice.  Next  May  or 
June,'  the  Satellite— a  journal  under  my  editional  manage¬ 
ment — will  begin  to  review  books,  etc.,  and  one  of  the 
first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours.  In  the  meantime 
permit  me  to  consider  you  as  one  of  the  Corresponding 
Editors  of  the  Annual  of  the  universal  medical  sciences, 
which  is,  as  you  know,,  an  annual  review  of  everything 
done  in  medicine,  worth  recording.  I  will  have  the 


<  8  ) 

pleasure  of  sending  you  this  year’s  issue  (5  bound  volumes, 
2,500  pages)  as  soon  as  it  leaves  the  binder’s,  say,  about 
April  1st.  I  send  you  by  this  mail  a  few  numbers  of 
the  Satellite-,  they  will  give  you  an  idea  of  both  works. 

I  am  sorry  to  say  that  I  agree  with  you  concerning 
the  insular  prejudices  of  the  English  physicians.  It  is 
really  unfortunate,  for  much  light  is  thus  kept  out.  The 
medical  world,  especially,  is  constantly  finding  in  the 
progressive  studies  of  the  present  repetitions  of  the 
past.  “  There  is  nothing  new  under  the  sun,”  it  is  their 
oft-repeated  dictum,  and  still  those  who  could  do  so  much 
will  persist  in  burying  in  a  tomb  of  scorn  the  remains  of 
much  knowledge  that  could  today  at  least  inspire  and 
suggest.  My  “  Annual”  is  still  in  its  infancy;  you  will  see 
in  it  reflections  of  my  thoughts  as  to  the  future.  I  hope 
to  show  you  some  day  that  prejudices  such  as  those  you 
mention  will  in  their  turn  be  buried  and  that  such  men 
as  yourself  are  precious  in  this  world. 

Yours  very  faithfully, 

(Sd)  CHAS.  E.  SAJONS. 

St.  Louis,  Mo.  U.  S-  A 
February ,  16  th,  1892 

Dear  Sir, 

Your  kind  letter,  accompanied  by  fascicule  1  of  your 
translation  of  Charaka  Samhita,  has  been  received  and  I 
thank  you  for  the  kindness  you  have  shown  me.  The 
work  interests  me  very  highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  las 
night,  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it,  which  exeiteda  lively 


(  9  ) 


curiosity  and  expressions  of  interest.  As  soon  as  practi¬ 
cable,  for  I  am  now  in  the  midst  of  laborious  engage¬ 
ments,  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal 
and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical  monthly,  which  will  no 
doubt  be  very  thankfully  accepted  and  published.  I  was 
very  agreeably  surprised  to  find  this  venerable  relic  of 
antiquity  so  different  from  what  I  had  imagined  it  might 
be.  I  expected  to  find  directions  for  invocations  to  the 
deity  and  all  kinds  of  incantations  and  charms,  but  I  was 
destined  to  see  a  very  respectable  display  of  materia 
medica  and  a  systematic  classification,  of  which  I  had  no 
idea.  True,  there  are  some  most  uncouth  remedies,  but 
no  worse  than  many  of  those  gravely  recommended  in 
the  medical  literature  of  mediaeval  Europe,  and  a  number 
cf  ethical  precepts  of  the  highest  merit.  You  have  cer¬ 
tainly  placed  me  under  obligation  by  bringing  to  my 
knowledge  so  quaint,  yet  so  venerable,  a  relic  of  the  old 
civilization  of  India. 

Whenever  my  time  permits  to  make  the  neccessary 
selections  and  to  put  an  article  in  shape  for  the  press,  I 
will  direct  a  copy  to  you  and  meanwhile  thank  you  again 
and  remain 

Sincerely  yours, 

(Sd)  Chas.  O.  Curtman 

P.  S. — Should  you  address  me  again,  please  use  the 
address  printed  above  and  omit  all  titles,  which  are  unusual 
n  our  United  States. 

From  R.  C.  Dutt,  C.S. — In  my  work  on  Ancient  India 
I  have  noticed  your  patriotic  labours  which  deserve  every 
encouragement  that  our  countrymen  can  bestow.  If  you 


(  16  ) 

live  to  finish  the  editions  of  Charaka  and  SusrUia  with 
commentaries,  which  you  have  so  admirably  begun,  you 
ieave  a  name  behind  you,  and  vvill  deserve  the  special 
acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession, 

Arrah, 

9  th  March,  1892. 

Dear  Sir, 

I  have  read  Charaka  Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
mervellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form, 
Many  of  the  recipes  appear  valuable,  especially  the  gruels 
at  p.  p.  15  and  16,  which  resemble  the  French  iisanes. 

(Sd)  T.  H.  B.  Skrini 

Maimensing, 
July  16,  1892 

Dear  Sir, 

I  have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  with  thanks  the 
receipt  of  your  book.  I  should  think  the  translatior 
would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting 
even  to  a  layman. 

I  am. 

Yours  truly, 

(Sd)  H.  A.  D.  Phillips 

Extract  from  the  ( London )  Times. 

“Great  credit  is  due  to  Pandit  Abinash  Chandra 
Kaviratna,  the  editor  of  a  monthly  medical  journal  ir 
Bengal.  He  has  edited  the  text  of  Susruta  with  a  com¬ 
mentary  in  Sanskrit,  and  published  at  the  same  time  a 


(  ”  ) 

Bengali  and  a  Hindi  translation  of  this  classical  work. 
He  has  likewise  edited  Charaka,  who  is  supposed  to  be 
older  than  Susruta,  with  a  Sanskrit  commentary,  and  he 
tias  now  undertaken  an  English  translation  of  this 
medical  manual,  of  which  three  numbers  have  appeared. 
He  tells  us  that  the  medical  literature  of  ancient  and 
mediseval  India  would  fill  a  fairly  large  library  .’’—May 
19,  1891. 

Extract  from  the  Medical  Record ,  New  York.  U.  S.  A 
“Pundit  Abinash  Chandra  Kaviratna  deserves  the 
thanks  of  all  English-speaking  scholars  for  his  labors  n 
translating  this  work,  and  we  hope  that  the  results  of  his 
venture  will  be  such  as  to  encourage  him  to  follow  it  up 
with  a  translation  of  Susruta  Samhita,  the  second  great 
Sanskrit  medibal  treatise,  and  one  which  may  be  regarded 
as  companion  to  Charaka,  of  which  he  has  already 
published  a  Bengali  translation.” — October  31  st,  1891. 

Extract  frotn  the  Indian  Medical  Gazette,  Calcutta. 

Translation  of  Charaka  Samhita. — Kaviraj 
Avinash  Chundra  Kaviratna  has  sent  us  a  fascicule  of 
the  English  translation  of  the  oldest  Sanskrit  work  on 
Medicine.  This  is  an  enterprise  which  is  deserv¬ 
ing  of  encouragement.  This  is  a  busy  and  practical 
age,  and  medical  science  as  now  known  and  practised 
differs  toio  cczlo  from  the  fanciful  pathology  and  crude 
therapeutics  laid  down  by  Charaka.  Still  the  early  grop¬ 
ing  after  truth  of  the  sages  of  an  ancient  and  marvellous 
civilization  will  never  cease  to  possess  interest  even  if  they 
fail  in'the  attribute  of  utility.”— May,  1891. 


(  12  ) 

Extract  from  the  ( Calcutta )  Englishman. 

“  Pundit  Avinash  Chunder  Kaviratna  has  published 
the  first  part  of  his  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita, 
the  most  ancient  and  famous  work  on  Hindu  medicine 
extant.  *  *  *  Pundit  Avinash  truly  says  the  age  of 

Charaka  is  not  its  only  recommendation,  for  it  is  also 
the  most  comprenensive  Hindu  treatise,  we  possess  on 
disease  and  the  general  conditions  of  health.  Eight 
years  ago,  Pundit  Avinash  Chunder  issued  an  edition  of 
Charaka,  together  with  a  Bengali  translation.  The  edition 
of  a  thousand  copies  was  rapidly  exhausted,  and  he  then 
set  to  work  upon  Susruta,  of  which  about  half  has  already 
appeared,  done  into  Bengali  and  Hindi.  And  now  he  has 
begun  this  English  version  of  Charaka,  which  has  all  the 
appearance  of  being  a  careful  and  scholarly  piece  of  work 
The  indefatigable  translator,desferves  the  warmest  encour¬ 
agement  from  his  fellow-countrymen  and  from  all  true 
friends  of  India.  His  work  is  being  published  at  a  cheap 
rate,  and  it  ought  to  be  welcomed  by  all  students  of 
medicine  in  India,  as  well  as  by  students  of  ancient  Hindu 
learning.” — 12  th  July ,  1891. 


Extract  from  {Bombay)  Native  Opinion. 

“Mr.  Kaviratna  has  kindly  s^nt  us  the  first  number  of 
his  English  translation,  which  he  proposes  to  issue  in  suc¬ 
cessive  parts.  We  wish  every  success  to  this  praiseworthy 
attempt  of  his.  Charaka’s  work  is  the  most  renowned  of 
extant  works  on  the  Indian  system  of  medicine,  -t.  trans¬ 
lation  of  this  work  from  the  pen  of  such  a  well-versed 


v 


4  7,357 

charaka-samuitA.  57 

After  this  I  shall  mention  the  persons  for  whom  smoke  is  in¬ 
jurious.32 

One  who  has  taken  purgative  should  not  take  smoke;  nor  one 
who  has  taken  an  injection;  nor  one  who  is  suffering  under  affec¬ 
tions  that  produce  hemorrhage;  nor  one  suffering  from  poisoning; 
nor  one  afflicted  with  grief ;  nor  a  woman  that  is  pregnant  ;S3  nor 
one  exhausted  with  labour ;  nor  one  under  intoxication,  nor  one 
whose  stomach  is  full  of  mucus;  nor  one  who  is  suffering  under. ex¬ 
cess  of  bile;  nor  one  whose  eyes  are  not  visited  by  sleep;  nor  one 
subject  to  fainting  fits  or  vertigo  or  afflicted  by  thirst;  nor  one  who 
is  weak  ;  nor  one  who  has  wounds  and  ulcers  on  the  body  ;34  nor 
one  who  has  taken  wine  or  milk  or  oily  drinks  or  honey.  One 
should  never  take  smoke  after  having  eaten  rice  with  curds.  Then 
again,  one  should  not  smoke  whose  constitution  is  dry,  as  also  one 
who  is  angry.35  One  should  not  smoke  who  is  suffering  under  an 
Inflammation  of  the  palate  ;  nor  one  who  is  suffering  under  cata¬ 
ract;  nor  one  whose  head  has  sustained  an  injury;  nor  one  who 
Is  suffering  under  pain  with  heat  and  swelling  in  the  temples  and 
forehead  ;  nor  one  who  has  got  inflammation  of  the  throat ;  nor  one 
who  is  suffering  under  disorders  of  the  urine  ;  nor  one  afflicted  with 
disorders  resulting  from  excess  of  drinking.36  He  who  in  these 
disorders  when  smoke  should  not  be  taken,  takes  it  through  igno¬ 
rance,  finds  his  disorders  increase  very  greatly  in  consequence  of 
such  misuse  of  smoke.37 

One  for  whom  smoke  is  not  forbidden  should  take  it  by  the 
nose  in  disorders  having  their  seat  in  the  head,  nose,  and  the  eye. 
When  the  disorder  is  in  the  throat,  one  should  smoke  by  the  mouth. 
One  who  smokes  by  the  nose  should  let  it  out  by  the  mouth.38  One 
inhaling  puffs  of  smoke  by  the  mouth  should  never  let  them  out  by 
the  nose  ;  for  such  smoke,  by  getting  upwards,  is  sure  to  injure  the 
eyes.39  The  man  of  prudence,  while  inhaling  smoke  by  the  nose, 
should  do  so  three  times,  having  shut  one  of  the  nostrils,  seated  at 
his  ease,  and  having  disposed  his  body  and  eyes  straight,  and 
with  mind  concentrated  on  the  act.40 

The  pipe  for  inhaling  smoke  for  purging  should  be  of  the  length 
of  one's  own  four  and  twenty  fingers’  breadth;  that  for  inhaling  oily 

3 


58 


CHAR  A  I<A -SA  MHITA . 


smoke  should  be  of  the  length  of  two  and  thirty  fingers’  breadth  ; 
and  that  for  daily  smoke  should  be  of  the  length  of  six  and  thirty 
fingers’  breadth.*41  The  pipe  should  consist  of  three  straight  limbs. 
The  hollow  of  the  first  limb  should  be  of  the  measure  of  the  seed 
of  a  jujube.  In  the  construction  of  a  smoking  pipe  the  use  is 
applauded  of  materials  employed  in  constructing  enema  pipes.42 
Smoke  that  is  emitted  from  a  distance,  divided  in  its  course  by 
(three)  limbs,  attenuated  by  the  peculiar  shape  of  the  pipe,  and  in¬ 
haled  in  proper  quantity  and  at  the  proper  time,  does  not  injure 
the  organs.4®  When  the  chest,  the  throat,  and  the  head  become 
light,  and  the  phlegm  losing  its  density  becomes  thin,  then  should  it 
be  said  that  the  smoke  has  been  inhaled  properly  ( i  e .,  in  proper 
measure  and  at  the  proper  time).44  When  one’s  voice  is  still  un- 
eleansed,  throat  not  purged  of  phlegm,  and  head  still  heavy,  it 
should  be  said  that  smoke  has  not  been  properly  inhaled.45  The 
palate,  pharynx,  and  throat  become  dry  and  inflamed,  and  one  feels 
thirst  and  yawns  and  becomes  subject  to  profuse  hemorrhage,4® 
the  head  swims  exceedingly,  and  one  suffers  fainting  fits,  and 
one’s  senses  burn  and  feel  pain,  when  smoke  has  been  inhaled  in 
excess.47  One  should  at  all  times  use  anutaila  or  such  oils  as  are 
beneficial  to  the  senses.  These  should  not,  however,  be  used  when 
the  sky  remains  cloudless  in  these  three  seasons,  viz.,  the  rainy 
season,  the  autumn,  and  the  spring.f48  He  who  uses  snuff  (of  oil) 
in  proper  times  and  as  directed  will  have  his  eyes  and  nose  and 
ears  uninjured.49  The  hair  and  beard  of  such  a  person  will  never 
become  white  or  brown.  This  hair  again  does  not  fall  off.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  grows  luxuriantly.50  By  the  use  of  such  snuff, 
stiff-neck,  headache,  hemiplegia  (or  paralysis  of  the  muscles  on  one 
side  of  the  face  and  neck),  lock-jaw,  coryza,  hemicrania,  and  trem- 


*  The  first  line  of  verse  41  is  variously  read.  '  Angulaih  swaih’  seems  to  be  the 
correct  reading.  In  the  second  line,  the  correct  reading  seems  to  be  ‘  Addhyarddham  ’ 
equivalent  to  ‘  sarddham.’  This  has  reference  to  24,  and  accordingly  (as  the  Com¬ 
mentator  explains)  the  length  of  the  pipe  in  1  prayoga  ’  is  36  and  not  48  as  supposed  by 
Dr.  Sircar.  —  T. 

t  The  word  used  here  is  ‘anutaila.’  The  Commentator  explains  that  this  means  oil 
that  is  good  for  the  'atm'  or  the  senses.  The  process  of  preparing  this  oil  is  described 
in  Verses  55  to  59  following.  —  T. 


CHA  RA  RASA  MHITA 


bling  of  the  head,  become  relieved.61  Moistened  by  such  snuff, 
the  nerves,  the  joints,  and  the  tendons  and  longer  arteries  of  the 
head  and  skull  of  such  a  person  acquire  great  strength.62  The 
face  becomes  lighted  and  full ;  the  voice  becomes  smooth,  steady, 
and  deep ;  and  all  the  organs  become  purified  (of  defects)  and 
acquire  great  strength.63  Diseases  of  parts  above  the  clavicle  do 
not  easily  appear  in  such  a  person.  Even  in  advanced  old  age, 
decrepitude  does  not  prevail  in  such  parts.*6  4 

Chandana  (a),  Aguru  ( b ),  Patra  ( c ),  the  bark  of  Darvi  ( d, ), 
Liquorice,  Vala(t?),  Prapaundarika  (/),  small  Cardamoms,  Vi- 
danga(^-),  Vilwa  (h),  and  Utpala  («-),66  Hrivera(/),  AbhayS  (k), 
Dhanya (/),  Twak  (w),  Musta(w),  Sariva(o),  Sthira(/>),  Surahva  (q) 
Prishniparni  [r),  Jivanti  (s),  and  £atavari  (t),se  Harenu  (u),  Vri- 
hati  (v),  Vyaghri  (w),  Surabhi  (x),  and  the  stamens  of  the  lotus, 
should  be  boiled  in  pure  rain  water  whose  measure  should  be  a 


*  Wrinkles  and  grey  hair  do  not  appear  in  such  a  man.  —  T. 

a.  Pterocarpus  santalinus. 

b.  Aquilaria  Agallocha. 

c.  Leaves  of  Cinnamomum  Tamala.  (Nees). 

d.  The  root-bark  of  Berberis  Asiatica, 

e.  Sida  cordifolia. 

f.  Root-stock  of  the  Nytnphaa  Lotus. 

g.  Bmbelia  ribes ;  syn.  Embelia  glandulifera. 

h.  AEgle  marme/os. 

i.  Nymphota  stellata. 

j.  Pavonia  odorata.. 

k.  Terminalia  chebula. 

l.  Corriander  seeds.  Some  texts  read  Vanya  which  is  a  variety  of  Cyperus. 

m.  Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum. 

n.  Cyperus  rotundus. 

o.  Hemidesmus  Tndicus. 

p.  Called  also  Calaparni,  Desmodium  Gangeticwn  ;  syn.  Hedysaram  Gangeticum. 

q.  Pinus  deodara. 

r.  Uraria  lagopodioides  ;  syn.  Doodia,  lagopodioides  (Roxb). 

s.  Ceelogyne  ovalis. 

t.  Asparagus  racemosus. 
it.  Piper  aurantiacum. 

v.  Solanum  Indicum. 

w.  Solanum  Xanthocarpum. 

x.  Ocimum  Basilicum. 


60 


CllA  RA  KA- SAME  IT  A. 


hundred  times  (that  of  the  oil  which  is  to  be  added  to  it  after¬ 
wards.)  5  7 

The  boiling  should  go  on  till  the  extract  that  remains  is  ten 
times  the  quantity  of  oil  that  is  to  be  used.  The  extract  should 
then  be  taken  down  from  the  boiling  oven.  It  should  then  be 
divided  into  ten  portions.  The  oil  should  then  be  boiled  with  each 
of  these  ten  portions  one  after  another.58 

When  boiled  for  the  tenth  time,  a  quantity  equal  to  what  then 
remains,  of  goat’s  milk,  should  then  be  added.  This  is  the  pro¬ 
cess  for  preparation  of  what  is  called  anutaila  for  purposes  of 
snuff.59 

The  dose  that  should  be  used  of  this  oil  is  of  the  measure  of 
half  a  pala  (four  tolahs)*  to  be  taken  as  snuff  for  three  times.  It 
should  be  used  with  a  pencil  of  cotton,  the  user’s  head'  having  been 
previously  rubbed  with  oil  and  fomented.80 

This  operation  should  go  on  for  seven  days  in  all,  repeating 
it  on  every  alternate  day.  If  a  man,  with  restrained  senses  and 
living  upon  the  proper  kind  and  measure  of  food  and  guarding 
himself  against  exposure  to  the  wind  and  keeping  himself  warm, 
uses  at  proper  times  this  oil  which  can  correct  the  disorders  of  the 
wind,  the  bile,  and  the  phlegm,  and  which  imparts  vigor  to  the 
organs,  he  derives  all  the  benefits  mentioned  before.81-89 

The  stick  for  brushing  the  teeth  should  be  either  astringent  or 
pungent  or  bitter.  One  of  its  ends  should  be  chewed  into  the  form 
of  a  brush.  It  should  he  used  twice  a  day,  taking  care  that  the 
gums  be  not  injured.-!-88 

The  process  (of  washing  the  teeth  thus)  destroys  bad  odor  and 
bad  taste.  It  removes  sordes  from  the  tongue,  teeth,  and  mouth, 
and  quickly  produces  appetite  and  purifies  the  teeth.84 


*  A  tolah  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  a  Rupee. — T. 

t  To  this  day  many  Hindus  wash  their  teeth  twice  a  day.  Washing  them  once 
however  is  a  rule  that  is  very  rarely  broken..  The  brush  must  be  a  fresh  one.  A  brush  once 
used  should  not  be  used  again. — T 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHITA . 


61 


In  making  sticks  for  brushing  the  teeth  the  plants  that  are  re¬ 
commended  are  Karan j a  (a),  Karavira  (3),  Arka  (c],  Malati  {d),  Ka- 
kubha  ( e ),  A^ana {/),  and  others  similar  to  them.65 

Tongue-scrapers  should  be  made  of  gold,  silver,  copper,  tin, 
lead,  and  iron.  These  should  be  of  blunt  edges  and  bent  in  form.66 

By  using  the  tongue-scraper  the  secretions  that  accumu¬ 
late  at  the  base  of  the  tongue,  and  also  those  that  obstruct  respira¬ 
tion,  are  removed,  and  the  mouth  becoming  freed  from  all  bad  odor 
emits  an  agreeable  smell.  For  this  reason  the  tongue  should  be 
scratched  with  the  tongue-scraper.67 

One  who  desires  cleanliness  and  good  odor  (of  the  tongue  or 
mouth),  and  appetite,  should  keep  in  his  mouth  the  fruits  of  Jati  (g), 
Katuka  ( h ),  and  Puga  (z),  as  also  of  Lavanga  (/),68  of  Kakkolaka  (k) 
good  betel-leaves,  camphor,  and  small  cardamoms.60  He  who 
rinses  his  mouth  with  oil  acquires  strength  of  the  lower  jaw  and 
of  the  voice  also  fulness  of  the  face,  keenness  of  taste  in  respect  of 
all  kinds  of  food,  and  excellent  appetite.70  Such  a  man  will  never 
suffer  from  dryness  of  throat ;  he  will  have  no  fear  of  his  lips  being 
cracked  •  his  teeth  will  never  wear  out  and  their  roots  will  become 
very  strong.  His  teeth  also  will  never  ache  and  will  never  become 
afflicted  by  acids,  and  will,  besides,  be  strong  enough  to  masticate 
the  hardest  kinds  of  food.72 

Of  one  whose  head  is  every  day  saturated  with  oil,  head-aches 
never  appear,  nor  baldness,  nor  the  effects  of  decrepitude ;  the 
hair. of  such  a  man  does  not  fall  off.78 


а.  Pongamia  glabra  ;  syn.  Galedufa  Indica. 

б,  Nerium  odorum  or  the  sweet-scented  oleander. 

c.  Calatropis  gigantea  ;  syn.  Asclepias  gigantea. 

d.  Aganosma  caryophyllata  ;  syn.  Echites  caryophyllata. 

e.  Terminalia  Arjuna  ;  syn.  Pentaptera  Arjuna. 

f.  Terminalia  tomentosa ;  syn,  Pentaptera  tomentosa. 

g.  Myristica  officinalis.  (Nutmegs  are  indicated). 

h.  Called  also  Latakasturi  in  Sanskrit.  Abelmoschus  mosehatus ;  syn.  Hibiscus 

Abelmoschus. 

i.  Areca  Catechu.  (The  betel-nut  tree). 

j.  Caryophillus  aromaticus.  (Cloves). 

k.  Berries  having  a  black  aromatic  waxy  substance. 


62  CHA  RA  K4-SAMU  IT  A 

The  head  and  skull  in  particular,  of  such  a  man  acquires  great 
strength.  His  hair  also  becomes  black  and  long  and  their  roots 
become  very  strong,7* 

By  anointing  one’s  head  with  oil  one’s  senses  become  clear, 
and  the  skin  of  one’s  face  becomes  good  ;  one  gets  sleep  easily, 
and  one  feels  ease  in  every  respect.75 

By  applying  oil  every  day  to  one’s  ears  one  becomes  free  from 
all  disorders  of  the  ear  born  of  wind,  wry-neck  and  lock-jaw, 
hardness  of  hearing,  and  deafness.76 

As  an  earthen  jar  if  saturated  with  oil,  or  a  piece  of  leather  if 
rubbed  therewith,  or  the  axle  of  a  car  or  cart  from  application  of 
the  same  substance,  becomes  strong  and  capable  of  resisting  wear 
and  tear,*77  even  so  the  body,  by  application  of  oil,  becomes 
strong,  and  the  skin  improves,  and  all  disorders  due  to  wind  are 
dispelled.  Through  such  means  the  body  also  becomes  capable  of 
enduring  exercise  and  fatigue.78 

The  wind  is  chiefly  instrumental  in  the  sense  of  touch.  The 
sense  of  touch  has  the  skin  for  its  refuge.  For  the  skin  the  appli¬ 
cation  of  oil  is  highly  beneficial.  Hence,  one  should  daily  anoin 
the  skin  with  oil.79 

The  body  that  is  daily  anointed  with  oil,  if  subjected  to  any 
impact  of  violence,  never  develops  consequences  that  are  very 
injurious.  Nor  are  such  consequences  observable  if  such  a  body 
is  subjected  to  any  kind  of  violent  exercise.80 

A  person,  by  using  oil  every  day,  acquires  smoothness  and 
fulness  of  limbs,  strength,  and  beauty  of  form.  When  overtaken 
by  decrepitude,  slight  symptoms  only  appear.81 

Harshness,  dryness,  heat,  fatigue,  and  numbness  of  the  feet 
become  promptly  relieved  if  the  feet  are  rubbed  with  oil.82 


*  ‘Abhyanga’  and  ‘Upanga’  bpth  mean  the  use  or  application  (of  oil). 
{ Akshah  ’  does  not  mean  wheel  (as  rendered  by  Dr.  Sircar)  but  (as  explained  by  the 
Commentator)  the  axle  or  the  beam  to  which  the  wheels  are  attached, — T. 


CHARAKA-SA  me  it  A. 


63 

Delicacy,  strength,  and  steadiness  of  the  feet,  as  also  clearness 
of  vision,  are  acquired,  and  all  disorders  born  of  wind  become 
relieved  (.by  rubbing  the  feet  with  oil).88 

By  rubbing  the  feet  with  oil  the  feet  become  free  from  sciatica, 
rhagades  of  the  soles,  and  all  kinds  of  contraction  of  the  nerves 
and  the  tendons.84 

By  rubbing  the  body  with  fragrant  unguents,  bad  odor,  heavi¬ 
ness  and  lassitude  of  the  limbs,  itching,  filth,  loss  of  appetite,  and 
the  bad  effects  of  excessive  sweating  are  all  destroyed.8' 

Bathing  purifies  the  body,  develops  virility  and  longevity, 
relieves  fatigue,  removes  sweat  and  filth,  promotes  strength,  and 
enhances  vitality.86 

The  wearing  of  clean  apparel  is  agreeable,  productive  of  fame 
and  longevity,  dispels  distress  and  ill-luck,  contributes  to  cheerful¬ 
ness,  adds  to  beauty,  makes  one  worthy  of  going  to  respectable 
assemblies,  and  is  otherwise  auspicious.87 

The  use  of  perfumes  and  garlands  conduces  to  virility,  fra¬ 
grance  (of  the  body),  longevity,  and  agreeableness.  It  affords 
nourishment  and  strength,  promotes  cheerfulness,  and  dispels  dis¬ 
tress  and  ill-luck.88 

The  wearing  of  jewels  and  ornaments  conduces  to  respectabi¬ 
lity  ;  it  is  auspicious  and  promotes  longevity  and  beauty.  It  pre¬ 
vents  all  kinds  of  misfortune,  confers  cheerfulness  and  agreeable¬ 
ness,  and  enhances  vitality.89 

The  practice  of  (washing  and)  always  keeping  clean  the  two 
feet  and  the  outlets  for  the  passage  of  excreta  and  urine,  contri¬ 
butes  to  strengthen  the  intellectual  powers,  aids  purity,  promotes 
longevity,  and  destroys  distress  and  ill-luck.90 

The  paring  of  nails  and  cropping  and  combing  of  hair,  beard, 
and  mustache,  promote  nourishment,  respectability,  longevity, 
purity,  and  beauty.*91 

*  ‘  Samprasadlianam  ’  includes  combing,  binding,  and  other  processes  for  keeping 
in  good  order. — T. 


64  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

The  wearing  of  shoes  (and  other  contrivances  of  a  simiiaf 
character)  is  beneficial  to  the  eyes  and  the  sense  of  touch.  It  pro* 
motes  strength  and  virility,  and  makes  the  exercise  of  walking 
agreeable.82 

The  use  of  the  umbrella  dispels  all  fear  from  the  dangers  and 
misfortunes  included  in  the  class  called  Iti,  conduces  to  strength, 
affords  protection  (against  evil  spirits  and  Rakshasas),  serves  as  a 
covering  for  the  head,  is  auspicious,  and  protects  one  from  the 
sun,  wind,  dust  and  rain.*83 

The  use  of  the  stick  prevents  one  from  falling  down,  serves 
to  destroy  enemies,  conduces  to  energy,  promotes  longevity,  and 
prevents  fear  (of  serpents  and  other  animals).84 

As  the  chief  officer  of  a  city  protects  his  city,  as  the  charioteer 
protects  his  chariot  after  the  same  manner  should  the  intelligent 
man  be  attentive  to  everything  that  should  be  done  for  the  benefit 
of  his  own  body.86 

One  should  follow  for  a  living  such  means  as  are  not  incon¬ 
sistent  with  religion  or  duty.  One  should  also  betake  to  tranquil¬ 
ity  of  soul  and  study  of  the  Vedas.  By  so  doing  one  enjoys 
felicity.86 

(Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary.) 

The  proper  measure  of  food,  the  different  articles  that  should 
be  used  as  food,  the  heavy  and  the  light  kinds  of  food  as  depend¬ 
ent  on  measure,  the  daily  use  when  injurious  of  different  kinds  of 
food,  the  use  of  those  kinds  of  food  that  are  commendable,87 

Collyrium,  the  stick  to  be  smoked,  the  three  processes  of  pre¬ 
paring  such  sticks,  the  merits  of  inhalation  (of  smoke),  the  proper 
occasions  of  smoking  and  its  proper  measure,88 

The  symptoms  of  excessive  inhalation  (of  smoke),  their  reme¬ 
dies,  those  for  whom  smoking  is  injurious,  the  mode  of  inhaling 

*  The  Commentator  explains  that  ‘Iti’  means  ‘  Ragadidurdaivam,’  i.  e.,  misfor¬ 
tunes  like  wrath,  &c.  It  is  difficult  to  understand  what  is  exactly  meant  by  the  word. 
The  six  well -known  dangers,  of  course,  that  are  sometimes  implied  by  the  word  cannot 
be  meant  here. — T. 


C HA  RAH A-S  A  M HI  T A 


65 


smoke,  the  materials  with  which  smoking-pipes  should  be  made 
and  their  forms  in  respect  of  the  kind  of  smoke  to  be  inhaled,90 

The  merits  of  snuffing  (oil),  the  mode  of  snuffing  and  its  time, 
the  manner  in  which  the  tooth-cleansing  stick  shoiild  be  made  and 
used,  the  merits  of  such  sticks  when  made  of  particular  plants,100 

The  articles  to  be  kept  in  the  mouth  and  the  object  for  which 
they  are  to  be  so  kept,  the  merits  of  oil  when  used  as  gargle,  and 
the  merits  of  anointing  the  head  with  oil,101 

The  merits  of  applying  oil  into  the  hollows  of  the  ears,  of  rubb¬ 
ing  oil  over  the  body  and  over  the  feet,  of  rubbing  (fragrant  pow¬ 
ders)  over  the  body;  of  bathing,  of  clean  apparel,  of  perfumes,  and 
of  ornaments,102 

The  merits  of  keeping  the  outlets  (of  the  body)  clean,  of  cropp¬ 
ing  the  hair,  of  wearing  shoes,  and  of  using  umbrellas  and  sticks, 
have  been  spoken  of  in  this  lesson  called  Matra$itiya.xos 


LESSON  VI: 

And  now  we  shall  expound  the  lesson  called  “  Tasyaf;itiya.” 
Thus  Said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri. 

Of  him  who  is  acquainted  with  the  opportiinfeneSs  of  conduct 
and  food  with  seasons,  strength  and  complexion  (and  happiness 
and  period  of  life)  increase,  in  consequence  of  his  food,  &c.,  (being 
taken  with  propriety).1 

For  the  purposes  of  this  lesson,  the  year  should  be  known  as 
consisting  of  six  portions,  divided  according  to  the  seasons.  Of 
these,  the  three  seasons  commencing  with  the  season  of  dews  and 
ending  with  summer  constitute  the  period  when  the  Sun  travels  in 
the  region  lying  to  the  north  of  the  equinoctial.  That  is  again  the 
period  when  the  Sun  takes  ( i .  e.,  sucks  up  the  liquid  portion  of  every 
earthly  object).  The  three  other  seasons  commencing  with  the 
season  of  rains  and  ending  with  Heffianta  constitutes  the  period  of 


CHA  RA  KA  -SA  MH1TA. 


the  Sun’s  southerly  course.  That  is,  besides,  the  time  when  the  Sure 
gives  (or  yields  moisture  to  all  earthly  objects).*2 

During  the  period  when  the  Sun  gives,  the  winds  are  not  very 
dry;  they  also  blow  (without  being  deprived  of  motion).  The 
winds  of  the  period  when  the  Sun  takes  have  opposite  virtues. 
The  Moon,  during  the  former  period,  appears  with  unabated  vigor 
and,  filling  the  universe  with  cool  raysr  gladdens  it  every  day. 
Hence  the  period  of  Giving  is  mild  (and  agreeable).3' 

The  period  of  Taking  is  fiery.  These  two  periods,  the  Sun 
and  the  winds,  and  the  Moon  also,  as  the  learned  instruct  us,  are 
subject  to  the  influences  of  Time,  of  their  own  respective  natures, 
and  of  track,  and  become  the  determining  causes  of  time,  season, 
moisture,  faults,  and  strength  of  body.f* 

In  the  period  of  Taking,  the  Sun,  by  means  of  his  rays,  sucks 
up  the  moisture  of  the  universe  ;  and  keen  and  rough  winds  also 
dry  up  the  same.  Besides,  (both  the  Sun  and)  the  winds,  in  the 
seasons  of  (jufira,  Vasanta,  and  Grishma,  gradually  developing  the 
property  of  roughness,  and  generating  juices  that  are  dry,  bitter, 
astringent,  and  pungent,  contribute  to  the  weakness  of  mankind.5 


*  The  year  is  divided  in  India  into  six  seasons.  The  two  months,  viz.,  Agrahayana 
and  Pausha  (middle  of  November  to  middle  of  January)  are  Hemanta  or  the  cold 
season.  Then  comes  Cifira,  occupying  Magha  and  Phalguna.  Then  comes  Vasanta, 
occupying  Chaitra  and  Vaisakha.  Jaishtha  and  Ashara  are  Grishma  or  Summer.  The 
season  of  rains  comes  next,  occupying  Cravana  and  Bhadra.  Then  comes  Carat, 
which  occupies  A?win  and  Kartic. — T. 

t  What  is  said  here  in  brief  amounts  to  this  :  the  Giving  and  the  Taking  periods, 
the  Sun,  the  Moon,  and  the  winds,  are  subject  to  certain  influences,  and  then  become 
determining  causes  of  certain  phenomena.  The  things  that  influence  them  are  Time, 
by  which  is  meant  Time  existing  as  a  deity  who,  though  essentially  of  one  unalterable 
and  absolute  form,  assumes  divers  forms  in  consequence  of  the  destinies  of  different 
individuals  and  makes  them  happy  or  smites  them  as  he  likes,  in  the  form  of  events, 
and  now  strengthens  the  Sun,  now  the  Moon,  and  now  the  winds.  Besides  Time,  they 
are  subject  to  their  own  respective  natures,  and  to  track,  by  which  last  is  meant  the 
northerly  or  the  southerly  course  of  the  Sun.  The  track  affects  the  Sun  only  and  not 
the  others.  Influenced  by  these,  they  become  determining  causes  of  other  things,  viz. , 
time  (as  measured  by  men),  the  seasons,  moisture,  faults  (of  the  physical  system  such  as 
excess  of  bile  or  of  wind  or  of  plegm),  and  strength  of  body. — T. 


CHA  RAICA  -SA  M HIT  A. 


67 


In  the  season,  however,  of  rains,  of  £arat,  and  of  Hemanta,  when 
the  Sun  begins  his  southerly  course,  and  his  powers  become  weak¬ 
ened  by  time, by  the  virtue  of  his  track  itself,  by  the  winds  generated 
by  the  clouds,  and  by  the  downpours  (from  the  cloudy  regions),  when 
the  Moon  also  appears  with  unabated  vigor,  and  (lastly)  when  the 
heat  of  the  universe  becomes  cooled  by  the  water  that  falls  from  the 
clouds,  moisture  that  is  cool,  sour,  saltish,  and  sweet,  increases 
gradually,  and  the  strength  of  human  beings  increases..6 

On  this  topic  are  the  following  verses  : — 

It  should  be  said  that  during  the  first  season  of  the  Giving 
period,  {viz.,  the  season  of  rains),  and  the  last  season  of  the  Taking 
period,  {viz.,  summer),  men  become  weak.  In  the  two  interme¬ 
diate  seasons  of  both  the  periods,  {viz.,  £arat  and  Vasanta),  men 
become  neither  very  weak  nor  very  strong.  During  the  last 
season  of  the  Giving  period,  {viz.,  Hemanta),  and  the  first  of  the 
Taking  period,  {viz.,  (jlifira),  the  strength  of  men  is  at  its  highest.1 

In  the  season  of  Hemanta  which  is  cold,  the  digestive  fire  of 
wen,  who  become  strong  at  that  time,  being  confined  within  the 
body  in  consequence  of  the  outer  surface  of  the  body  coming  'into 
constant  contact  with  cold  winds,  becomes  capable  of  digesting 
heavy  food  taken  even  in  excess  of  the  proper  measure.*2 

When  that  fire  does  not  get  proper  fuel  (on  which  to  spend 
itself),  it  then  begins  to  destroy  the  moisture  belonging  to  the 
body  itself.3  For  this  reason,  the  wind,  which  becomes  cold  in  the 
cold  season,  becomes  strong  (for  producing  evil  results).  Hence 
in  this  season  of  snow,  one  should  eat  the  flesh  of  goats  and 
aquatic  and  amphibious  animals  yielding  juices  that  are  cooling, 
sour,  and  saltish. t 4 

*  ‘Cite’  is  an  adjective  of  ‘Hemanta.’  ‘  Valinam  ’  is  used  because  men,  as  said 
in  the  previous  verse,  become  endued  with  strength  in  this  season.  ‘  Vali  ’  is  digestive 
fire.— T. 

t  ‘  Medhya  ’  means  goats,  probably  in  consequence  of  their  fitness  for  being  used  in 
sacrifices  ;  ‘  audaka  ’  are  aquatic  animals,  like  tortoises  and  fish  ;  *  anupa  ’  animals  are 
the  boar,  the  rhinoceros,  the  buffalo,  etc.  The  Commentator  expressly  mentions  these. 
Modern  Hindus,  who  entirely  abstain  from  such  meat,  may  save  their  progenitors  by 
reading  ‘  medhyanam  ’  as  an  adjective  of  ‘  audakanupamangshanam,  ’  and  argue  that 
only  the  cleaner  ones  among  these  classes  are  recommended. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITl. 


The  flesh  also  of  such  animals  as  live  in  holes  and  of  kine 
and  asses,  roasted  on  spits,  should  also  be  taken  in  this  season. 
One  should  also  (in  this  season),  after  taking  such  meat,  drink 
wines,  Sidhu,  and  Madhu.*$ 

Of  him  who  in  this  season  habitually  takes  milk  (and  its 
preparations),  the  diverse  preparations  from  sugar,  fat  of  animals\ 
oil,  and  new  rice,  and  who  drinks  hot  water,  the  period  of  life  is 
never  lessened.8 

In  this  season  the  body  should  be  rubbed  with  oil,  chafing  the 
limbs  in  an  upward  direction.  Oil  should  be  applied  to  the  head. 
Perspiration  should  be  caused  by  staying  within  a  heated  cham- 
ber.-f-  Exposure  is  to  be  sought  to  the  heat  of  the  sun.  Warm 
subterranean  chambers,  and  warm  apartments  of  other  kinds, 
should  be  used.7 

In  this,  season  (as  also  whenever  it  is  cold),  conveyances  and 
beds  and  seats,  that  are  well-covered,  and  overlaid  with  thick 
clothes,  (furred)  skins,  silken  sheets,  thick  hempen  cloths,  and 
painted  blankets,  should  be  used.J8 

One  should  also,  at  such  times,  cover  oneself  always  with 
thick  and  warm  clothing,  and  use  thick  plasters  of  Aguru.  Retir¬ 
ing  to  bed,  one  should  sleep,  clasping  as  one  likes,  a  woman  of 


*  Among  animals  living  in  holes,  the  Commentator  mentions  the  Iguana. 
'  Prasahah  ’  means  kine  and  asses.  ‘  Bhrita  ’  is  cooked  or  roasted  on  the  spit.  Both 
‘  Sidhu  ’  and  ‘  Madhu  ’  were  wines.  It  is  difficult  to  ascertain  how  these  were  made. 
‘  Madhu  ’  probably  was  fermented  honey.  Wilson  thinks  that  Sidhu  ’  was  distilled 
from  molasses. — T. 

t  The  process  called  Jentdka  is  described  below  very  fully. — T. 

t  ‘Cite,’  the  Commentator  explains,  has  reference  to  both  the  season  of  Hemanta 
and  such  other  times  during  the  year  when  through  normal  or  abnormal  causes  the 
atmosphere  becomes  cold.  ‘  Susamvritam  ’  means  well-covered  or  protected  from 
exposure  to  the  wind.  ‘  Prabeni’ the  Commentator  explains,  is  otherwise  called  ‘Goni.’ 
It  was  probably  a  kind  of  coarse  cloth  made  of  hemp.  ‘  Kutbaka  ’  is  a  painted 
blanket. — T. 


CH A  RA  KA-SAMHITA . 


ample  proportions,  of  full  and  well-developed  bosom,  and  smeared, 
with  the  perfumed  unguent  of  Aguru.*9 

Upon  the  advent  of  the  next  season,  viz.,  £i<;ira  (the  season 
of  dews,  when  the  strength  increases),  one  may,  as  one  pleases, 
indulge  in  sexual  congress.  Upon  the  advent  of  the  cold  season 
one  should  abstain  from  food  and  drink  that  are  light  and  that 
partake  of  the  property  of  wind.  One  should  at  such  a  time 
avoid  exposure  to  the  wind,  the  practice  of  abstinence  in  the 
matter  of  eating,  and  barley  powdered  and  boiled  in  water.10 

The  practices  that  should  be-  adopted  in  Hemanta  and  in 
£i§ira  are  of  the  same  kind.  Indeed,  those  of  ^i^ira  differ  only 
slightly  (from  those  of  Hemanta).  In  the  season  of  l^ira,  in 
consequence  of  the  Sun’s  taking,  the  property  of  dryness  is  deve¬ 
loped,  as  also  that  of  coldness  arising  out  of  clouds,  winds,  and 
(occasional)  downpours.11 

For  this  reason,  all  the  practices  ordained  for  Hemanta  be^ 
come  desirable  (for  adoption)  in  (Jifira  also,  with  this  exception 
that  in  the  latter  season  chambers  that  are  still  better  protected 
from  the  wind  and  that  are  a  little  more  warm,  should  be  used. 
In  the  season  of  £i<jira,  food  and  drink  that  are  pungent,  bitter, 
and  astringent,  that  have  the  property  of  the  wind,  that  are  light, 
and  that  are  cooling,  should  be  avoided.12-13 

The  phlegm  that  is  stored  in  Hemanta,  is  excited  (in  the 
season  of  Vasanta)  by  the  Sun  through  his  rays.  That  phlegm 
checks  the  digestive  fire  within  the  body,  This  causes  diseases  of 
many  kinds.14  For  this  reason,  the  usual  purging  operations  should 
be  gone  through  in  the  season  of  Vasanta.  In  this  season  food  and 
drink  that  are  heavy,  sour,  cooling,  and  sweet,  as  also  sleep  during 
the  day,  should  be  avoided.15  Upon  the  advent  of  the  flowery 
season  (viz.,  Vasanta),  athletic  exercises,  the  use  of  unguents,  of 

*  Aguru  is  Aquilaria  Agallocha.  Both  Sandal  wood  and  Aguru  are  rubbed  on  a 
stone  with  a  little  quantity  of  water,  and  the  soft  paste  so  obtained  is  extensively  used  in 
India  for  plastering  the  temples,  the  forehead,  and  other  parts  of  the  body.  The  paste 
proves  very  cooling,  and  cures  skin  diseases  of  many  kinds.  When  made  thick,  it  keeps 
the  body  warm,  fqr  it  is_soon  dried  but  the  particles  adhere  to  the  body, — T. 


70 


OHARA  K  A-S AM  HIT A 


smoke,  of  collyrium  of  the  measure  of  two  tolahs,  and  the  practice 
of  bathing  and  cleaning  the  body  and  limbs  with  cool  and  fra¬ 
grant  water,  should  be  resorted  to.*1® 

In  that  season,  smearing  one's  body  and  limbs  with  sandal 
and  Aguru  paste,  one  should  eat  barley  and  wheat,  and  the  meat 
of  Carabha,  £a9a>  and  Ena,  and  Lava,  and  Kapinjala.f17 

One  should  in  this  season  also  eat  Nigada,  and  drink  Sidhu 
and  Madhwika  wines.  Vasanta  should  be  known  as  the  season 
when  women  and  vegetables  acquire  the  state  of  youth.18 

In  the  season  of  summer,  the  Sun,  by  means  of  his  (hot)  rays, 
sucketh  up  the  moisture  of  the  universe.  At  that  time  food 
and  drink  that  are  agreeable  to  the  taste,  cool,  liquid,  and  oily,  are 
beneficial.1 0 

That  person  never  becomes  weak  who  in  this  season  eats 
£ali  rice  with  ghee  and  milk,  and  cool  barley  meal  mixed  with 
sugar,  and  the  flesh  of  animals  and  birds  obtained  from  the 
forests.J20 

In  this  season  wine  should  not  be  taken  in  even  the  smallest 
dose ;  or,  if  taken  at  all,  it  should  be  taken  after  diluting  it  very 
largely  with  water.  Food  and  drink  that  are  saltish  and  sour,  and 
pungent  and  hot,  as  also  all  kinds  of  physical  exercises,  should  be 
avoided.8 1  During  daytime  one  should,  in  that  season,  sleep  in  a 
cool  room  and  in  the  night  in  an  apartment  that  is  cooled  by  the 
rays  of  the  moon,  having  smeared  one’s  body  with  sandal  paste, 
or  on  the  house- terrace,  exposed  to  the  wind. 2 8 

In  this  season,  seated  at  one’s  ease  on  a  comfortable  seat  and 
adorned  with  pebbles  and  gems,  and  served  by  servants  (male  and 
female)  with  fans  moved  by  the  hand  and  cooled  by  being  (con¬ 
stantly)  dipped  in  water  mixed  with  sandal  paste,  one  should 


*  The  Ayurvedartha  Chandrika  explains  that  a  ‘  kavadagraha  ’  is  a  measure  of  2 
tolahs. — T. 

+  Vide  notes  h,  g,f  d,  and  e  in  p.  50  ante.—T. 

X  '  Mantha  ’  is  barley  meal  mixed  with  Ghee.  It  is  regarded  as  very  cooling. — T. 


CHARAKA-SA  MU  IT  A. 


71 


fesort  to  cool  and  shady  woods  and  bowers  and  enjoy  cool  water 
and  flowers.  One  should,  in  this  season,  refrain  from  sexual 
congress.23-24 

In  the  body  which  becomes  weak  in  consequence  of  the  virtue 
of  the  period  of  Taking,  the  digestive  fire  becomes  weak.  That 
fire  becomes  further  weakened  in  consequence  of  the  faults  of 
wind  (bile  and  phlegm)  in  the  season  of  rains.26 

In  consequence  of  the  vapoury  exhalations  of  the  earth  and 
the  downpours  from  the  clouds,  and  the  water  itself  being  so 
modified  as  to  develop  the  property  of  sourness,  in  the  season 
of  rains,  when  the  digestive  fire  (as  said  before)  is  weakened,  wind 
and  the  others  become  injurious.28  For  this  reason,  in  the  season 
of  rains  the  adoption  of  such  general  practices  that  lead  to  health 
becomes  desirable.  And  as  regards  eating  and  drinking,  and  the 
other  rites  that  areobligatory,  one  should  see  that  in  going  through 
them  one  does  it  with  the  assistance  of  wine .*•* 7 

On  days  that  are  perturbed  by  wind  and  rain  and  that  are  espe¬ 
cially  cold,  in  the  season  of  rains,  one  should,  for  neutralising  the 
evil  effects  of  wind,  eat  food  that  is  sour  and  saltish  and  oily.28 

One  desirous  of  keeping  up  his  digestive  fire  from  weakening 
should,  in  this  season,  eat  barley  and  wheat  and  £ali  rice  that  are 
old,  (i.  e.,  gathered  two  or  three  years  ago),  with  the  flesh  of 
animals  obtained  from  the  forest  and  cooked  with  water  in  which 
has  been  boiled  diverse  kinds  of  pulses.f29 


*  ‘  Sadharanah  vidhih  ’  is  explained  as  those  practices  which  lead  to  the  strengthen¬ 
ing  of  the  digestive  fire,  the  improvement  of  the  appetite,  the  promotion  of  harmony 
between  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  and  the  proper  motion  of  the  bowels.  It  also  includes 
abstention  from  sleep  during  the  day,  from  exposing  oneself  to  the  rays  of  the  Sun  and 
to  cold,  from  violent  exercises,  and  from  sexual  congress.  ‘  Kshaudra  ’  is  honey  ;  here 
it  means  some  kind  of  light  wine  manufactured  from  honey. — T. 

+  ‘Yusha’  is  water  prepared  by  boiling  pulses  in  it.  It  is  regarded  as  nutritive, 
and  is  frequently  used  in  making  curries,  which  then  become  very  palatable.  Newly- 
gathered  barley  or  wheat  or  Cali  rice  is  not  so  easily  digestible  as  when  they  become  a 
little  old. — T. 


72 


CHA  RA  I<A  -SA  M  HIT A. 


A  little  dose  of  honeyed  wine,  or  of  Madhwika  wine  or  butter¬ 
milk  largely  diluted  with  water,  should  (in  this  season)  be  taken. 
Rain  water,  or  water  from  wells,  or  that  from  tanks,  neither  hot 
nor  cold,  should  be  drunk.30 

In  this  season  one  should  cause  his  body  and  limbs  to  be 
rubbed  and  chafed,  and  cleansed.  One  should  bathe  every  day 
and  use  perfumes  and  garlands  of  flowers,  and  light  and  clean 
attire,  and  pass  his  time  in  places  that  are  dry.  31 

The  bile  of  men  whose  bodies  are  exposed  to  the  cold  of  the 
rainy  season,  and  who  suffer  themselves  to  be  suddenly  exposed 
to  the  rays  of  the  Sun,  becomes  stored.  This  bile,  in  the  season 
of  £arat,  becomes  injurious.32  Those  that  desire  their  own  benefit 
should,  therefore,  in  the  season  of  £arat,  take  food  and  drink, 
agreeably  to  the  proper  measure,  and  that  are  sweet,  light,  cool, 
with  (at  times)  things  that  are  bitter  and  that  check  bile.33  After 
the  season  of  rains  has  passed  away,  the  food  that  should  be  taken 
should  consist  of  Lavas,  Kapinjalas,  Enas,  Urabhras,  £arabhas,  £a9as, 
and  £ali  rice  with  barley  and  wheat.*34  In  this  season,  when  the 
clouds  have  disappeared,  the  use  of  bitter  drinks  and  ghee,  and  of 
purgatives,  as  also  the  letting  of  blood  and  exposure  to  the  Sun’s 
rays,  should  be  abstained  from.36  In  this  season,  these  also  should 
be  avoided,  viz.,  fat,  oil,  frost,  the  flesh  of  aquatic  animals  as  also 
of  those  that  live  in  marshy  regions,  articles  that  are  saline,  and 
curds,  and  sleep  during  the  day,  and  exposure  to  the  east  winds. 

Warmed  by  the  rays  of  the  Sun  during  the  day,  cooled  by  the 
rays  of  the  Moon  during  the  night,  and  by  the  virtues  of  the 
season,  exceedingly  clear,  and  its  injuriousness  dispelled  by  ,  the 
Rishi  Agastya  (in  days  of  old),  the  limpid  and  pure  water  of 
£arat  is  called  Hansodaka.  For  purposes  of  bathing  and  drinking 
and  immersing  the  body,  that  water  is  highly  applauded,  even 
as  heaven’s  nectar.37-38 

In  this  season,  the  use  of  garlands  of  such  flowers  as  bloom 
at  that  time,  and  of  clean  clothes,  and  exposure  to  the  cool  rays  of 
the  Moon  in  the  evening,  are  recommended.  39 


‘  Urabhra  ’  is  sheep.  For  the  rest, 


in  page  So.— T. 


charaka-samhitA 


73 


Thus  is  expounded  the  opportuneness  of  practices  with  the 
several  seasons,  and  the  beneficial  kinds  of  food  and  drink  that 
form  the  basis  of  that  opportuneness. 

That  which  produces  happiness  or  yields  not  torture,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  the  system  being  inured  to  it,  is  known  by  the  name 
of  okasatmya.*i0  They  that  are  conversant  with  this  topic  of 
assimilation  (pr  suitability  of  practices  to  the  system),  regard  that 
conduct  and  that  food  to  be  suitable  which  have  virtues  contrary 
to  those  of  the  place  of  habitation  and  of  the  disorders  (to  which 
the  system  is  subject).!41 

Here  is  a  Verse  containing  a  summary. 

In  this  Lesson  called  Tasyapitiya  has  been  shown  what  should 
be  practised  and  endured,  and  what  should  not,  in  every  successive 
season,  as  also  what  is  agreeable  with  the  character  of  each  season, 
along  with  the  reasons  thereof.1 

Thus  ends  the  Lesson  called  Tasyapitiya  in  the  treatise  of 
Agnivepa  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  VII. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  lesson  on  the  inadvisability  of 
suppressing  the  urgings  of  nature.  Thus  said  the  illustrious  son 
of  Atri. 

One  endued  with  intelligence  should  not  suppress  urgings, 
that  have  become  pronounced,  in  respect  of  urine  and  faeces  ;  as 
also  of  the  semen  and  the  wind,  and  of  vomitting  and  sneezing.1 


*  Suitable  to  the  system  or  body.  Thus  opium  and  arsenic  cease  to  become  injurious 
with  continued  use. — T. 

+  Certain  texts  read  ‘Doshanam.’  The  correct  reading,  of  course,  is  ‘  Decanam.’ 
If  a  country  be  moist  or  cold,  watery  or  cooling  food  would  be  injurious  there.  Instead, 
warm  food  would  be  recommended  by  every  physician.  Similarly,  in  a  disorder  like 
cough,  brought  about  by  exposure  to  cold,  the  practice  of  keeping  oneself  warm  by  using 
warm  clothing  and  warm  chambers  would  be  beneficial. — T. 


10 


74 


CHA  RAKA  -SAMHITA. 


The  ufgings  also  in  respect  of  eructations,  of  yawns,  of  hunger 
and  of  thirst,  of  tears,  of  sleep,  and  of  heavy  breathing  induced  by 
toil  (should  not  to  be  suppressed).  Listen  now  to  me  as  I  discourse 
(to  you)  on  the  topic  of  treating  the  several  diseases  that  are 
generated  of  the  person  who  suppresses  the  urgings  of  these  when 
they  appear  in  pronounced  forms.3 

By  suppressing  the  call  of  urine,  inflammation  sets  in 
of  the  bladder  and  the  membrum  virile.  The  other  consequen¬ 
ces  are  strangury  or  painful  micturition,  headache,  bending  forward 
at  the  time  of  micturition,  inflammation  of  the  pubic  and  iliac 
regions,  and  epistasis  or  suppression  of  urine.*4 

When  retention  of  urine  takes  place,  (the  inducing  of)  perspi¬ 
ration,  immersion  (of  the  patient)  in  cool  water,  rubbing  the  body 
with  oil,  (the  use  of)  clarified  butter  as  snuff,  and  the  three  processes 
of  evacuation,  are  the  remedies  that  should  be  adoptedf6 

By  suppressing  (the  call  for)  stools,  pain  in  the  abdomen, 
obstruction  of  the  wind,  suppression  of  stools,  pain  in  the  calf  of 
the  leg,  and  flatulence,  are  induced.6 

Perspiration,  the  rubbing  of  the  body  with  oil,  immersion  in 
cool  water,  (insertion  of  the  different  kinds  of)  sticks, J  the 
evacuating  processes,  eating  and  drinking,  and  (the  use  of)  such 
medicines  as  facilitate  the  free  action  of  the  wind,  are  beneficial 
in  disorders  arising  from  the  obstruction  of  the  wind  (induced  by 
suppressing  the  call  for  stools).7 


*  ‘Vinama  is  bending  of  the  form  in  pain  (at  the  time  of  micturition). 
‘Vankhana’  is  inflammation  of  the  pubic  and  iliac  regions.  ‘Anaha’  is  the  total 
suppression  of  urine,  or  epistasis. — T. 

t  ‘  Avapidaka  ’  is  the  use  or  application  of  a  medicine,  oily  or  of  any  other  kind, 
for  purging  the  cerebrum.  The  three  kinds  of  evacuation  here  referred  to  are  (i)  eva¬ 
cuation  by  the  use  of  purgatives,  (2)  that  by  the  use  of  emetics,  and  (3)  by  the  use  of 
errhines. — T. 

+  The  sticks  are  inserted  into  the  anal  canal  for  inducing  purging.  They  are  pre¬ 
pared  of  diverse  ingredients.  —  T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


75 


By  obstructing  the  emission  of  the  vital  seed,  pain  in  the 
membrum  virile  and  the  testes,  langour  of  the  body,  pain  in  the 
heart,  and  retention  of  urine  also,  are  induced.8 

In  disorders  caused  by  obstructing  the  emission  of  the  vital 
seed,  rubbing  the  body  with  oil,  immersion  of  the  body  in  cool 
water,  wines,  the  meat  of  fowl,  rice,  enemata  prepared  with  milk, 
and  sexual  congress,  are  laid  down  as  remedies  for  adoption.® 

By  suppressing  the  passage  of  the  wind  (through  the  anal 
canal),  obstruction  of  the  wind,  retention  of  urine  and  of  stools, 
flatulence,  langour  of  body,  and  other  disorders  in  the  stomach 
(born  of  wind),  are  induced.10 

In  such  diseases  the  use  of  oil  and  ghee,  the  inducing  of  pers- 
piration,  the  application  of  the  sticks,  eating  and  drinking,  and  the 
use  of  enemata,  have  been  laid  down  as  remedies  for  restoring  the 
free  action  of  the  wind.11 

By  suppressing  phlegmatic  evacuations,  itching  of  the  body, 
urticaria  evanida,  loss  of  appetite,  brown  eruptions  on  the  face, 
inflammations,  anaemia,  fever,  leucoderma,  hiccup,  and  erisypelas, 
are  the  disorders  that  are  engendered.*12 

In  such  diseases,  vomiting  (by  artificial  means)  after  eating, 
smoking,  fasts,  blood-letting,  the  use  of  dry  food  and  drink,  physi¬ 
cal  exercise,  and  purging,  are  desirable.18 

By  suppressing  sneezing,  wry  neck,  headache,  facial  paralysis 
hemicrania,  and  weakness  of  the  senses,  are  induced.14 

In  such  amongst  these  disorders  that  affect  those  parts  of  the 
body  that  are  above  the  collar  bone,  the  rubbing  of  oil,  perspiration, 
smoking,  snuffs,  the  use  of  such  food  as  destroys  disorders  of  the 
wind,  and  drinking  clarified  butter  after  a  full  meal,  are  bene¬ 
ficial.-]*16 

*  The  disease  called  ‘  Pandu  ’  is  of  many  varieties.  Generally,  a  paleness  over¬ 
spreads  the  skin,  due  to  bloodlessness.  There  is  ancemia  at  the  bottom.  One  variety 
of  1  Pandu  ’  is  called  Jaundice ;  another  is  called  Chlorosis.— I1. 

t  ‘  Adyam  ’  is  food  of  any  kind.  1  Vataghnamadyam  ’  is  light,  digestible  food.— i'. 


76 


charaka-samhitA. 


Hiccup,  consumption,  loss  of  appetite,  paralysis  agitaris,  heart' 
diseases,  and  accumulation  of  phlegm  in  the  chest,  are  induced  by 
suppressing  the  tendency  to  vomit.  In  such  disorders  the  remedies 
are  the  same  that  are  laid  down  for  hiccup,1® 

Bending  of  the  body,  convulsions,  contractions  (of  muscles), 
toss  of  the  sense  of  touch,  acute  sensation  of  cold,  and  paralysis 
agitans,  arise  from  suppressing  tendencies  to  yawn.  All  those 
remedies  that  are  laid  down  for  destroying  disorders  of  the  wind 
are  beneficial  in  these.1 7 

By  suppressing  the  call  of  hunger,  leanness,  weakness,  loss  of 
color,  langour,  loss  of  appetite,  and  delirium  are  induced.  The 
remedy  in  such  disorders  is  light  and  lukewarm  food.18 

By  suppressing  the  call  of  thirst,  the  throat  and  the  mouth  are 
parched,  and  deafness,  faintness,  asthma,  and  pain  in  the  heart,  are 
induced.  The  remedy  in  these  disorders  is  the  use  of  cool  oils 
and  drinks  which  invigorate  the  blood.10 

By  suppressing  tears,  cattarrh  in  the  nose,  eye-diseases,  heart- 
disease,  loss  of  appetite,  and  delirium  are  induced.  In  these  dis¬ 
orders,  sleep,  wines,  and  agreeable  conversation  are  the  remedies 
prescribed.20 

Yawns,  langour  of  body,  sleepiness,  headache,  and  heaviness 
of  the  eye-lids,  are  induced  by  suppression  of  sleep.  In  ihese  dis¬ 
orders  the  remedy  is  sleep  and  gentle  chafing  of  the  limbs.21 

Abdominal  tumours,  heart-disease,  loss  of  consciousness,  and 
faintness  are  born  of  suppression  of  breath.  In  these,  rest,  and  all 
kinds  of  treatment  that  are  destructive  of  disorders  of  the  wind,- 
are  beneficial.22 

If  one  desires  that  the  disorders  mentioned  above,  that  are 
born  of  suppressing  the  calls  of  Nature,  should  not  arise,  one 
should  not  suppress  those  calls.22 

One  desirous  of  one’s  good  both  here  and  hereafter  shduld 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


77 


suppress  these  impulses  also,  viz.,  those  of  (ill-regulated)  courage 
and  all  fruitless  impulses  of  thought,  word,  and  deed.*24 

The  man  of  intelligence  should  also  suppress  the  impulses  of 
cupidity,  grief,  fear,  wrath,  pride,  shamelessness,  envy,  violent 
propensities  of  every  kind,  and  covetousness.26 

One  should  also  suppress  the  rising  impulses  of  harshness,  of 
doing  anything  that  is  disagreeable  to  others,  of  untruthfulness  of 
speech,  of  speech  that  is  inopportune,  of  whatever  tendencies  that 
exist'  for  giving  pain  to  others,  of  sexual  congress,  of  appropriating 
the  property  of  others,  and  of  all  wrongful  propensities.28-27 

Through  sinlessness  of  thought,  word,  and  deed,  a  person 
earns  righteous  fame,  and  lives  happily,  acquiring  and  enjoying 
religious  merit,  wealth,  and  (sources  of)  pleasure.28 

That  exertion  of  body  which  is  productive  of  good  consequen¬ 
ces  (to  the  body  itself),  which  conduces  to  collectedness  (of  mind), 
and  increases  strength,  is  called  physical  exercise.  One  should 
have  recourse  to  it  in  due  measure.29 

The  consequences  resulting  from  physical  exercise  are  light¬ 
ness  of  body,  capacity  for  work,  collectedness,  power  of  enduring 
hardship,  removal  of  all  imperfections,  and  augmentation  of  the 
digestive  fire.t30 

From  excess  of  physical  exercise  result  fatigue,  faintness,  loss 
of  vigor,  thirst,  asthma,  consumption,  fever,  and  attacks  of  cold.31 

An  intelligent  person  should  never  indulge  in  physical  exer¬ 
cise,  lailghter,  talking,  walking,  sexual  congress,  and  night-keeping, 
to  excess  even  when  these  become  necessary.32 


*  As  an  example  of  ill-regulated  courage  the  Commentator  gives  the  instance  of 
one’s  approaching  an  infuriate  elephant. — T. 

t  It  is  a  fact  that  by  particular  exercises  particular  limbs  may  be  made  to  look 
handsotae  after  the  removal  of  their  imperfections.  This  has  been  lately  known  in  the 
West.— T. 


78 


CHA  RA  K A-S AM HIT A 


He  who  indulges  in  these  and  similar  other  practices  in  excess 
soon  meets  with  destruction  like  an  elephant  that  assails  a  lion.38 

An  intelligent  man  should  abstain  gradually  from  all  habitual 
practices  that  are  injurious  and  adopt  gradually  practices  that  are 
beneficial.  What  is  meant  by  ‘gradually’  is  laid  down  as  follows.34 

If  one  is  addicted  to  an  injurious  practice  and  unaccustomed 
to  a  practice  that  is  healthful,  one  must  abstain  from  the  former 
and  accustom  oneself  to  the  latter  according  to  the  following  pro¬ 
gressive  scale :  for  the  first  two  days  one  should  indulge  in  the 
injurious  practice  to  the  extent  of  only  three-fourths  and  adopt  the 
salutary  practice  to  the  extent  of  only  one-fourth  ;  after  this,  for 
the  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  days  one  should  abstain  from  the  former 
by  a  half  and  adopt  the  latter  by  a  half  ;  after  this,  for  the  sixth, 
seventh,  eighth,  and  ninth  days  one  should  indulge  in  the  baneful 
act  to  the  extent  of  only  a  fourth  and  adopt  the  healthful  practice 
to  the  extent  of  three-fourths  ;  after  that.,  from  the  tenth  day  one 
should  give  up  the  injurious  habit  altogether  and  adopt  the  health¬ 
ful  one  fully.*35 

In  this  way  are  faults  got  rid  of  gradually,  and  good  habits 
acquired  gradually.  In  this  way  are  faults  got  rid  of  by  the  good 
never  to  return  and  healthful  habits  acquired  without  ever  losing 
them  again.36 

Some  men,  from  the  time  of  their  conception  in  the  mother’s 
womb,  have  an  equality  or  harmony  of  bile,  wind,  and  phlegm  ; 
some  are  seen  in  whom  wind  predominates  ;  some  in  whom  bile 
predominates;  and  some  in  whom  phlegm  predominates.37 

Amongst  these,  those  mentioned  first,  {viz.,  men  in  whom  bile 
wind,  and  phlegm  exist  in  a  state  of  harmony)  are  always  hale. 
Those  in  whom  any  one  of  these  three  predominates,  are  always 


*  This  verse  is  expressed  in  language  that  is  exceedingly  terse.  To  make  the  sense 
intelligible  I  have  expanded  it,  following  the  lead  of  the  Commentator.— T. 


cearaka-asmeitA. 


79 


subject  to  disease.  The  continued  presence,  in  the  system,  of  faults 
of  this  nature,  constitutes  the  character  of  one’s  constitution  *38 

Those  acts,  amongst  the  practices  of  the  hale,  that  are  anta¬ 
gonistic  to  the  particular  fault  which  predominates  in  a  person’s 
constitution,  are  regarded  as  beneficial  for  that  person.  For  a 
person  again  in  whom  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  exist  in  a  state  of 
harmony,  such  assimilable  things  as  contain  all  the  tastes  in  proper 
proportions  are  said  to  be  beneficial.30 

In  the  lower  part  of  the  body  there  are  two  outlets  ;  in  the 
head  there  are  seven  ;  besides  these,  there  are  the  pores  through 
which  perspiration  flows.  These  outlets  for  the  escape  of  impurities 
become  subject  to  disorders  in  consequence  of  impurities  being 
generated  that  are  unhealthy  and  in  excess  of  (the  ordinary) 
measure.40 

The  increase  or  decrease  of  impurities  (of  the  body)  is  to  be 
inferred  from  the  heaviness  or  the  lightness  of  the  outlets  for  their 
escape,  as  also  from  the  weakness  or  the  strength  of  the  inclina¬ 
tion  to  pass  them.41 

Ascertaining  these  through  symptoms  that  indicate  faults,  the 
physician  should  treat  such  diseases  as  are  curable,  with  medicines, 
diet,  and  conduct,  each  possessed  of  virtues  contrary  to  the  cause, 
to  the  disease,  and  to  both  the  cause  and  the  disease,  reflecting  the 
while  upon  the  question  of  measure  and  time. f4  2 


*  The  nature  of  one’s  constitution  is  determined,  in  respect  of  its  name,  by  the  pre¬ 
ponderance  of  any  one  of  these  three  faults,  so  that  one  in  whom  bile  preponderates  is 
said  to  have  a  bilious  constitution,  one  in  whom  wind  preponderates  is  said  to  have  a 
windy  constitution,  and  one  in  whom  phlegm  preponderates  is  said  to  have  a  phlegmatic 
constitution. 

+  This  is  a  very  important  Verse.  ‘  Tan  ’  in  the  first  line  refers  to  impurities  when 
increased,  and  wind  and  bile  and  phlegm  when  inharmonious  and  disordered.  Only 
curable  diseases  are  directed  to  be  taken  up  for  treatment.  ‘  Pratidwandwaih  ’  includes 
drugs,  diet,  and  the  conduct  the  patient  is  to  observe  during  treatment.  The  question  of 
both  measure  and  time  or  seasonableness  is  directed  to  be  taken  into  consideration. — T. 


80 


CHA  RAKA-SA  M  HIT  A. 


When  persons  in  health  conduct  themselves  improperly  in 
respect  of  diet  and  deportment,  forgetting  the  considerations  of 
measure  and  season,  these  and  other  diseases  are  generated.  A 
person(in  health,  therefore,  should  always  conduct  himself  pro¬ 
perly  in  respect  of  diet  and  deportment  and  bear  in  mind  the 
considerations  already  adverted  to.43 

In  the  first  month  {viz.,  Chaitra)  of  Vasanta  (spring),  and  in 
the  first  month  {viz.,  Cravana)  of  Nabha  (rainy  season),  and  also  in 
the  first  month  ( Agrahayana )  of  Saha  (cold  season),  all  accumu¬ 
lated  impurities  should  be  dispelled  from  the  body  (by  emetics  and 
purgatives.)44 

After  the  body  has  been  sufficiently  rubbed  with  oil  and  after 
perspiration  has  been  caused,  the  intelligent  physician  should  then 
administer  both  emetics  and  enemata.  After  this,  errhines  should 
be  administered.45 

After  this  the  physician,  conversant  with  the  requirements  of 
time,  should  administer,  in  due  order  and  according  to  the  proper 
measure  of  ingredients,  tonics  tested  by  experience  and  strength- 
promoting  medicines.46 

By  acting  in  this  way,  the  ingredient  humours  of  one’s  body 
are  restored  to  their  normal  condition,  and  (as  the  consequence  of 
this)  diseases  are  not  generated.  Besides  this,  blood  and  other 
ingredients  increase  and  the  decrepitude  of  age  never  makes 
appearance  .*  47 

These  are  the  rules  pointed  out  for  the  prevention  of  disease. 
With  respect  again  to  diseases  that  arise  from  people’s  own  faults 
and  those  that  spring  from  other  causes,  the  following  are  separ¬ 
ately  laid  down.48 


*  ‘Jara  chantyamupaiticha  ’  means  that  decrepitude  comes  to  an  end  or  destruc¬ 
tion,  i.e.,  decrepitude  does  not  appear  in  such  a  person,  or,  if  its  symptoms  do 
appear,  they  are  calculated  to  soon  come  to  an  end.—?'. 


CHA  RAICA -SA  MHITA . 


81 


Regarding  £hose  extraneous  diseases  of  men  that  arise  from 
the  action  of  superhuman  beings  and  planets,  of  poison,  of  (hot 
and  unhealthy)  winds,  of  fire,  and  of  blows  and  weapons,  (and  of 
curses  and  incantations),*  people’s  own  understandings  are  to 
blame.49 

Jealousy,  grief,  fear,  wrath,  pride,  malice,  and  such  other 
mental  derangements  have  all  been  said  to  arise  from  faults  of  the 
understanding.60 

The  abandonment  of  unrighteous  practices,  the  restraint  of 
the  senses,  the  cultivation  of  the  memory,  knowledge  of  place, 
of  time,  and  of  one’s  own  self,  and  treading  in  the  footsteps  of  the 
righteous,  constitute  the  method  that  is  laid  down  for  the  preven¬ 
tion  of  all  extraneous  diseases  of  even  those  whose  understandings 
are  vitiated  by  faults.  As  regards  the  man  of  intelligence,  he 
should,  prior  to  the  appearance  of  disease,  accomplish  all  those  acts 
which  he  regards  to  be  beneficial  for  himself. f 51-62 

The  instructions  of  the  well-informed,  and  the  experience  of 
the  wise,  are  causes  that  bring  about  the  alleviation  of  derange¬ 
ments  born  and  unborn.63 

Those  that  are  sinful  in  conduct  and  speech,  those  that  are 
untruthful,  those  that  are  fond  of  quarrels,  those  that  indulge  in 
cutting  ridicule,  those  that  are  covetous,  those  that  are  unable  to 
bear  the  advancement  of  others,  knaves,64  those  that  are  always 
engaged  in  caluminating  others,  those  that  indulge  in  congress 
with  other  people’s  wives,  those  that  are  destitute  of  compassion, 
and  those  that  have  abandoned  righteousness,  are  wretches  among 
men  whose  companionship  should  be  avoided.65 

Those  that  are  endued  with  intelligence  and  learning,  with 
years  and  character,  and  with  fortitude  and  memory  and  (habits  of) 


*  The  word  ‘  adi  ’  refers  to  these  last. — T. 

+  The  loss  of  memory,  whence  arises  loss  of  judgment,  is  regarded  in  the-  Hindu 
Scriptures  as  the  antecedent  cause  of  all  sinful  and  injurious  acts.  By  memory  is  meant 
the  undimmed  knowledge  of  one’s  surroundings.— T.  . 


11 


GHA  RA  K  A- SAM  HI  TA 


contemplation,  those  that  wait  with  reverence  upon  the  aged,, 
those  that  have  experience,  those  that  have  knowledge  of  self,  those 
that  have  transcended  the  anxieties  of  the  world, 5  6  those  that 
have  agreeable  and  kind  words  for  all  creatures,  those  that  are 
possessed  of  tranquillity  of  soul,  those  that  observe  laudable  vows, 
those  that  always,  indicate  righteous  ways  by  their  instructions, 
those  that  listen  to  the  scriptures  and  sacred  discourses,  and  those 
that  have  beheld  sacred  spots,  are  individuals  that  should  be  waited 
upon  with  reverence.57 

One  endued  with  intelligence  and  desirous  of  happiness  both 
here  and.  hereafter,  should,  bent  upon  achieving  what  is  beneficial, 
bestow  great  care  upon  everything  connected  with  food,  deport-, 
ment,  and  practices.58 

One  should  not  take  curds  in  the  night ;  if  one  takes  it  one 
should  not  take  it  without  mixing  it  with  ghee  and  sugar,  or  with 
the  gruel  of  Mudga  (a),  or  with  honey,  or  with  the  juice  of 
Amlaka  (6).  One  should  not  also  take  warm  or  hot  curds  in  the- 
night.59  Curds  are  forbidden  to  be  taken  in  the  night  because  of 
the  act  being  regarded  as  destructive  of  prosperity.  Curds  mixed 
with  ghee  are  productive  of  phlegm  but  destructive  of  wind.6® 
Curds  mixed  with  sugar  do  not  increase  bile.  They  have  the 
virtue  of  digesting  (other)  food  that  is  taken.  They  should  be 
prescribed  for  the  other  virtue  they  possess,  viz.,  of  alleviating 
thirst  and  burning  of  the  skin.6"1 

Mixed  with  the  gruel  of  Mudga  (a),  they  cure  Leprosy.*  If 
mixed  with  honey,  they  become  sweet  and  less  injurious.62  If 
mixed  with  (the  juice  of)  Dhattri(i5),  and  taken  when  hot,  they  cure 
haemorrhagic  discharges.  If  the  man  that  is  fond  of  curds  takes 


(а)  Phaseolus  Mungo.  As  a  rule,  when  curds  are  taken  in,  the  night,  they  are  taken 
mixed  with  sugar.  The  gruel  of  Mudga  is  rarely  used. — T 

(б)  Phyllanthus.  Emblica-,  Syn.  Emblica  officinalis.  I-n  the  North-West  Provinces, 
curds  are  frequently  taken  mixed  with  the  juice  of  this  fruit. — T, 

*  Raktanila  or  Vatarakta  is  identifiable  with  Leprosy  which  is  caused,  according  to 
Hindu  medical  authorities,  by  disorders  of  the  wind  in  the  system. — T. 


CH A  RAKA-SA  M  HI  T A 


them  in  disregard  of  these  rules  he  is  sure  to  have  fever,  haemorr¬ 
hagic  discharges,  erysepelas,  leprosy,  chlorosis,  or  anaemia,  and 
jaundice  in  acute  form.*03 

Here  are  some  Verses  containing  a  summary. 

The  urgings  which  the  human  constitution  feels,  the  diseases 
that  are  generated  by  suppressing  them,  the  medicines  to  be  used 
for  curing  them,  those  urgings  that  should  be  suppressed,  what  is 
beneficial  or  otherwise  for  what  persons,  that  which  should  be 
avoided  even  though  one  may  be  accustomed  to  it  and  that  which 
should  be  practised  even  though  one  is  unaccustomed  to  it,  the 
manner  in  which  one  should  gradually  accustom  oneself  to  such 
practices  and  divest  oneself  of  practices  to  which  one  is  unaccus¬ 
tomed,  the  character  of  the  constitution,  particular  kinds  of  food 
and  practices  suitable  to  particular  constitutions,  the  enumeration 
of  outlets  for  the  discharge  of  impurities,  the  diseases  that  may 
■arise  from  their  actions  being  suspended,  their  remedies,  the 
means  by  which  diseases  not  yet  generated  may  be  avoided,  the 
^remedies  of  diseases  already  generated,  the  classes  of  persons  that 
-should  be  sought  and  advised  by  one  endued  with  intelligence  and 
■desirous  of  one’s  own  happiness,  the  rules  according  to  which 
•curds  should  be  taken  and  the  reasons  of  those  rules,  have  all  been 
discoursed  upon  by  that  sage,  viz.,  the  son  of  Atri,  in  this 
lesson  called  “  The  inadvisability  of  suppressing  the  urgings  of 
mature.”1-4 

Thus  ends  the  lesson  called  “  Inadvisability  of  suppressing 
the  urgings  of  Nature.” 


LESSON  VIII. 

We  shall  now  explain  the  lesson  on  the  “  Analysis  of  the 
Senses.”  Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri. 

*  Pandit  is  a  generic  name.  Its  chief  symptom  is  a  paleness  of  the  skin. 
V.  C.  Dutt  supposes  it  stands  for  chlorosis,  anaemia,  and  also  jaundice.  Kama  la  Is 
acute  jaundice.  — T. 


84 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


It  is  certain  that  there  are  five  senses,  five  materials  that  con¬ 
stitute  those  senses,  five  resting  places  of  those  senses,  five  objects 
of  those  senses,  and  five  kinds  of  perceptions  obtained  through 
those  senses.  This  has  been  said  (by  the  learned  of  old)  in  dis¬ 
courses  on  the  senses.*1 

The  mind  is  regarded  as  something  different  from  the  senses. 
It  is  sometimes  called  safwa,  and  some  again  call  it  chetas.  Its 
functions  are  regulated  by  the  contact  of  its  objects  with  the  soul. 
Some  regard  the  mind  as  the  cause  of  the  functions  of  the 
senses.t2 


*  This  aphorism  embodies  the  essence  of  what  is  said  of  the  Senses  by  Hindu 
philosophers.  There  are  five  senses,  viz.,  vision,  hearing,  scent,  taste,  and  touch. 
The  five  primal  elements  of  earth,  water,  light,  air,  and  space  enter  into  the 
composition  of  these  senses.  Vision  partakes  of  light,  hearing  of  space,  scent 
of  earth,  taste  of  water,  and  touch  of  wind.  This  is  stated  in  another  way, 
for  light  is  said  to  have  vision  for  its  attribute  or  property ;  space  has  the  attribute 
of  hearing  ;  earth  has  the  attribute  of  scent ;  water  has  that  of  taste  ;  and  wind  has  that 
of  touch.  The  adhisthdnas  or  resting-places  of  the  five  senses  are  as  follows  :  the 
eyes,  the  ears,  the  nose,  the  tongue,  and  the  skin.  The  objects  of  the  five  senses 
are  rupa,  rasa,  fabda,  sparca,  gandha,  i.  e. ,  form  (which  is  apprehended  by  the  eye), 
taste  (apprehended  by  the  tongue),  sound  (apprehended  by  the  ear),  touch  (apprehended 
by  the  skin  or  the  whole  body),  and  scent  (apprehended  by  the  nose).  The  five  kinds 
of  perception,  or  apprehension,  or  knowledge  obtained  through  the  five  organs  of  sense, 
are,  of  course,  vision,  audition,  scent,  taste,  and  touch.  The  ideas  or  notions  of 
vision,  &c.,  are  materially  different  from  one  another.  Vide  Mahabharata,  Book  XII*, 
Sections  252  and  275. — T. 

t  ‘  Tadarthatma-sampadayatta-cheshta  ;  ’  this  is  very  abstruse.  Here  ‘  Tat  ’  stands 
for  ‘  manah  ’  or  mind.  By  •  artha  ’  is  here  implied  all  upon  which  the  mind  dwells, 
viz.,  pleasure  or  pain,  and  reasoning  on  objects  of  reasoning.  By  *  atman  ’  is  here 
meant,  as  the  Commentator  explains,  ‘  chetana-pratisandhatri  ’  i.  e.,  the  principle  that  is 
the  cause  of  the  consciousness  of  one’s  own  identity  as  a  living  being.  To  render 
*  atman  ’  therefore,  as  *  soul  ’  would  be  misleading.  But  in  the  absence  of  a  more 
exact  word,  this  usual  equivalent  in  English  for  «  atman  ’  cannot  be  discarded. 
What  is  meant,  therefore,  by  the  ‘chesta’  of  the  mind  being  ‘ayatta’  of  the  ‘sampat  ’ 
or  contact  of  the  objects  of  the  mind  with  this  ‘  atman  ’  seems  to  be  that  mental  oper¬ 
ations  become  possible  in  consequence  of  the  objects  of  those  operations  coming  into 
contact  with  this  principle  that  makes  one  conscious  of  one’s  own  identity  as  a  living 
agent.  The  word  ‘  manah,’  as  used  here,  certainly  includes  « buddhi  ’  or  under¬ 
standing. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  85 

At  first  sight  one  may  think  that  there  is  more  than  one  mind 
in  one  and  the  same  person  in  consequence  of  the  variety  that  is 
observable  in  the  objects  of  the  mind,  in  those  of  the  senses  (that 
follow  the  lead  of  the  mind),  and  in  the  resolutions  (or  judgments) 
of  the  mind,  as  also  in  consequence  of  the  union  of  all  the  three 
attributes  of  Goodness,  Passion,  and  Darkness  with  the  mind.  In 
reality,  however,  there  is  no  multiplicity  of  minds.  If  the  mind 
were  more  than  one,  it  could  simultaneously  attend  to  more  than 
one  object.  (As,  however,  that  is  never  seen,  the  theory  of  the 
multiplicity  of  mind  must  be  erroneous.  There  cannot  be,  in 
reality,  more  than  one  mind).  Therefore,  all  the  senses  are  in¬ 
capable  of  acting  at  one  and  the  same  time.*® 

.The  mind  is  sometimes  possessed  by  the  quality  of  Satvia 
(Goodness),  sometimes  by  that  of  Rajas  (Passion)  and  sometimes 
by  that  of  Tamas  (Darkness).  Agreeably  to  the  kind  of  mind 
thus  endued  that  continually  attaches  to  a  person,  is  that  person 
regarded  by  the  wise  in  respect  of  his  character,  for  the  character 


*  This  is  a  very  difficult  passage.  In  most  editions,  it  is  disfigured  by  errors  of 
reading.  The  grammatical  analysis  is  this  :  *  ekasmin  purushe  anekam  satwam  ;  ’  one 
may  thus  think  in  consequence  of  the  ‘  vyabliicharana  ’  of  ‘  swarthah,’  of  ‘  indriyarthah,  ’ 
and  of  ‘  samlcalpah  as  also  of  the  ‘  yoga  ’  of  ‘  Satwa,’  ‘  Rajas,  ’  and  ‘  Tamas.’  What  is 
implied  by  this  is  as  follows  :  the  objects  of  the  mind  are  different.  One  sometimes  feels 
happy,  sometimes  miserable,  and  sometimes  indifferent.  The  objects  of  the  senses, 
again,  are  characterised  by  equal  variety.  One  sees  a  blue  object,  then  a  red  one,  then 
a  white  one,  &c.  ;  then  again,  one  hears  a  sweet  sound,  then  a  harsh  sound,  &c.  The 
ideas  carried  to  the  mind  by  the  different  senses  are  widely  different  from  one  another. 
Even  the  same  sense,  at  different  times,  carries  different  notions  to  the  mind.  From  this 
admitted  variety  of  feelings  and  ideas  one  may  conclude  that  the  mind  instead  of  being 
single  is  many ;  that  it  is  one  mind  that  feels  happy,  another  that  feels  miserable,  a 
third  that  has  knowledge  of  form,  a  fourth  that  has  perception  of  sound,  &c.  Turning 
one’s  attention,  again,  to  the  moral  conduct  of  a  person,  one  and  the  same  person  is  seen 
now  engaged  in  a  righteous  act,  now  indulging  in  passion,  and  now  perpetrating  sinful 
and  wicked  deeds.  Thus,  from  the  union  of  Satwa  (Goodness),  Rajas  (Passion),  and 
Tamas  (Darkness),  with  the  same  person,  the  argument  in  favor '  of  a  multiplicity  of 
minds  may  become  stronger.  The  author  then  says  that  this  is  not  so,  for,  if  many,  the 
mind  Could  at  the  same  time  attend  to  many  things.  But  that  is  admittedly  impossible. 
Hence,  there  is  but  a  single  mind.  It  follows  from  this  that  the  senses,  which  cannot 
•work  unless  the  mind  leads  them,  though  many,  cannot  work  all  together  at  the  same 
time,  for  in  working  they  shall  have  to  wait  for  their  single  leader.  —  T. 


86  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

must  depend  upon  the  preponderance  of  the  quality  that  manifests 
itself  in  a  person.*4 

The  senses  become  capable  of  seizing  their  respective  objects 
only  when  they  are  led  by  the  mind.f8 

The  five  senses  are  vision,  hearing,  scent,  taste,  and  touch. 
The  materials  that  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  five  senses 
are  space,  wind,  light,  water,  and  earth.  The  resting  places  of 
the  five  senses  are  the  two  eyes,  the  two  ears,  the  nose,  the 
tongue,  and  the  skin  or  whole  body.  The  five  objects  of  the  five 
senses  are  sound,  touch,  form,  taste,  and  scent.  The  five  percep¬ 
tions  derived  from  the  five  senses  are  the  perception  of  form 
through  vision,  &c.  These  perceptions  spring  from  a  union  of  the 
senses,  the  objects  of  the  senses,  mind,  and  the  soul,  and  are  of 
two  kinds,  viz.,  transitory  and  durable  or  leading  to  certitude. 
This  about  the  five  and  twenty  topics  (of  knowledge  or  enquiry). J8 

Mind,  the  functions  of  the  mind,  the  Understanding,  and  the 
Soul  constitute,  in  brief,  the  substances  and  qualities  that  are 


*  In  brief,  what  is  implied  by  this  is  that  he  who  repeatedly  manifests  the  quality 
of  Goodness  is  regarded  to  be  Good  in  respect  of  his  character  :  he  who  repeatedly  gives 
way  to  Passion  is  regarded  as  Passionate  :  and  he  who  repeatedly  perpetrates  wicked 
and  sinful  acts  is  regarded  as  under  the  lead  of  Darkness.  Not  that  the  good  man  is 
never  expected  to  do  what  is  wicked,  or  that  the  wicked  are  incapable  of  never  doing 
what  is  good  ;  only,  in  determining  one’s  character,  we  must  be  guided  by  the  predomi¬ 
nance  of  the  particular  quality  that  is  manifested  in  one’s  acts. — T. 

t  Unless  led  by  the  mind,  the  senses  cannot  act  :  when  one  is  engaged  in  deep 
thought,  one  never  sees  the  objects  that  pass  before  one’s  eyes.  It  cannot  be  contended 
that  at  such  times  the  physical  conditions  that  lead  to  vision  are  annihilated. 
The  presence  of  light,  and  of  the  contact  of  the  reflected  rays  with  the  retina, 
cannot  be  doubted,  yet  there  is  no  vision.  The  mind  being  absent,  the  eye  does  not 
see.— T. 

t  The  senses,  their  constituent  elements,  and  their  respective  objects  have  been 
stated  in  their  proper  order  in  the  note  inp.  84.  The  senses  convey  to  the  mind  two 
kinds  of  impressions,  viz. ,  transitory  and  durable  or  certain.  The  distinction  is  well- 
founded.  One  may  look  at  a  landscape  at  a  distance.  It  cannot  be  said  that  one  does 
not  see  it.  Indeed,  one  beholds  all  the  objects  of  which  that  landscape  is  composed. 
But  one  cannot  distinguish  the  particular  objects  composing  it.  To  do  this  would 
require  a  nearer  view  and  a  more  prolonged  one, — T. 


CHARAKA-ASMHITA. 


87 


known  by  the  name  of  Adhyatma.  These  are  also  the  cause  of 
our  inclinations  and  disinclinations  in  respect  of  all  good  and  bad 
acts.  Then  again  all  such  effects  as  are  produced  by  having 
recourse  to  particular  objects,  and  which  are  (in  medical  science) 
especially  known  by  the  name  of  KriyU  (operation),  depend  upon 
those  very  things  as  their  cause.*7 

Although  the  senses,  as  led  by  the  reason,  have  for  their 
essence  the  modifications  of  all  the  five  great  primal  elements,  yet 
the  element  of  light  especially  enters  into  the  composition  of  the 
sense  of  vision,  of  space  into  that  of  the  sense  of  hearing,  of  earth 


*  These  are  very  important  aphorisms,  explaining  the  connection  of  the  physical 
with  the  mental  world.  At  first  the  term  Adhyatma  is  explained.  By  Adhyatma  is 
meant  everything  depending  on  dtman  or  the  Soul.  The  universe  is  believed  to  be  only 
certain  substances  and  attributes,  which  in  their  turn  are  displayed  (or  created)  by  the 
Mind  including  the  Senses,  the  Understanding,  and  the  Soul.  (Certain  systems  of 
philosophy,  however,  regard  the  Soul  to  be  only  an  inactive  witness. )  The  universe, 
then,  of  both  things  and  acts,  as  it  exists,  exists  only  in  Consciousness,  i.e.,  the  Mind 
including  the  senses,  and  the  Understanding.  The  Mind  only  receives  impressions, 
the  Understanding  causes  the  certitude  of  knowledge  by  the  processes  of  ratiocination. 
(For  fuller  particulars,  vide  Mahabharata,  Book  XII,  Sections  194  and  247.) 
The  Mind  and  its  functions  (taking  the  word  Mind  as  including  the  Senses),  and  the 
Understanding  (leaving  out  the  Soul,  regarding  it  to  be  only  an  inactive  witness),  cons¬ 
titute  the  foundation  on  which  all  our  inclinations  and  disinclinations  in  respect  of  both 
good  and  bad.  acts  depend  for  their  manifestation  or  occurrence.  Thus  far  for  the 
universe  of  both  things  and  acts  regarded  in  the  light  of  mere  mental  manifestations. 
He  who  can  realise  the  universe  to  be  such  is  said  to  possess  True  Knowledge  and  is  sure 
to  attain  to  Emancipation  or  identity  with  Supreme  Brahma ,  which  is  not  annihilation 
but  pure  Knowledge  without  the  duality  of  knower  and  known.  To  realise  the  universe, 
however,  as  such,  is  difficult.  It  requires  the  training  of  Yoga.  The  universe  is,  again, 
as  ordinary  men  take  it,  a  physical  or  substantive  reality.  In  this  view,  particular 
objects  produce  particular  effects  on  the  body,  resulting  in  health  or  the  reverse.  These 
effects  (such  as  vomitting,  purging,  &c.),  for  the  good  or  otherwise  of  the  body,  depend 
upon  the  very  same  Mind  and  its  functions,  and  the  Understanding.  The  material 
world  therefore,  with  its  manifestations,  is  the  world  as  existing  in  Consciousness  viewed 
in  a  particular  light  (or,  rather,  through  the  darkness  of  ignorance)  by  ordinary  men. 
It  is  with  this  world  that  medical  science  is  concerned.  The  effects  of  particular  sub¬ 
stances,  called  in  especial  Kriya  or  operation,  depend  upon  or  appertain  to  the  same 
world  which  exists  in  Consciousness  but  which,  viewed  through  the  darkness  of  ignorance, 
is  the  material  world.— T. 


CHA  RAKA -SAM  HIT  A. 


into  that  of  the  scent,  of  water  into  that  of  taste,  and  of  wind  into 
that  of  touch.*8 

That  particular  sense  into  whose  composition  a  particular 
element  enters,  follows  or  apprehends  that  particular  object  which 
has  that  particular  element  for  its  essence,  the  reason  being  that 
both  partake  of  the  same  nature,  and  one  is  invested  with  puis- 
ance  over  the  other.f9 

In  consequence  again  of  the  exeessive  correlation,  the  absence 
of  (judicious)  correlation,  and  the  impropriety  of  correlation,  of  the 
senses  with  their  respective  objects,  the  senses  including  the  mind, 
falling  away  from  their  normal  condition,  become  hurtful  to  the 
perceptions  of  which  they  are  the  respective  sources  or  channels. 
In  consequence  again  of  a  judicious  correlation  of  the  senses  with 
their  objects,  they  preserve  their  normal  condition,  and  maintain 
in  their  normal  condition  the  perceptions  or  knowledge  respect¬ 
ively  derived  through  them. if 10 


*  The  approved  doctrine  of  Hindu  philosophy  is  that  “  this  all,  consisting  of  mobile 
and  immobile  creatures,  is  made  of  the  five  primal  elements.  Creation  and  Destruction 
is  due  to  (the  combination  and  the  dissolution  of)  these  five.  The  Creator  of  these  ele¬ 
ments  has  placed  them  in  different  proportions  in  all  created  things.”  (Mahabharata, 
Book  XII,  Section  247).  Although  the  senses  are  the  result  of  the  modifications  of  the 
five  great  elements,  and  all  although  the  elements  exist  in  each  sense,  still  some  one  of 
the  elements  is  seen  to  predominate  in  the  composition  of  some  one  of  the  senses.  Thus 
light  enters  into  the  composition  of  vision,  space  of  hearing,  &c.  Vision,  hearing,  &c., 
as  also  their  objects,  viz. ,  form,  sound,  &c.,  are  again  spoken  of  as  the  attributes  of 
light,  space,  &c.  (Mahabharata,  Book  XII,  Section  252). — 71 

t  Thus  light  which  particularly  enters  into  the  composition  of  the  sense  of  vision, 
forms  also  the  essence  of  rupa  or  form,  because  form  is  the  attribute  of  light.  Both 
vision  and  form  partaking  of  the  nature  of  light,  vision  concerns  itself  with  or  appre¬ 
hends  form.  So  also  is  the  case  with  hearing  and  sound.  Both  partake  of  the  nature 
of  space,  and  hence  sound  is  apprehended  by  the  sense  of  hearing.  So  on  with  every 
other  sense  and  the  objects  they  apprehend. — 71 

+  Take  the  sense  of  vision  first.  Its  object  is  rupa  or  form.  Excessive  correlation 
of  vision  and  form  would  be  excessive  use  of  sight  for  seeing  objects,  such  as  keeping 
oneself  awake,  by  resisting  the  inclination  to  sleep,  for  seeing  entertaining  scenes  and 
shows.  The  absence  of  (judicious)  correlation  would  imply  the  scant  Use  of  the  eye  or 
its  total  disuse,  Improper  correlation  means  the  witnessing  of  repulsive  or  horrible 


NOTICE. 


The  English  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  will  be  issued 
in  successive  fascicules  of  4  forms,  Royal  octavo,  each;  12 
fascicules  will  be  issued  every  year.  Under  favorable  circum¬ 
stances.  the  number  of  fascicules  or  the  number  of  forms  in 
each  fascicule  may  be  increased.  For  subscribers  paying  in 
advance  the  charge  is  Rs.  32  for  the  whole  work. 


Manager  of  Charaka  Samhita  &  Susruta  Samhita, 
200,  Cornwallis  Street, 
CALCUTTA. 


The  following  publications  relating  to  Hindu  Medical  Science 
■may  be  had  at  No.  200,  Cor nwalis’  Street, 
Calcutta ,  India. 


1.  Charaka-Samhita  in  original,  with  Chakrapanidatta's  Com¬ 
mentary  ;  edited  by  Pandit  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna 
(published  in  Devanagara  character  in  successive  fascicules). 
Price  Rs.  30  in  advance. 

2.  Susruta-Samhita  (in  original)  with  Dallanacharya’s  com¬ 
mentary,  edited  by  Pundit  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna 
(published  in  Devanagara  character  in  successive  fasci¬ 
cules).  Price  Rs.  19  in  advance. 

3.  Bengali  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  with  the  original 
text  (complete)  in  the  Bengali  character.  Price  Rs.  12. 

4.  Hindi  translation  of  Ditto  (  published  in  successive  fasci¬ 
cules).  Price  Rs.  16  in  advance. 

5.  Bengali  translation  of  Susruta-Samhita  (published  in  suc¬ 
cessive  fascicules).  Price  Rs.  10  in  advance. 

6.  Hindi  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive  fasci¬ 
cules).  Price  Rs.  15  in  advance. 

7.  Chikitsa-Sammilani,  (a  monthly  medical  journal  in  Ben¬ 
gali).  Subscription  in  advance  for  one  year  Rs.  3-6  ;  for 
the  poorer  classes,  Rs.  2-6.  (Back  volumes  for  seven  years 
may  be  had  for  Rs.  21,  or  Rs.  3  for  each  volume  embracing 
12  numbers.) 


473f7 


PART  IV. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


Published  by 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Caharaka  Samhita  and  of  Susruta  Samhita 

(in  original)  WITH  COMMENTARIES;  BENGALI  AND 

Hindi  translator  of  Charaka  Samhita  and 
of  Susruta  Samhita  •  editor  of  Chikitsa- 
Sammilani  (  Medical  Journal  in 
Bengali) ;  PRACTITIONER  OF 

the  Hindu  System 
of  Medicine, 

&c.,  &c.,  &c. 

Calcutta ; 

Printed  by  D.  C.  Dass  &  Co., 

“Corinthian  Press,”  33,  New  China  Bazar 
and 

Published,  at 
200,  Cornwallis  Street. 

'  1892. 


(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved. ) 


(  i3  ) 

scholar  of  the  Aryan  medicine,  as  Mr.  Kaviratna,  promises 
to  be  a  reliable  one.  The  first  number  of  his  translation, 
now  on  our  table,  shows  with  what  care  and  zeal  .he  is 
doinghis  work.  Only  the  first  few  pages  of  Gharaka’s  work 
are  translated  in  this  number.  Wherever  any  names  of 
Indian  plants  have  occurred,  he  has  given  equivalent 
botanical  names  in  foot  notes  He  has  also  appended 
ample  foot-notes,  both  explanatory  and  critical.  An 
ardent  admirer  of  the  Indian  system  of  medicine  as  Mr. 
Kaviratna  appears  to  be,  he  does  nowhere,  in  his  introduc¬ 
tion  to  his  translation,  hold  up  the  Indian'system,  ag 
comprising  highly  scientific  doctrines  regarding  the  struc¬ 
ture  and  functions  of  the  human  body.” 


( Extract  from  the  Theosophist ,  Madras.) 

“The  translation  is  undertaken  by  a  well-known 
Kaviraj  of  Calcutta,  Pundit  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna. 
He  has  already  produced  good  editions  of  Charaka  and 
Susruta  Samhitas ;  and  has  now  sent  us  the  first  part  of 
his  translation. 

The  foot-notes  containing  English  and  botanical 
equivalents  to  names  of  Indian  drugs,  are  very  valuable, 
and  show  how  much  pains  have  been  taken  with  them. 
We  sincerely  hope  that,  considering  the  necessity  for  the 
translation  of  these  most  ancient  Indian  Medical  works 
we  possess,  the  public  will  come  forward  to  purchase  it, 
for  nothing  can  be  a  greater  need  to  the  rising  generation 
of  this  country  than  to  exactly  know  what  their  ancestors 
thought  and  did.” 


(  14  ) 

( Extract  from  the  Bengal  Times,  Dacca .) 

“Paadit  Avinash  Chundra  Kaviratna,  by  education  a 
student,  by  inclination  and  training,  a  physician,  has 
seized  upon  the  medical  lore  of  his  forefathers,  who 
wrote  their  works  in  Sanskrit,  in  view  to  its  diffusion  in 
a  popular  form,  and  to  its  study  as  a  standard  system 
among  practitioners. 

He  is  now  .  at  work  on  an  English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  and  Susruta  Samhita,  two  Hindoo 
works  on  medicine  and  surgery  unsurpassed  in  any  age, 
or  by  any  people,  as  specimens  of  ancient  scientific 
research.  To  help  him  in  this  object,  he  has  made  an 
appeal  to  Government,  which  we  are  sanguine  will  meet 
with  a  becomingly  indulgent  response.” 


( Extract  from  Sammilani,  Jessore. ) 

“The  Pandit  is  also  bringing  out  an  English  translation 
of  Charaka  Samhita. 

“The  translator,  in  the  preface  to  the  first  fascicule  which 
has  reached  us,  observes  that,  ‘it  is  my  firm  belief  that 
an  English  translation  of  Charaka,  if  executed  properly, 
and  if  it  succeeds  in  attracting  the  attention  of  scientific 
men  in  Europe  and  America,  is  sure  to  produce  many 
important  changes  in  modern  systems  of  treating  diseases. 
Charaka  is  a  highly  philosophical  work.  Its  deliverances 
on  many  subjects,  unsurpassed  for  their  brevity  and 
weight,  are  like  those  of  Bacon,  extremely  suggestive. 
Locked  in  a  difficult  tongue,  those  hints  have  for  ages 
lain  unutilised.  Whether  employed  in  teaching  students 


(  IS  ) 

or  practising  their  system,  Hindu  physicians  have  moved 
too  much  in  a  groove.  The  vigorous  intellect  of  the  West 
by  taking  up  these  hints,  may  produce  results  of  the 
utmost  importance  to  science  and  the  sacred  cause  of 
alleviating  human  misery.’  We  fully  endorse  what  has 
been  said  by  the  translator. 

Charaka  has  hitherto  been  a  sealed  book  to  European 
medical  men.  The  translation  is  likely  to  be  productive 
of  much  good  to  the  cause  of  humanity.” 

( Extract  from  the  Indian  Light ,  Madras .) 

"One  of  the  well-known  sons  of  this  miniature  continent 
is  a  distinguished  Ayurvedic  physician  and  editor  of 
one  of  the  Bengali  journals  of  Calcutta.  This  high 
personage  is  no  other  than  Pandit  Avinas  Chandra  Kavi- 
ratna.  He  has  set  on  foot  the  task  of  reviving  Sanscrit 
medicine  by  translating  into  Bengali  and  other  languages 
the  ancient  Medical  works  of  India. 

We  can  only  say  that  the  translation  is  a  faithful  copy 
of  the  original  and  that  our  medical  men  will  not 
hesitate  to  assist  Mr.  Avinas  Chandra.  Kaviratna  in  his 
noble  task  of  restoring  the  study  of  the  Medical  classics. 
We  hope  that  the  translator  will  not  be  discouraged  by 
the  Government  and  his  fellowmen  and  that  his  en¬ 
deavours  will  be  crowned  with  success.” 

( Extract  from  the  People's  Journal,  Madras.) 

“Babu  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna  has  undertaken 
to  translate  this  vast  compendium  of  medical  Science  into 
English,  and  has  won  golden  opinions  from  all  quarters. 


(  *6  ) 

It  may  be  safely  said  that  the  reader  of  these  pages 
will  find,  almost  at  every  step,  something  to  learn  or 
admire. 

•  Such  an  undertaking  as  that  of  Babu  Kaviratna 
deserves  every  encouragement  at  the  hands  of  his  country¬ 
men  and  the  Government.” — July  18 th  1891. 

(Extract  from  the  Madura  Mail.) 

“WeJiave  before  us  the  first  fascicule  of  the  English 
version  of  Charaka  Samhita  kindly  sent  us  by  the 
publisher,  Abinash  Chandra  Kaviratna.  The  Kaviratna 
is  a  Kaviraj  or  physician  of  great  reputation  in  Bengal 
practising  according  to  the  Hindu  system  of  Medicine. 
His  qualifications  for  the  great  work  he  has  undertaken 
are  beyond  question. 

We,  therefore,  trust  that  the  Local  Governments  will 
see  their  way  to  extend  to  the  philanthropic  gentleman 
their  patronage,  which,  we  may  say,  he  has  fairly  earned 
by  his  former  publications.  The  Kaviratna  is  no  blind 
admirer  of  authors  of  antiquity  and  their  works.” 
July  18,  r89i. 

(Extract from  the  Sanmarga  Bodhiny,  Bellary.)  . 

“We  have  been  always  of  opinion  that  only  a  native 
Sanskrit  scholar  could  do  ample  justice  in  correctly 
translating  into  English  and  editing  Sanskrit  works.  And 
it  is  our  fortune  that  we  have  been  enabled  soon  to 
realise  this  our  long-cherished  desire.  We  beg  to  acknow¬ 
ledge  with  thanks  the  receipt  of  the  1st  part  of  Charaka- 
Samhita  from  its  learned  author  for  review ;  and  we  are 


(  17  ) 


highly  pleased  to  record  our  opinion  on  the  merits  of  the 
translation  into  English.  Charaka  and  Susruta  are  the 
acknowledged  authorities  on  Hindu  medicine. 

We  have  years  ago  come  to  the  conclusion  that  in 
Medicine,  the  Aryans  are  second  to  none.  Most  of 
their  methods  of  treatment  are  inimitable.  Their 
treatises  on  medicine  treat  exclusively  of  the  virtues'of 
the  various  simples.  In  every  branch  of  Medical 
Science  they  attained  excellence  long  before  any  other 
nation  under  the  sun  had  developed  this  science.  We 
are  happy  to  record  that  Mr.  Abinash  Chandra  Kavi- 
ratna,  who  has  already  earned  fame  as  a  competent 
Medical  scholar,  has  undertaken  this  laborious  but  worthy 
task  and  thus  conferred  a  great  good  upon  the  general 
public  and  especially  the  students  of  medicine  in  both  the 
Western  and  Eastern  continent. 

The  present  translation  will  not  only  disabuse  their 
minds,  but  amply  do  justice  to  the  sacred  memory  of 
Aryan  scientific  learning.  We  are  much  pleased  with 
the  translation.  The  style  is  very  easy,  lucid  and  explicit 
enough.  The  author  has  endeavoured  his  best  to  make 
the  book  readable  and  the  general  get  up  of  the  book  is 
very  excellent.  We  wish  the  learned  author  every  success 
in  his  meritorious  undertaking,  as  he  richly  deserves  it. 
The  Rajahs,  Zamindars  and  the  rich  will  do  well  to  render 
him  ample  pecuniary  aid  as  there  is  no  greater  good 
which  a  true  patriot  and  well-wisher  of  the  country  can 
do  than  helping  the  revival  of  this  most  important  but 
much  neglected  divine  science  and  art  of  healing,  which 
is  the  only  true  handmaid  of  human  happiness.” 


(  i8  ) 

( Extract  from  Hope,  Calcutta.) 

“YVe  have  received  the  first  part  of  Charaka-Samhita 
translated  into  English  and  published  by  Pandit  Avinas 
Chandra  Kaviratna,  the  energetic  Ayurvedic  physician 
who  has  undertaken  the  arduous  task  of  placing  within 
each  of  the  general  reader  of  the  present  day  the 
ancient  works  on  the  Hindoo  system  of  medicine  and 
surgery.  The  Pundit  has  already  brought  out  editions 
of  Charaka-Samhita  and  Susruta-Samhita,  the  two  most 
authoritative  works  on  Hindoo  medicine  and  surgery,  in 
the  original,  with  commentaries,  and  also  Bengali  and 
Hindi  translations  of  the  same.  The  present  venture  of 
publishing  translations  of  both  the  works  in  English  is 
intended  to  complete  his  work  in  the  line,  and  we  sincerely 
hope  that  the  public  will  not  fail  to  lend  support  to  one 
who  has  already  shown  such  results  of  his  energy  and 
perseverance.  So  far  as  we  can  judge,  the  part  to  hand 
of  the  English  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  is  very 
well  done,  the  style  being  easy  and  clear,  and  the  text 
being  elucidated  by  copious  notes  explaining  scientific 
and  other  points. 

The  new  publication  will,  no  doubt,  be  a  very  valuable 
work  towards  whose  completion  they  should  all  mate¬ 
rially  help.  The  work  will  be  very  expensive,  and  neither 
subscriptions  nor  donations  alone  such  as  the  publisher  is 
likely  under  ordinary  circumstances  to  recieve  will  cover 
its  cost.” 

Paul  Burtholom,  m.  d.,  Philadelphia ,  June  12  th  \ — I 
have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the  .  profound  mean¬ 
ing  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  any- 


(  19  ) 

thing  that  I  have  ever  met  before  in  medical  literature 
and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

James  M.  Flint,  Esq,,  Washington,  June  i ith  1892  : — 
I  beg  to  assure  you  that  I  have  the  highest  admiration 
for  the  work  you  are  doing,  both  for  its  nature  and 
quality. 

John  R.  Gray,  Secretary ,  Buff  alio  College,  of  Phar¬ 
macy,  fine  14th  1892  : — Regarding  the  character,  prin¬ 
ciples,  extent  and  scope  of  the  work,  I  can  say  it  is  mag¬ 
nanimous  and  it  is  most  desirable  that  the  work  goes 
forward  to  completion.  Surely  it  is  the  only  channel 
through  which  the  mysteries  of  medical  and  botanical 
history  can  be  positively  cleared  up 

W.  D.  Whitney,  Esq.,  New  Haven,  TJ.  S.  A.,  June 
17th  1892  : — It  is  a  work  of  much  desert  that  you  have 
undertaken  and  will  be  very  welcome. 

Soren  Sorensen,  Esq.,  Copenhagen ,  Denmark,  30 th 
June  1892  : — I  feel  the  greatest  sympathy  with  your  work 
and  I  sincerely  wish  and  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in 
carrying  it  out. 

G.  B.  Shattuck  Esq.,  Boston,  7 th  fuly  1892  We 
shall  take  pleasure  in  calling  the  attention  of  our  scholars 
to  it  and  will  send  you  a  copy  of  the  issue. 


(  30  ) 

Narkeldanga, 

6th  August  1892. 

Dear  Sir, — I  have  received  the  1st  three  parts  of 
your  English  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita.  The  work 
is  not  only  of  value  to  the  physician  and  the  antiquarian, 
but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support. 
I  wish  you  all  success. 

Your  Truly, 

(Sd.)  Gooroodass  Baxnerji. 

Arrah, 

The  1st  August. 

My  Dear  Sir, — I  am  greatly  obliged  by  the  3rd 
number  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita.  It  is 
wonderful  to  note  the  comparatively  advanced  views  held 
by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely  they  had 
anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderners  flatter  our¬ 
selves  are  due  to  the  enlightment  of  this  age. 

Yours  sincerly. 

(Sd.)  F.  H.  B.  Skrink, 

Darjf.ei.ing. 

3r d  August  1892. 

Dear  Sir, — I  have  read  the  part  of  Charaka  Samhita 
with  much  interest.  The  book  certainly  contains  most 
wholesome  advice  as  regards  the  management  of  health. 
I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  sending  it  to  me. 

Yours  very  truly, 

(Sd.)  H.  A.  D.  Phillips. 


{  21  ) 


.  The  Medical  Fortnightly, — 'Saint  Luis  U.  S.  A. 
Tune  15 th,  1892  : — We  are  greatly  surprised  in  finding  in 
this  venerable  relic  of  past  ages  not  incantations  and 
seperstitious  ceremonies  recommended  for  the  cure  of  all 
the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to,  but  a  regular  materia  medica, 
comprising  many  hundreds  of  medicinal  plants  and 
, other  remedial  agents. 


The  Darjeeling  News,  August  6,  189a. 

We  have  received  a  copy  of  the  3rd  fasiculus  of  the 
English  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita.  The  work  seems 
to  be  in  the  nature  of  a  repertory  of  hygiene,  as  under¬ 
stood  by  the  ancient  sages,  and  shows  clearly  that  many 
important  truths  were  unknown  then  as  now.  The 
lesson  on  the  inadvisability  of  suppressing  the  urgings  of 
nature,  the  necessity  of  physical  exercise  and  the  action 
of  the  passions  and  feelings  on  health,  cannot  fail  to  be 
very  interesting  and  instructive.  We  take  this  opportu¬ 
nity  of  correcting  a  misimpression  which  appears  to 
have  gone  abroad  that  Charaka  is  entirely  a  medical 
work  and  bristles  with  technicalities.  It  ought  to 
find  its  way  into  every  house  where  health  is  regarded  as 
a  matter  of  supreme  importance. 


journal  des  Savants,  Paris,  May  1892. 

*  *  *  In  every  respect  no  one  than  he  is  better 

fitted  to  carry  on  this  long-wounded  labour  which  requires 
much  special  enlightenment  and  great  perseverance.  In 
Mons.  Kabiratha  are  combined  all  the  necessary  condi- 


tions.  His  publications  are  of  interest  to  Philologists  as  well 
as  Doctors.  This  ist  lesson  is  confined  to  the  enumera¬ 
tion  of  the  general  principles  of  the  science  of  medicine. 
These  principles  are  moral  as  well  as  material  and  concern 
the  soul  as  also  the  body.  It  is  only  a  specimen  which  the 
learned  Pundit  has  sent  to  us,  but  this  specimen  is 
sufficient  and  the  completion  of  a  work  so  well  commenced 
should  be  the  wish  of  all  Indianists. 


H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia ,  i st  March  1892  : —  I 
have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  I  sincerely  hope 
that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I 
will  be  one  of  the  happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my 
library. 


Oscar  Oldberg,  Esq.,  Chicago  Exhibition ,  April  2nd. , 
1892  : — I  beg  to  assure  you  that  I  am  already  deeply 
interested  in  the  work.  It  would  give  me  great  pleasure 
to  meet  you  in  Chicago  at  the  World’s  Columbian  Ex¬ 
position. 


S.  E.  Sayre,  Esq.,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.,  May  27 th, 
1892: — I  have  read  with  a  good  deal  of  pleasure  and 
profit,  I  assure  you.  I  can  do  no  better,  in  giving  my 
views  that  enclose  some  of  the  clippings  of  the  journals 
from  my  pen. 


<  23  ) 


Cambridge  ; 

June  3,  1893. 

My  dear  Sir, — I  thank  you  very  sincerely  for  the  two 
fascicules  of  the  translation  of  the  Charaka  Samhita  which 
you  have  sent  me  ;  a  careful  translation  of  this  ancient 
work  will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only 
express  my  cordial  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  trans¬ 
lating  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement 
when  finished. 

I  remain, 

My  dear  Sir, 

Your  sincerely, 
(Sd.)  E.  B.  COWELL. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Brooklyn ,  U.  S.  A.  : — Accept 
my  thanks,  the  matter  is  certainly  of  great  interest  to 
me  and  I  shall  probably  refer  to  it  in  some  American 
publication. 

13,  Kew  Gardens  Road  ; 

Kew, 

Surrey — London, 

The  10th  August  1892. 

Dear  Sir, — I  have  safely  received  the  third  part  of 
Charaka  Samhita  which  you  have  been  so  good  as  to 
send  me  (and  also  your  accompanying  letter  of  advice) 
and  to  thank  you  for  the  same.  I  am  not  surprised  that 
ordinary  medical  practitioners  can  find  little  time  to  go 
into  the  subject  of  the  historical  development  of  the 
healing  art.  They  have  now  such  an  enormous  quantity 
to  learn,  especially  human  anatomy  and  physiology,  that 
they  can  find  very  little  time  for  such  important  subjects 


(  24  ) 


to  them  as  chemistry  and  comparative  anatomy ;  and 
they  usually  regard  botany  and  drugs  as  a  mere  nuisance. 
I  think  you  must  look  more  to  “  scientists  ”  to  take  an 
interest  in  your  translation  than  to  the  medical  “  profes¬ 
sion,”  i.e,,  those  engaged  in  practice.  They  can  get 
little  time  for  study  and  they  have,  therefore,  to  read 
very  much  to  the  point. 

Yours  truly, 

(Sd.)  C.  B.  Clarke. 

Dippelshof, 

Vei  Eraisa-Darmstadt, 
gth  August  1892. 

My  dear  Sir, 

“  I  was  greatly  interested  by  the  contents  of  Part  III 
and  sincerely  hope  that  in  spite  of.  the  materialistic 
period  of  the  Kali yuga  we  are  passing  through  here,  in 
which  men  only  take  up  things  which  show  a  return,  that 
in  spite  of  this,  Gharaka  will  be  appreciated. 

From  the  opinions  of  the  “  press  ”  I  see  that  you  have 
already  interested  Professor  Jacobi  of  the  Bonn  Univer¬ 
sity.  As  the  eminent  medical  men  I  intended  to  con¬ 
sult  as  to  the  propagation  of  your  books  are  of  the  same 
University,  I  intend  to  write  to  Professor  Jacobi  to  get 
his  opinion  about  the  best  means  of  introducing  your  en¬ 
terprise  to  the  public. 

I  remain, 

Sir, 

Yours  faithfully, 

(Sd.)  Franz  Gebhard. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


89 


THE  objects  of  the  mind  are  ideas.  Here  again,  the  proper, 
excessive,  scant,  and  injudicious  correlation  of  the  Mind  with  its 
objects,  or  of  the  mental  Understanding  with  its  objects,  becomes 
the  cause  of  the  normal  or  abnormal  condition  of  oneself.* 

Here  again,  for  these  reasons,  one  should  act  in  such  a  way  as 
to  preserve  one’s  normal  condition  in  order  that  one’s  untroubled 
senses  and  mind  might  continue  in  an  untroubled  state  ;  that 
is  to  say,  by  keeping  oneself  in  touch  with  such  objects  of 
the  senses  as  are  productive  of  beneficial  results  ;  by  properly 
achieving  such  acts  as  deserve  to  be  achieved  (and  abstaining  from 
such  acts  as  should  be  abstained  from),  repeatedly  ascertaining 
everything  by  a  judicious  employment  of  the  Understanding  ;  and 
lastly,  by  resorting  to  practices  that  are  opposed  to  the  virtues  of 
the  place  of  habitation,  season  of  time,  and  one’s  own  particular 
nature  or  disposition  (as  dependant  upon  a  preponderance  of  this 
or  that  attribute  or  ingredient).  Hence  all  persons  desirous  of 


sights.  All  these  injure  the  sight  or  make  it  fall  away  from  its  normal  condition.  The 
consequence  of  this,  of  course,  is  that  the  perceptions,  of  which  the  eyes  are  the  source 
or  channel,  become  injured.  A  judicious  or  proper  correlation,  however,  of  the  eye 
with  form,  preserves  the  normal  condition  of  the  eye,  and  the  perceptions  of  which  the 
eye  is  the  source  are  kept  unimpaired.  The  same  is  the  case  with  each  of  the  other 
senses  ;  excessive  indulgence  or  exercise,  the  absence  of  judicious  indulgence,  and  im¬ 
proper  indulgence,  impair  each  of  them.  Deafness  is  often  induced  by  exposing  the  ear 
to  loud,  harsh,  and  dissonant  sounds  continuously.  The  delicacy  of  the  olfactory  nerves 
is  seen  to  be  impaired  by  exposing  them  continually  to  powerful  scents.  Taste  and 
Touch  may  be  impaired  by  such  injudicious  indulgence. —  T. 

*  Certain  objects,  such  as  form,  &c.,  are  apprehended  or  seized  by  the  Senses. 
The  Mind,  as  the  leader  of  the  Senses,  apprehends  or  seizes  those  very  objects.  Some¬ 
times  again  the  Mind,  acting  without  the  intervention  of  the  Senses,  concerns  itself  with 
those  objects.  When  the  latter  are  thus  presented  to  the  Mind,  they  are  more  particu¬ 
larly  called  the  objects  of  the  Mind.  Hence,  the  objects  of  the  Mind  are  what  are  called 
ideas  or  notions  or  mental  representations  of  external  objects.  *  Mano-bhuddhi  ’  in  the 
text  is  used  to  distinguish  it  from  ‘  Indriy a-buddhi.  ’  I  have  verbally  rendered  it  ‘  mental 
Understanding  ’  when  '  Understanding ’  alone  would  have  been  a  good  rendering.  Ac¬ 
cording  to  the  Sankhya  system  of  philosophy  it  includes  Dhi,  Dhriti,  and  Smriti,  i.  e. , 
Reason  or  Judgment,  the  Representative  power  or  imagination  including,  perhaps.  Re¬ 
production  or  Association,  and  Memory  or  the  power  of  conserving  what  is  acquired. —  T. 

12 


90  CHaRaKA-S.I  me  IT  A. 

achieving  their  own  good,  should  always  adopt  with  heedfulness 
the  practices  of  the  good.* * * §11 

By  observing  such  practices  one  simultaneously  accomplishes 
two  objects,  viz.,  the  preservation  of  health  and  the  subjugation  of 
the  senses.  I  shall,  therefore,  O  Agnive^a,  inculcate  to  thee  in  full 
what  the  practices  of  the  good  are.f12 

They  are  as  follows:  one  should  worship  the  deities,  kine,  Brah- 
manas,  seniors,  aged  men,  persons  crowned  with  (ascetic)  success, 
and  preceptors.  One  should  tend  one’s  sacrificial  fires4  One  should 
bear  on  one’s  person  efficacious  herbs.§  One  should  bathe  twice 
in  the  day,  once  in  the  morning  and  once  again  in  the  evening.|[ 
One  should  always  keep  one’s  outlets  for  the  passage  of  impurities 
{viz.,  urine  and  excreta),  and  one’s  feet,  perfectly  clean  and  well 
washed.  Within  a  fortnight  one  should  have  three  shaves  and 
thrice  pare  one’s  nails. One  should  every  day  wear  clean  and 
well- washed  clothes.  One  should  be  always  cheerful,  and  always 
use  agreeable  perfumes.  One  should  wear  handsome  and  decent 


*  ‘  Prakritibhave  ’  is  explained  by  the  Commentator  as  ‘  nirbbikaratwakarane  ’  by 
means  of  medicaments.  ‘  Guna  ’  is  grammatically  connected  with  all  the  three  words 
after  which  it  comes.  For  practices  opposed  to  the  virtues  of  the  place  of  habitation, 
vide  note  to  Verse  41  of  Lesson  VI.,  p.  73  ante.  ‘  Atma-guna  ’  is  one’s  disposition  or 
nature  as  dependant  upon  the  preponderance  of  wind  or  bile  or  phlegm. — T. 

t  The  subjugation  of  the  Senses  is  a  very  high  object  in  itself.  It  is,  of  course,: 
looked  upon  as  a  means  to  an  end,  the  end  being  not  Yoga-puissance  or  heaven  or  the 
status  of  the  deities,  but  something  higher  still,  viz.,  Emancipation,  which  is  the  highest 
object  of  attainment.  Emancipation  or  Moksha  is  not  annihilation  but  complete  identi¬ 
fication  with  Brahma  and  tfye  perfect  cessation  of  individual  consciousness. — T. 

+  /.  e.,  perform  the  daily  homa  by  pouring  libations  of  ghee  on  it  in  honor  of  the 
deities. —  T. 

§  These  are  generally  placed  within  little  hollow  drum-shaped  capsules  of  gold  or 
silver  which  are  then  hermetically  sealed  and  worn,  with  the  aid  of  threads  or  small  thin 
chains,  on  the  upper  arm  or  round  the  neck. — T. 

1|  ‘  Upaspri?et  ’  may  alao  mean,  as  pointed  out  by  the  Commentator,  ‘say  his 
prayers,’  it  being  the  custom  in  this  country  to  utter  certain  prayers  at  morn  and  eve. 
This,  in  the  language  of  the  country,  is  *  to  adore  the  two  twilights.’  Of  course,  prayers 
cannot  be  said  by  one  without  one  having  first  undergone  a  purificatory  bath. — T. 

IF  *•  Trih  pakshasya 1  is  thus  explained  by  the  Commentator.  I  have  used  the  word 
‘shave’  but  literally  rendered,  the  sentence  would  read,— ‘one  should  cut  one’s  hair 
and  beard  and  nails,’ — 7. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITl. 


91 


garments,  and  dress  one’s  hair  (by  combing  and  parting  it.)  One 
should  every  day  apply  oil  to  one’s  head,  ears,  nose,  and  feet. 
One  should  inhale  smoke  (under  the  restrictions  and  in  the  way 
indicated  before).  One  should  welcome  a  person  one  meets  (with¬ 
out  waiting  to  be  spoken  to).  One  should  speak  agreeable  words 
with  smiles.  One  should  protect  another  fallen  into  distress.  One 
should  perform  Sacrifices  (in  honor  of  the  deities)  and  make  gifts. 
One  should  bend  one’s  head  in  reverence  at  seeing  the  spot  where 
four  roads  meet.  One  should  make  offerings  to  the  deities.* * * § 
One  should  reverence  one’s  guests,  and  offer  cakes  (in  fraddkas) 
unto  one’s  deceased  ancestors-t  At  the  proper  time  one  should 
be  sparing  of  speech  and  say  what  is  beneficial  and  of  sweet 
importf  One  should  keep  one's  senses  under  subjugation. § 
One  should  be  righteous-souled.  One  should  cherish  emulation 
in  respect  of  the  causes  of  other  people’s  prosperity,  but  should 
never  be  jealous  of  that  prosperity. ||  One  should  not  hesitate 
in  indecision.  One  should  be  fearless.  One  should  be  modest. 
One  should  sharpen  one’s  faculty  of  judgment.  One  should  be  stre¬ 
nuous  in  exertions,  possessed  of  cleverness  and  ability,  virtuous, 
and  endued  with  faith.  One  should  reverence  modesty  and  inteh 
ligence  and  learning  and-good  birth  and  aged  men  and  persons 
crowned  with  ascetic  success,  and  perceptors.  One  should  use 
umbrellas,  sticks,  turbans,  and  shoes.  One  should  be  observant  of 


*  ‘Vali’  is  any  offering  made  to  the  deities.  It  includes,  of  course,  the  animals 
that  are  slaughtered  in  Sacrifices.  —  T, 

+  ‘  Atithi  ’  is  a  person  who  comes  of  his  own  accord  to  a  house  in  expectation  of 
food  and  shelter.  The  Hindu  scriptures  declare  that  that  house  from  which  such  a  guest 
turns  away  without  receiving  anything  is  not  the  abode  of  a  householder  but  the  den  of  a 
picaclia  (evil  spirit.)  Craddhas  are  religious  rites  performed  in  honor  of  the  dead. 
Whatever  is  offered  to  the  manes  of  the  dead  may  not  reach  them  but  the  offerings  have 
the  effect  of  cleansing  the  hearts  of  the  offerers.  —  Tr 

t  ‘  At  the  proper  time,’ because  everything  has  its  proper  time.  Even  beneficial 
and  sweet  words  may  be  untimely.— T. 

§  The  '  atman  ’  here,  as  explained  by  the  Commentator,  signifies  the  Senses. — T, 

||  ‘  Irsha  ’  is  envy  or  jealousy.  The  speaker  says  that  one  may  cherish  jealousy 
as  directed  to  the  causes  or  means  of  another  man’s  prosperity,  for  such  jealousy  would 
only  be  a  virtuous  rivalry  or  emulation  that  would  lead  its  cherisher  to  acquire  those 
means,  One  should  not,  however,  be  jealous  of  the  consequences  of  those  means. — T, 


chararasamhitA. 


92 

all  auspicious  acts.  One  should  avoid  such' spots  as  are  strewn 
with  filthy  rags  and  bones  and  horns,  as  are  unholy  (such  as  ceme¬ 
teries  and  crematoriums),  and  such  as  are  also  strewn  with  hair, 
chaff,  sweepings  and  rubbish,  and  ashes,  and  skulls,  and  flowers  that 
have  been  used  in  worship.  One  should  not  indulge  in  physical  exer¬ 
cises  when  one  is  tired.  One  should  constitute  oneself  the  friend 
of  all  creatures* * * §  One  should  seek  to  pacify  the  angry,  assure 
the  frightened,  and  redress  the  woes  of  the  distressed.13 

One  should  firmly  adhere  to  truthfulness,f  and  lead  a  life 
of  tranquillity  (by  abstaining  from  injuring  any  creature.)  One 
should  accustom  oneself  to  calmly  bear  the  harsh  speeches  of 
others.  One  should  subdue  wrath.}:  One  should  be  a  careful 
observer  of  the  attribute  of  peacefulness.  One  should  remove  the 
very  roots  of  anger  and  aversion  or  haste.  One  should  never  tell 
an  untruth.  One  should  never  appropriate  what  belongs  to  others. 
One  should  not  covet  the  prosperity  of  another.§  One  should  not 
fancy  another's  wife  or  desire  to  provoke  hostilities.  One  should 
not  commit  sins  or  keep  company  with  those  that  are  sinful.  One 
should  not  speak  of  another  man’s  faults.  One  should  not  seek  to 
penetrate  the  secrets  of  other  people.  One  should  not  have 
friendly  intercourse  with  unrighteous  persons,  or  with  those  that 
are  disloyal  to  the  king,  or  with  those  that  are  stark  mad,  or  with 
those  that  are  fallen  (degraded  for  sinfulness),  or  with  those  that  are 
guilty  of  foeticide, [{  or  with  those  that  are  mean,  or  with  those  that 
are  wicked.  One  should  not  ride  vicious  animals.  One  should  not 
sit  upon  a  hard  seat  of  the  height  of  one’s  knee.  One  should  not 
sleep  on  a  bed  that  has  not  been  properly  stretched,  that  is  with. 


*  The  Commentator  points  out  that  a  physician  should  not,  therefore,  refuse  to  treat 
a  person  who  has  incurred  the  animosity  of  the  king  or  one  who  has  become  fallen 
through  sin,. — T. 

+  This  has  reference  also  to  the  keeping  of  promises,  besides,  of  course,  speaking 
the  truth  under  other  circumstances. — T. 

}  *  Amarshaghnah  ’  is  explained  by  the  Commentator  as  ‘killer  of  incapacity,’  for 
*  amarsha  ’  is  taken  by  him  as  ‘  akshamata  ’  upon  what  authority  I  am  not  aware. — T. 

§  /.  <?.,  be  jealous  of  such  prosperity. — T. 

||  There  are  certain  sins  by  perpetrating  which  one  becomes  guilty  of  foeticide, 
the  commission  of  those  sins  is  as  abhorrent  as  foeticide. — T, 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MR  I TA. 


93 


out  pillows,  that  is  not  spacious,  and  that  is  not  smooth  and  level. 
One  should  not  wander  or  walk  over  the  uneven  summits  of  moun¬ 
tains.  One  should  not  climb  trees.  One  should  not  plunge  into  a 
rapid  stream.  One  should  not  enjoy  the  shade  of  a  jujube  tree. 
One  should  not  walk  about  in  the  vicinity  of  a  place  where  a  fire 
has  broken  out.  One  should  not  laugh  aloud.  One  should  not 
pass  wind  loudly.  One  should  not  yawn,  or  sneeze,  or  laugh 
without  covering  one’s  face.  One  should  not  scratch  Or  rub  one’s 
nose.  One  should  not  grind  one’s  teeth.  One  should  not  scratch 
one’s  nails.  One  should  not  strike  bone  against  bone.  One 
should  not  scratch  the  soil.*  One  should  not  tear  grass  (idly 
while  talking.)  One  should  not  (idly)  grind  little  clods  of  earth  or 
soft  pebbles.  One  should  not,  while  relaxing  one's  limbs,  make 
ugly  attitudes.  One  should  not  cast  one’s  eyes  on  dazzling  lumi¬ 
naries,  and  on  fires  that  are  unholy  and  inauspicious,  t1 4 

One  should  not  utter  the  exclamation  Hun  at  sight  of  a  dead 
body.  One  should  not  cross  the  shadow  of  the  top  of  a  sacred  tree 
or  the  shadow  of  one’s  preceptor,  or  of  a  person  that  is  worthy  of 
one’s  reverence,  or  of  one  that  is  a  sinful  wretch.J  One  should 
not  pass  the  night  in  temples  of  deities,  in  the  shades  of  sacred 
trees,  in  open  places  laid  out  for  sacrifices,  in  spots  where  four 
roads  meet, 'in  groves,  in  crematoriums,  and  in  places  of  exe¬ 
cution^  One  should  not  enter  an  empty  house  or  a  forest  alone 

*  This  is  an  ugly  habit  with  many  persons.  Sitting,  as  people  do,  in  India  on  un¬ 
carpeted  floors,  many  men,  while  talking,  scratch  the  floor  with  little  sticks  or  pointed 
pebbles. — T. 

t  One  should  not  look  at  the  Sun,  for  its  dazzling  splendour  is  sure  to  injure  one’s 
eyes.  One  should  not,  again,  look  at  funeral  fires  which  are  unholy  and  inauspicious. 
The  Commentator  observes  that  although  the  consequences  of  many  of  these  forbidden 
acts  are  not  plain  to  the  understanding,  yet,  considering  that  they  are  forbidden  by  per¬ 
sons  of  superior  understanding,  they  should  be  abstained  from.  —  T. 

\  In  almost  every  Hindu  village  there  is  an  ancient  tree,  generally  a  banian  (Ficus 
Bcngalensis ,  Linn. ,  or  Ficus  Inciica,  Roxb.),  or  an  Aswattha  (Ficus  religiosa,  Linn.), 
round  whose  foot  is  raised  a  platform. upon  which  stone  images  are  kept  of  some  of  the 
deities  of  the  Hindu  Pantheon.  Such  trees  are  regarded  sacred.  What  is  said  here  is  that 
the  shadow  cast  by  the  summit  of  such  a  tree  should  never  be  crossed.  The  shadow  of  a 
sinful  wretch  is  polluting.  ‘  Abhiqasthah  ’  may  also  mean  a  person  under  a  curse.  —  T. 

§  An  ‘  upavana  ’  is  a  grove  or  a  pleasure  garden,  or  an  artificial  forest  like  a  park  ; 
•ayatana  ’  is  an  incorrect  reading  for  ‘  aghatana.  T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


94 

or  unaccompanied  by  another.  One  should  cast  off  a  sinful  wife, 
a  sinful  servant,  and  sinful  friends.  One  should  never  quarrel 
with  persons  that  are  good.  One  should  never  associate  with  those 
that  are  mean.  One  should  never  fancy  a  person  of  a  crooked 
heart.  One  should  never  depend  upon  a  person  of  low  extraction 
or  vile  conduct* * * §  One  should  never  frighten  others.  One  should 
not  rashly  violate  the  rules  that  have  been  laid  down  with  respect 
to  food  and  other  things.f  One  should  not  indulge  in  excessive 
sleep,  in  excessive  wakefulness,  in  excessive  bathing,  in  excessive 
drinking,  and  in  excessive  eating.  One  should  not  stand  erect  on 
one’s  knees  for  a  long  time.  One  should  not  approach  snakes,  or 
animals  having  fangs  and  teeth,  or  animals  having  horns.  Oiie 
should  abandon  places  exposed  to  the  east  wind;  as  also  sunshine 
and  frost  and  breezy  spots  %  One  should  not  set  Kali  in  motion. § 
One  should  not  secrete  fire  in  a  house  (but  should  keep  it  in  its 
usual  place.)  One  should  not  eat  the  remnants  of  another’s  dish.  || 
One  should  not  warm  anything  by  holding  a  fire  in  such  a  way  as 
to  make  its-  heat  go  downwards..  One  should  not  bathe  without 
having  dispelled  fatigue  by  rest  or  while  one’s  face  is  still  covered 


*  The  word  used  in  the  original  is  *  anaryya.’  The  Commentator  explains  that  an 
‘  aryya  ’  is  one  who  keeps  himself  at  a  distance  from  every  kind  of  sin.  »A  person  of  an 
opposite  nature  is  an  ‘anaryya.’  For  all  that,  low  extraction  is  often  indicated  by  the 
word. — T. 

t  ‘  Sahasa’ is  explained  by -the  Commentator  in  this  sense.  He  cites  the  rules 
laid  down  in  the  previous  Section  about  the  manner  in  which  and  the  time  when  curds 
are  to  be  taken.  The  particle  ‘  ati  ’  following  ‘  sahasa  ’  is  connected  with  all  the  words 
that  follow  it. —  T. 

%  1  Ava9yaya  •’  is  frost.  —  T. 

§  There  are  four  ages  of  the  world,  viz.,  Krita,  Treta,  Dwapara,  and  Kali.  In 
the  first  age  there  is  righteousness  everywhere.  In  the  second  age,  three-fourths  of 
righteousness  prevail.  In  the  third  age,  only  half  of  righteousness  prevails,  and  in  the 
last  or  Kali,  righteousness  becomes  reduced  by  three-fourths.  Only  a  fourth  of  it 
remains,  the  rest  being  all  sinfulness.  What  is  said,  therefore,  is  that  no  one  should  act 
in  such  a  way  as  to  pave  the  advent  of  Kali.  When  Kali  runs  out  its  course,  universal 
destruction  takes  place,  and  the  world,  after  along  while,  is  created  anew. — T. 

||  It  is  difficult  to  convey  the  idea  of  *  uchcchishta  ’  to  non-Hindu  peoples.  Any 
food  becomes  ‘  uchcchishta  ’  when  a  portion  of  it  is  eaten  off  the  dish  whereon  it  is 
placed.  If,  however,  the  eater  touches  it  only  once  and  refrains  from  taking  a  second 
handful,  it  does  not  become  ‘ uchcchishta.’-—  T, 


CHA  AM  KA -SA  Mill  TA. 


with  sweat.  One  should  not  bathe  becoming  nude.  One 
should  not  touch  one’s  head  with  the  cloth  one  wore  while  under¬ 
going  a  bath.  One  should  not  pull  one’s  hair  by  the  end.  One 
should  not,  after  having  taken  a  bath,  wear  the  clothes  one  wore 
while  bathing.* * * §  One  should  not  go  out  without  having  (first) 
touched  jewels  and  gems,  clarified  butter,  some  object  of  rever¬ 
ence,  auspicious  articles,  and  flowers  -|*  One  should  not  set  out 
(of  one’s  abode  on  any  mission),  keeping  objects  of  reverence  and 
those  regarded  as  auspicious  on  one’s  right.  One  should  not  set 
out,  keeping  objects  and  articles  of  an  opposite  kind,  on  one’s  left. 
Without  wearing  a  jewel  or  gem  on  one’s  arm,  without  having 
bathed,  without  having  changed  one’s  clothes,  without  having 
poured  libations  on  the  sacred  fire,  without  having  (silently)  recited 
one’s  mantras, %  without  having  offered  the  usual  gifts  to  the 
deities, §  without  having  made  offerings  to  one’s  deceased  ances¬ 
tors,  without  having  made  presents  to  one’s  seniors  and  precep¬ 
tors,  ||  without  having  made  gifts  to  one’s  guests  and  dependants, 
without  bearing  flowers  and  perfumes  on  one’s  person,  without  a 
garland  of  flowers  round  one’s  neck,  without  having  washed  one’s 
hands  and  feet  and  face,  without  having  cleansed  one’s  mouth, 
without  avoiding  the  posture  of  sitting  with  face  to  the  north, 
without  being  cheerful,  and  without  sending  away  unattached, 


*  ‘  Te  ’  is  not  a  verbal  suffix  here,  but  a  Pronominal  adjective  referring  to 
‘  vasasi.  ’  What  the  author  interdicts  is  the  use  of  wet  clothes. — T. 

t  ‘  Ratna  ’  is  jewells  and  gems  of  every  kind  ;  ‘  ajya  ’  is  ghee  or  clarified  butter  ; 

‘  pujya  ’  is  any  object  of  veneration,  animate  or  inanimate,  such  as  a  cow,  a  Brahmana, 
or  an  idol  unto  which  or  whom  worship  is  offered.  Of  ‘  auspicious  ’  articles  there  are 
many.  ‘  Sumanas  ’  is  a  general  name  for  flowers.  The  etymological  signification  is 
‘  anything  that  makes  the  mind  cheerful.’  The  Hindus  love  flowers  passionately. — T. 

t  ‘.Yapa’is  the  silent  recitation  of  particular  mantras  or  sacred  texts.  The  most 
sacred  text  is  the  Gayatri  which  every  person  of  the  three  regenerate  orders  must  recite 
as  many  times  as  he  can.  The  Gayatri  is  a  beautiful  invocation  to  the  divine  Maker  of 
the  universe. — T. 

§  Every  person  of  the  three  regenerate  orders  must  worship  the  deities  with  offer¬ 
ings  of  flowers  and  scents  and  leaves  and  scents. — T. 

Guru  ’  is  a  senior  in  age  and  relationship,  or  a  preceptor  or  teacher.  One’s 
sire,  grandsire,  uncles,  elder  brothers,  &c.,  as  also  one’s  teacher  or  spiritual  guide, 
are  one’s  Gurus,  —  T. 


96  CHARAKA-SA  MHITA 

refractory,  impure,  and  hungry  servitors  from  his  presence,  with¬ 
out  using  plates  and  cups  that  are  pure  and  clean,  without  being 
seated  on  a  proper  place,  w'ithout  selecting  the  proper  time  and  a 
spot  that  is  uncrowded,* * * §  without  having  cast  the  first  morsel  on 
the  fire  (as  an  offering  to  the  deities),  without  sprinkling  the  food 
with  sacred  water, f  without  dispelling  its  faults  by  uttering  the 
proper  mantras ,J  without  avoiding  the  utterance  of  everything 
that  looks  like  depreciating  the  food  to  be  taken, §  without 
assuring  himself  that  the  food  is  not  unclean,  and  that  it  has  not 
been  brought  or  served  by  an  enemy,  one  should  not  sit  down  to 
eat.15  One  should  not  take  food  that  is  stale  unless  it  be  meat  or 
green  pot-herbs  or  jute-leaves  or  fruits  or  certain  kinds  of  confec- 
tionery.H15  One  should  not  eat  the  whole  of  the  food  that  is  placed 
before  one  unless  it  be  curds  or  honey  or  salt  or  the  flour  of  fried 
barley  or  ghee.^I17 

One  should  not  take  curds  in  the  night.  The  flour  of  (fried) 
barley  should  not  be  taken  by  itself  (i.  e.  without  mixing  it  with 
ghee  and  sugar.)  One  should  not  take  a  large  quantity  of  barley- 
flour.  Nor  should  one  take  such  flour  twice  a  day.  Nor  should 
one  take  it  without,  mixing  it  with  water.18 

One  should  not  eat  without  properly  masticating  the  food 
with  the  teeth.  One  should  not  sneeze  or  eat  or  lie  down  (for 

*  ‘  Akime  ’  is  explained  by  the  Commentator  as  ‘  vahujanakirne,’ — T. 

t  Food  is  directed  to  be  taken  after  sprinkling  it  with  water  which  has  been  sancti¬ 
fied  with  mantras. — T. 

J  Besides  sprinkling  sanctified  water,  the  defects  and  faults  of  the  food  to  be  taken 
must  be  dispelled  by  the  utterance  of  particular  Vedic  mantras. — T. 

§  Every  body  familiar  with  Boswell  remembers  the  strong  condemnation  by 
Johnson  of  the  mutton  leg  placed  before  him  by  an  inn-keeper  in  course  of  the  Doctor’s 
journey  from  London  to  Oxford.  “Ill  fed,  ill  killed,  ill  kept,  and  ill  dressed.” 
Such  condemnation  is  forbidden  by  the  Rishis. — T. 

||  1  Harita  ’  is  green  potherb  of  any  kind  and  not  ginger.  ‘  Cushka^aka  ’  is  the 
leaves  of  the  Jute  plant.  ‘Bhakshyam’  is  explained  by  the  Commentator  as 
•  modakadi. — '/’. 

IT  Every  rigid  Hindu  must  leave  a  portion  of  his  food  uneaten  on  the  dish.  This 
vs  intended  for  birds,  worms,  and  diverse  other  living  creatures.  In  taking  rice,  one 
should  leave  at  least  a  hundred  boiled  grains  uneaten.  This  is  called  Catdnna. — T. 


CBARAKA-SAMHITA. 


97 


sleeping)  in  a  bent  posture.*  One  should  not  engage  in  any  act 
when  one  feels  an  impulse  or  urging  of  nature  (without  first  at¬ 
tending  to  it.) 

One  should  not  spit,  or  make  water,  or  answer  the  other  call  of 
nature,  with  face  turned  towards  the  blowing  wind,  a  blazing  fire; 
a  piece  of  water,  of  the  Moon,  or  the  Sun,  or  a  person  of  the  re¬ 
generate  classy  or  one’s  preceptor.  One  should  not  commit 
nuisance  on  a  road  or  street.  One  should  not  eject  the  phlegiri 
or  mucus  of  one’s  nose  amid  a  place  that  is  crowded,  or  when  one 
is  engaged  in  eating,  or  when  one  is  employed  in  reciting  one’s 
prayers  or  in  performing  the  homa  or  in  reading  with  one’s  pre¬ 
ceptor  or  in  dedicating  offerings  to  the  deities,  or  when  one  is 
doing  any  auspicious  or  religious  act.19 

One  should  not  disregard  one’s  wife.  Nor  should  one  confide 
too  rtiUch  in  her.f  One  should  not  acquaint  one’s  wife  with  one’s 
secrets.  One  should  not  allow  One’s  wife  to  intCrefere  in  all  one’s 
affairs.  One  should  not  have  sexual  congress  with  a  woman  while 
she  has  menstruated;  or  with  one  who  is  ill,  or  with  one  who  is  afflict¬ 
ed  with  leprosy  and  other  diseases  of  the  kind,  or  with  one  that  is  of 
disagreeable  features  or  disagreeable  conduct,  orwith  one  that  has  no 
cleverness,  of  with  one  that  does  not  feciprocate  one’s  desire,  or  with 
one  that  loves  another,  or  with  one  that  belongs  to  a  different  caste  or 
order.J  One  should  not  have  sexual  congress  against  the  order 
of  nature.  One  should  not  have  sexual  congress  undef  the  shade 
of  a  chaitya  tfee,  or  on  a  ground  intended  for  a  Sacrifice,  or  on  a 
spot  where  fouf  roads  meet,  or  in  a  grove,  or  in  a  crematorium,  or 
on  a  sacrificial  altaf,  or  in  a  tank,  lake,  or  other  water,  Or  in  a  spot 
where  sacred  or  medicinal  plants  and  herbs  grow,  of  in  the  house 
of  a  regenerate  person,  or  in  that  of  one’s  preceptor,  or  in  that  of 


*  ‘  Dwija  ’  means  tooth,  because  it  gtows  twice.  ‘  Anrijuh  ’  is,  as  pointed  out  by 
the  Commentator,  connected  with  all  the  three  acts  of  sneezing,  eating,  and  lying  down 
for  sleep.— T. 

f  The  Commentator  explains  ‘  nativijrambhayet  *  as  ‘  hStipianayaVatim  kuryyat’ 
i.  r. ,  one  should  not  show  too  much  love  for  her. —  T. 

t  The  Commentator  points  out  that  ‘  abhigachcchet  ’  should  be  supplied  after 
'  anya-yonim.’  ‘  Anya-yonim’  is  1  asavarnam.’ — T. 


13 


CHA  RA  K A-S AM  HI  TA. 


08 

a  deity.  One  should  not  have  sexual  congress  at  dawn  or  in  the 
evening,  or  on  such  days  of  the  Moon  as  have  been  declared  (in  the 
scriptures)  to  be  unfit  for  such  acts,  or  when  one  is  impure,  or 
when  one  has  not  taken  a  provocative  tonic  or  other  medicine,  or 
when  one  is  anxious  in  consequence  of  one’s  not  having  accom¬ 
plished  what  is  in  one’s  heart,  or  when  one’s  heart  is  not  cheerful,  or 
when  one  is  hungry  (for  not  having  taken  any  food),  or  when  one 
has  overloaded  one’s  stomach,  or  when  one  has  not  a  level  bed  to 
lie  upon,  or  when  one  is  afflicted  by  the  urgings  of  urine  or  faeces, 
or  when  one  is  spent  by  toil,  exercise,  fast,  and  exhaustion.  One 
should  not,  again,  indulge  in  such  congress  except  in  privacy.20 

One  should  not  dispraise  one’s  seniors,  or  those  that  are 
good.  One  should  not,  while  impure,  perform  any  Vedie  act,  or 
worship  a  sacred  tree  or  any  adorable  deity,  or  engage  oneself  in 
study.  When  lightnings  appear  out  of  season,  when  the  horizon 
all  around  becomes  red  as  if  ablaze  with  fire,#  when  a  conflagra¬ 
tion  takes  place,  when  an  earthquake  happens,  when  a  great 
festival  is  going  on,  when  meteors  fall  down,  when  the  great 
planets  eclipse  each  other,  when  the  Moon  is  on  the  fourth  luna¬ 
tion  on  either  half  of  the  month  of  Bhadra,  in  the  two  twilights,  with¬ 
out  the  help  of  a  living  preceptor,  without  guarding  against  even  a 
single  letter  falling  off,  exceeding  the  proper  measure,  with  a 
languid  voice,  with  a  disagreeable  voice,  without  clearly  pro¬ 
nouncing  all  the  words,  without  avoiding  excessive  haste,  without 
at  the  same  time  avoiding  excessive  slowness,  without  abstain¬ 
ing  from  pronouncing  the  words  with  excessive  slowness,  without 
avoiding  excessive  loudness,  and  without  avoiding  a  voice  that  is 
inaudible,  one  should  not  study  (the  scriptures).  While  studying, 
one  should  not  mingle  with  fellow  students,'  nor  should  one 
break  the  rules  one  has  formed  (in  respect  of  study.)21 

One  should  not  rove  in  the  night,  especially  in  an  unknown  land. 
In  the  two  twilights  one  should  avoid  eating,  study,  sexual  congress, 

*  When  lightnings  appear  seasonably,  i.  e.,  in  their  proper  season,  the  phenomena 
are  not  regarded  as  preternatural.  Only  when  they  appear  unseasonably,  Brahman 
students  cease  to  study  their  lessons.  The  phenomenon  of  unseasonable  thunder-roll 
also  is  regarded  in  the  same  light.  By  ‘  digdaha  ’  is  meant  the  preternatural  redness  of 
the  horizon.  This  is  regarded  as  a  very  inauspicious  omen. —  T. 


CHA RA  KA -SAM HI TA. 


99 


and  sleep.  One  should  not  make  friendship  with  children,  with 
men  that  are  old,  with  those  that  are  covetous,  with  men  that  are 
ignorant,  with  persons  afflicted  with  diseases,  and  with  those  that 
are  destitute  of  manliness.* * * §  One  should  conquer  all  propensities 
for  alcoholic  stimulants,  gambling,  and  women  of  ill  fame.  One 
should  never  give  out  the  secrets  of  others.  One  should  not  dis¬ 
regard  any  one.  One  should  not  indulge  in  annoying  others.  One 
should  seek  to  be  clever.  One  should  never  be  niggardly  but 
should  practice  liberality.  One  should  cast  off  malice.  One  should 
never  speak  ill  of  Brahmanas.  One  should  never  strike  a  cow  with 
a  stout  stick.  One  should  never  censure  them  that  are  old,  or 
them  that  are  one’s  seniors,  or  them  that  are  united  for  a  common 
purpose,  or  them  that  are  ruling  chiefs.  One  should  never  in¬ 
dulge  in  harsh  speeches.  One  should  not  cast  off  one’s  friends,  or 
those  that  are  devoted  to  oneself,  or  those  that  render  help  in 
seasons  of  distress,  or  those  that  are  acquainted  with  one’s 
secrets,  t 2  2 

One  should  not  be  impatient  and  haughty.  One  should  pro¬ 
perly  support  one’s  servants.  One  should  inspire  confidence  in 
one’s  relatives.  One  can  never  be  happy  by  taking  or  enjoying 
anything  alone  and  without  dividing  it  with  others.  One  should 
not  adopt  such  conduct,  such  practices,  and  such  usages,  as  are 
productive  of  pain  or  misery.J  One  should  not  trust  every  body, 
nor  should  one  mistrust  every  body.  One  should  not  always  reflect 
when  called  upon  to  act.§  One  should  not  lose  (in  hesitation)  the 
opportunity  for  doing  an  act.  One  should  not  enter  the  house  of 
an  unknown  person.  One  should  not  suffer  oneself  to  be  over¬ 
mastered  by  one’s  senses.23 


*  ‘Klishta’  is  explained  by  the  Commentator  as  ‘  nindita-rogadina,  &c,,’ ;  and 
‘  kliva  ’  as  1  Hina-sattwa.’ — V. 

t  ‘  Ganan  ’  means,  literally,  members  of  a  tribe  or  class.  It  is,  however,  frequently 
used  to  signify  the  aristocracy  or  the  nobles  of  a  kingdom.  Here,  when  ruling  chiefs  are 
mentioned  immediately  after,  the  word  ought  to  be  taken  as  standing  for  the  nobles.  — 7'. 

t  The  Commentator  observes  that  ‘plant’  is  ‘  swabhavikavrittam,’  i.  e.,  one’s 
conduct  with  respect  to  food,  sleep,  dress,  &c.  ;  ‘achafah  ’  is  practices  adopted  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  scriptural  injunctions  ;  ‘upacharah’  means  usages  of  other  kinds.  —  T. 

§  /.  e.,  there  are  certain  acts  that  must  be  done  unhesitatingly. — T. 


100 


charara-samhitA. 


When  the  mind  becomes  restless  one  should  not  employ  it 
upon  any  task.  One  should  not  impose  a  too  heavy  burden  upon 
one’s  understanding  or  the  senses.  One  should  not  yield  to  pro¬ 
crastination.  One  should  not  act  under  the  impulse  of  wrath  and 
malice.  One  should  not  indulge  in  too  much  joy  when  one’s 
object  is  accomplished.  Nor  should  one  give  way  to  cheerlessness 
on  the  failure  of  one’s  object.  One  should  always  recollect  the 
origin  or  cause  of  one’s  being* * * §  One  should  firmly  believe  in  the 
efficacy  of  causes  (as  represented  by  good  and  bad  aets).f  One 
should  commence  one’s  acts  under  circumstances  calculated  to 
give  success.  One  should  never  deem  one’s  acts  (in  this  world) 
to  have  all  been  accomplished.^  One  should  never  do  anything 
whose  consequence  would  be  the  loss  of  one’s  manliness.  One 
should  never  diffuse  another’s  opprobrium.24  One  should  first 
purify  oneself  (by  bath  and  other  purificatory  rites)  and  then  make 
offerings,  to  the  sacred  fire,  of  good  ghee ,  clean  rice,  sesame  seeds, 
Kufa  grass,  and  mustard  seeds.§  On  the  completion  of  this  rite 
one  should  invoke  a  blessing  upon  oneself,  uttering  the  following 
mantras ,  viz. : — Let  not  Agni  (fire)  go  out  of  my  body  !  Let  Vayu 
(Wind)  grant  me  life-breath  !  Let  Vishnu  grant  me  strength ! 
Let  Indra  grant  me  energy  !  Let  Civa  cause  all  the  waters  to 
enter  my  body ! — One  should  then  touch  water,  uttering  the 
mantras  begining  with  “  Apohishta,  &c.”||  One  should  then  twice 


*  ‘  Prakritim  ’  is  *  Utpattikaranam.’  All  creatures  are  due  to  a  combination  of  the 
five  primal  essences,  viz  ,  earth,  water,  air,  light,  and  space.  If  this  thought  be  ever 
present  to  the  mind,  the  mind  will  necessarily  cast  off  attachments  and  dislikes,  &c.,  and 
will  strive  for  Emancipation. — T. 

t  /.  e.,  one  should  always  believe  that  good  acts  lead  to  good  fruits  and  bad  acts 
to  bad  fruits,  or,  one  should  not  be  a  sceptic  with  regard  to  the  consequences  of  acts. 
Acts,  according  to  Hindu  philosophy,  are  the  cause  of  rebirth  and  of  every  incident  in 
the  lives  of  all  beings. — T. 

|  It  may  also  mean  that  one  should  never  deem  one’s  own  self  as  the  accomplisher 
of  one’s  acts.  The  true  theory  is  that  acts  are  done  by  the  Supreme  who  uses  us  as  only 
agents  or  intruments.  —  T. 

§  ‘Akshata’  is  rice  obtained  from  paddy  without  the  operation  of  boiling  but  by 
simple  exposure  to  the  Sun  before  husking.  It  is  called  ‘  atapa-tandul.’ — T. 

II  These  are  the  well-known  Vedic  mantras  occurring  in  course  of  the  prayers  to  be 
uttered  at  dawn,  noon,  and  evening  by  every  member  of  the  three  regenerate  classes.  —  T, 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


101 


wash  one’s  lips  with  water  and  one’s  feet  also.  After  this  one 
should  sprinkle  water  on  one’s  head  and  then  sprinkle  that  element 
on  the  sky  above  the  head.  After  this  one  should  (again)  sprinkle 
water  over  one’s  body,  the  region  about  the  heart,  and  the  head. 
Daily  accomplishing  these  rites,  one  should  betake  oneself  to  the 
practice  of  Brahmacharyya ,  the  duty  of  teaching,  and  of  friend¬ 
ship  and  compassion,  and  cultivate  cheerfulness,  and  by  these 
means  to  acquire  tranquillity  of  Soul.*25 

{Here  occur  some  verses  containing  a  summary .) 

In  this  Lesson  on  the  Analysis  of  the  Senses  have  been  indi¬ 
cated  the  five  Senses  and  the  several  aggregates  of  five  that  apper¬ 
tain  to  them,  the  Mind,  and  the  four  (principal)  causes  (of  disease 
and  its  reverse)  ;f  and  good  or  righteous  conduct  in  all  its  details.1 
That  man  who  duly  practises  that  course  of  good  conduct  which 
has  been  indicated  (in  this  Lesson)  remains  hale  for  a  hundred 
years  and  is  never  cut  off  before  the  allotted  period  of  human  life 
runs  out.2  Honored  by  the  righteous,  such  a  man  fills  the  world 
of  men  with  his  fame.  Possessed  of  a  righteous  soul,  he  wins  the 
friendship  of  all  creatures.  Of  virtuous  acts,  such  a  man  (when  he 
departs  from  this  world)  attains  to  those  regions  (of  felicity)  here¬ 
after  that  belong  to  the  righteous.  Hence,  every  one  should 
always  observe  the  course  of  conduct  pointed  out  above.®  If 
there  be  any  laudable  practice  that  has  not  been  mentioned  in  the 
above  enumeration,  that  also  is  approved  by  the  son  of  Atri.4J 


*  The  Commentator  here  discusses  the  question  of  the  apparent  incompatibility  of 
practising  the  duty  of  universal  friendship  and  compassion  with  the  advisability  that  has 
been  advocated  of  animal  food.  Such  food  involves  slaughter  and  injury.  The  discus¬ 
sion,  however,  is  concluded  with  the  observation  that  the  object  of  Ayurveda  is  the 
preservation  of  health  and  not  to  point  out  the  way  to  Emancipation  by  acquiring 
righteousness. — T. 

t  These,  as  stated  before,  are  ‘  Santa,  Ati,  Hitta,  and  Mithya  Yogdh  p.  84 

t  The  object  of  this  Verse,  as  pointed  out  by  the  Commentator,  is  to  point  out  that 
the  enumeratibn  of  righteous  practices,  as  made  in  this  Lesson,  is  certainly  not  complete. 
For  here,  only  those  good  practices  have  been  named  as  have  some  bearing  with  the 
question  of  health.  The  reader,  therefore,  is  asked  to  note  that  those  duties  that  occur 
in  the  Dharma?astras  and  that  are  not  indicated  in  the  Ayurveda,  are  not  to  be  taken  as 
disapproved  of  by  Atreya. — T. 


102 


CIlARAKA'SAM  RITA. 


Thus  ends  the  Lesson  called  the  Analysis  of  the  Senses  in 
the  treatise  of  Agnive$a  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  IX. 

And  now  we  shall  explain  the  Lesson  called  the  Brief  Aggre¬ 
gate  of  Four.  Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri. 

The  Physician,  Drugs,  Nurse,  and  Patient,  constitute  an 
aggregare  of  four.  Of  what  virtues  each  of  these  should  be  pos¬ 
sessed  so  as  to  become  causes  for  the  cure  of  disease,  should  be 
known.*1 

The  absence  of  harmony  in  respect  of  the  ingredient  humours 
(of  the  body)  is  Disease  ;  while  their  harmony  constitutes  our 
normal  condition.  Health,  again,  is  otherwise  called  Happiness  ; 
while  Disease  is  Sorrow  or  misery.f 2 

In  Disease,  the  well-known  tale  of  four  commencing  with 
Physician  has  active  agency.  The  course  that  is  adopted  for  res¬ 
toring  the  harmony  of  the  ingredient  humours  is  called  Treatment.3 

A  thorough  mastery  of  the  scriptures  (bearing  on  the  Science 
of  Life),  large  experience  (of  actual  results),  cleverness,  and  purity 
(of  both  mind  and  body),  are  regarded  as  the  four  (principal)  qua¬ 
lifications  of  the  Physician.4 

Abundance  of  virtue,  adaptability  to  the  disease  under  treat¬ 
ment,  capacity  of  being  used  in  diverse  ways,  and  undeterioration 
numbering  the  fourth,  are  the  attributes  of  Drugs.  J-* 

*  I  use  the  word  ‘Nurse’  for  ‘Upasthatri’  or  ‘  Paricharaka.  ’  The  European 
reader  should  note  that  in  India  ‘  Paricharakas  ’  are  always  males,  and  in  very  rare 
cases  only,  females. — T. 

f  The  ingredients  called  ‘  Dhatu  ’  are  Wind,  Bile,  and  Phlegm.  In  their  parity  or 
harmony  of  correlation  is  Health  or  the  normal  condition  of  the  body.  The  absence  of 
such  parity  or  harmony  is  Disease.  Health  is  otherwise  known  by  the  name  of  Happi¬ 
ness  ;  while  Disease  is  identified  with  Sorrow  or  Misery. — T. 

t  The  merit  of  a  drug  consists  in  its  possessing  an  abundance  of  virtue,  so  that  a 
very  small  quantity  may  produce  a  very  large  measure  of  action.  There  may  be  objects 
cartloads  of  which  would  be  necessary  to  produce  a  particular  action.  These  should  not 
be  regarded  as  drugs.  The  merit  of  a  drug,  again,  consists  in  its  capaoity  of  being  used 
in  diverse  ways  to  suit  patients  of  diverse  dispositions.  The  usual  forms  of  Ayurvedic 


Cf/A  kA  KA  -  SA  MHI TA. 


103 


Knowledge  of  the  manner  in  Which  drugs  should  be  prepared 
or  compounded  for  administration,  cleverness,  devotedness  to  the 
patient  waited  upon,  and  purity  (of  both  mind  and  body)  are  the 
four  qualifications  of  the  attending  Nurse.6 

Memory,  obedience  to  directions  (given  by  the  Physician), 
fearlessness,  and  communicativeness  (with  respect  to  all  that  is 
experienced  internally  and  all  that  is  done  by  him  during  the  in^ 
tervals  of  the  Physician’s  visits),  are  the  qualifications  of  the 
Patient.7 

If  this  tale  of  four  be  possessed  of  these  sixteen  qualifications 
then  does  it  constitute  the  cause  for  the  achievement  of  success 
(in  Treatment).  The  Physician,  in  this  aggregate  of  four,  is  the 
chief  cause  (for  the  achievement  of  success)  since  he  is  the  ascer- 
tainer  (of  the  character  of  the  disease),  the  director  (with  respect 
to  what  the  patient  and  the  nurse  should  do\  and  the  minister  (who 
applies  the  remedies  that  bring  about  the  cure).8 

As  in  the  task  of  cooking,  a  vessel,  fuel,  and  fire  are  means 
in  the  hands  of  the  cook  ;  as  a  field,  an  army,  and  weapons  are 
means  in  the  victor’s  hands  for  achieving  a  victory  in  battle ;  even 
so  the  patient,  the  nurse,  and  drugs  are  objects  that  are  regarded 
as  the  physician’s  means  in  the  matter  of  achieving  a  cure.  In  the 
act  of  treatment,  the  physician  is  regarded  as  the  chief  cause.9"1  a 

Like  clay,  stick,  wheel,  thread,  &c.,  in  the  absence  of  the 
potter,  failing  to  produce  anything  by  their  combination,  the 
three  ofrhers,  viz.,  drugs,  nurse,  and  patient,  cannot  work  out  a 
cure  in  the  absence  of  the  physician.11 

In  the  matter  of  the  most  difficult  diseases  disappearing  like 
the  vapoury  forms  in  the  welkin,  and  of  others  capable  of  ready 
cure  but  aggravating  within  the  shortest  time,,  the  sole  cause  is  a 
competent  and  an  incompetent  physician,  the  other  three  (of  the 
tale  of  four)  being  present  in  both  cases.  Even  death  (without 


medicines  are  Churna,  Swarasa,  Kalka,  Kwatha,  Phaota,  Citakashaya,  Paniya,  Prama- 
thya,  Mantha,  Kshirapaka,  Yavagu,  Avalepa,  Vatika,  Modaka,  Khandapaka,  Bhavans, 
Putapaka,  &c.  The  more  the  number  of  forms  in  which  a  drug  can  be  used,  the  greater 
its  importance.  Then,  again,  drugs  should  be  undeteriorated,  i.e.,  their  virtues  should  not 
be  weakened  by  worms,  dampness^  &c. — T. 


104 


CHARAKA-SA  M  HIT  A 


treatment)  is  preferable  to  treatment  made  by  an  ignorant  and 
incompetent  person.*12-13 

An  ignorant  physician  proceeds  in  the  treatment  of  disease 
like  a  boat  tossed  by  the  wind  or  like  a  blind  rridn  who,  having  no 
knowledge  of  the  ground  over  which  he  Walks,  gropes  fearfully 
along,  always  stretching  out  his  arms.14 

An  ignorant  physician,  who  succeeds  in  curing  by  chance  a 
person  afflicted  with  disease  and  having  his  allotted  period  of 
existence  still  unexhausted,  and  who  regards  himself  on  that 
account  as  one  well  conversant  with  the  treatment  of  disease,  very 
soon  slays  hundreds  of  persons  the  allotted  periods  of  whose  exist¬ 
ence  have  run  out.t15 

Hence  one  devoted  to  these  four  principal  qualifications  of  a 
physician,  viz.,  the  scriptures  (bearing  on  the  science  of  Life), 
knowledge  of  their  meaning,  readiness  to  act  (according  to  his 
knowledge  and  abilities),  and  the  acquisition  of  experience  (of 
all  that  concerns  his  profession),  is  said  to  be  a  saviour  of  the  life- 
breaths.  J1  6 

That  physician  who  has  knowledge  of  these  four  things,  viz., 
(disease),  the  symptoms  (of  disease),  the  means  of  alleviating 


*  The  vapoury  or  cloudy  forms  in  the  welkin  that  are  continually  changing  and 
disappearing  for  giving  place  to  new  shapes  are,  in  the  popular  estimation,  the  man¬ 
sions  of  the  Gandharoas,  an  order  of  beings  intermediate  between  humanity  and  the 
Devas.  They  are  called  Gandharvanagaras  or  Gandharvapuras,  and  they  stand  as  types 
of  all  transitory  and  fleeting  things.  What  is  said  in  these  two  Verses  is  that  both  as 
regards  the  cure  of  the  most  serious  diseases  and  the  rapid  aggravation  of  those  that  are 
easy  of  cure,  the  cause  is  always  the  physician  who  has  taken  the  treatment  in  his  hands, 
irrespective  of  the  three  others,  viz.,  the  patient,  nurse,  and  drugs. — T. 

f  ‘  Aniyatayusham,  &e.’  The  true  theory  of  destiny  is  that  though  everything  is 
predestined,  yet  exertion  is  required  to  bring  about  what  is  ordained.  One  is  predestined 
to  be  wealthy  ;  but  he  should,  for  all  that,  exert  himself  legimitately  in  money-making 
pursuits  instead  of  shutting  himself  up  in  a  cave.  This  modified  theory  of  destiny  is 
accepted  by  the  son  of  Atri.  A  person  dies  by  calling  in  an  ignorant  physician.  His 
death  is  the  result  of  the  allotted  period  of  his  life  having  run  out.  Still,  exertion  was 
necessary  to  bring  about  . this  consequence.  Hence,  the  patient  himself  who  dies  is  to 
blame  for  having  summoned  such  a  physician  ;  and  the  physician  himself  is  to  blame  for 
having  undertaken  to  treat  the  former  when  he  is  destitute  of  the  proper  qualifications. — T. 

$  ‘  Pranabhisarah  ’  is  one  who  compels  the  outgoing  life  breaths  to  return.  —  T. 


cearaka-samhitA.  105 

(disease),  and  curing  diseases  so  effectually  that  they  may  not  re¬ 
appear,  is  the  foremost  of  his  class  and  deserves  to  be  the  king’s 
physician,*17 

Weapons,  the  scriptures,  and  water,  in  the  matter  of  their 
merit  and  demerit,  depend  upon  the  quality  of  the  person  that 
bears  them.  Hence,  for  the  purpose  of  treatment,  one  should  first 
cleanse  one’s  understanding. ■f1 8 

That  physician  who  possesses  these  six  qualifications,  viz., 
knowledge  (of  the  scriptures  bearing  on  the  Science  of  Life),  the 
faculty  of  reasoning  (drawing  inferences  from  established  proposi¬ 
tions),  conversance  with  other  branches  of  knowledge,  memory, 
an  aptitude  for  treating  disease,  and  repeated  experience  of  treat¬ 
ment,  can  accomplish  everything  (in  his  line). f1 9 

Hence,  any  of  these,  viz.,  knowledge,  a  good  understanding, 
large  experience,  facility  acquired  by  practice,  success  (in  treat¬ 
ment),  and  connection  with  good  preceptors,  would  explain  the 
etymology  of  the  word  Vaidya  (physician).20 

He  who  possesses  these  auspicious  qualifications  beginning 
with  knowledge  deserves  the  designation  of  Vaidya  which  has  been 
thus  formed ;  and  such  a  person  is  really  the  giver  of  both  life 
and  happiness.21 

The  scriptures  are  as  light  for  discovering  objects.  His  own 
understanding  is  like  the  eye.  The  physician,  by  undertaking  to 

*  Some  physicians  are  skilful  in  diagnosis ;  and  some  are  skilful  in  treatment.  To 
become  skilful  in  both  diagnosis  and  treatment  is  to  become  a  royal  physician. _ T. 

t  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  weapons  may  be  borne  by  good  men  or  bad  men.  If 
borne  by  the  former,  they  may  be  productive  of  benefit ;  if  by  the  latter,  they  may  cause 
much  sorrow  to  others.  Compare  good  Kshatriyas  armed  with  weapons  and  robbers 
similarly  armed.  Water  also,  if  brought  by  an  unclean  person,  becomes  unclean  ;  if  by 
a  clean  person,  it  becomes  clean  and  serviceable.  Similarly,  the  scriptures,  in  the  hands 
of  evil-disposed  persons,  become  sources  of  injury  to  the  world.  In  the  hands  of  good 
men,  they  become  the  means  of  great  good.  One’s  intelligence  or  understanding  is  the 
pdtra  or  vessel  for  holding  the  scriptures.  Hence,  one  should  first  cleanse  that  intelli¬ 
gence  or  understanding  before  one  can  hope  to  do  good  by  the  Ayurveda  when  called 
upon  to  treat  disease. — T. 

t  ‘  Vijnanam  ’  is  explained  by  the  Commentator  as  ‘  castrantarajnanam  ‘tat- 
parata  ’  as  excess  of  ‘  prayatna  ’  in  the  treatment  of  disease';  and  *  kriya  ’  as  ‘  punah 
punah  chikitsa  karanam.’ — T. 


14 


106 


CHAR  A  KA  -SA  M  HI  TA 


treat  disease  after  having  properly  equipped  himself  with  these 
two,  incurs  no  blame.22 

Since  the  three  requisites  of  treatment,  (viz.,  patient,  nurse, 
and  drugs),  are  completely  dependant  on  the  physician,  therefore, 
the  physician  should  exert  his  best  in  the  matter  of  those  qualifica¬ 
tions  that  constitute  his  wealth.23 

The  physician’s  behaviour  should  consist  of  these  four  things : 
friendliness  towards  the  patient ;  compassion  for  him  ;  an  enthu¬ 
siasm  in  respect  of  such  diseases  as  are  curable ;  and  unwilling¬ 
ness  to  treat  such  creatures  as  are  on  the  point  of  death.*24 
( Here  occurs  a  summary  in  Verse). 

In  this  Lesson  has  been  laid  down  the  tale  of  four  requisites 
in  the  matter  of  treatment.  Each  of  those  requisites  has  four 
qualifications.  Among  those  requisites,  the  physician  is  the  fore¬ 
most,  since  he  has  four  groups  of  attributes  (each  group  consisting 
of  four  attributes).1  Knowledge  and  the  other  qualifications,  as 
also  the  four  kinds  of  pure  and  superior  understanding  (viz.,  those 
mentioned  in  Verse  24),  have  all  been  laid  down  in  this  Lesson  on 
the  Brief  Aggregate  of  four.2 

Thus  ends  the  Ninth  Lesson,  called  the  Brief  Aggregate  of 
Four,  in  Agnive^a’s  Treatise  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  X. 

We  shall  now  explain  the  Lesson  called  the  Comprehensive 
Aggregate  of  Four.  Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri. 

The  aggregate  of  four  possessing  the  six  and  ten  virtues  is 
regarded  by  physicians  as  T reatment.  That  is  T reatment  which  has 
been  mentioned  in  the  previous  Lesson  as  possessed  of  six  and 
ten  virtues.  Applied  with  reason,  that  is  competent  to  cure  dis¬ 
ease.  Thus  said  Punarvasu  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.^1 

*  ‘  Prakritistha  ’  here  means  ‘  on  the  point  of  death.’  By  undertaking  to  treat  such 
patients,  a  physician  only  endangers  his  reputation,  and  puts  the  friends  of  the  patient 
to  needless  expense. — T. 

t  The  word  ‘  Bheshaj,’  which  I  render  ‘  treatment,’  it  will  be  observed,  is  used  in  a 
very  extended  sense.  It  implies  a  combination  of  physician,  drugs,  nurse,  and  patient, 
as  possessed  of  the  sixteen  virtues  specified  in  Lesson  IX.— T. 


CHA  kA  KA-SA  MHITA.  107 

Maitreya  said, — This  is  not  so.  For  what  reason  are  some 
patients  seen  to  be  restored  that  are  furnished  with  drugs,  equipt 
with  nurses,  possessed  of  intelligence,  and  treated  by  skilful  physi¬ 
cians,  while  others  possessed  of  the  same  advantages  meet  with 
death  ?  Hence,  Treatment  is  futile.*2 

This  is  like  throwing  a  small  quantity  of  water  into  a  dry  pit 
or  into  a  tank  that  is  full  of  water  :  or  like  scattering  a  handful  of 
dust  into  a  running  river  or  on  a  heap  of  dust.t3 

Then  again  others  are  seen  to  be  restored  to  health  though 
unfurnished  with  drugs,  unattended  by  nurses,  unendued  with  in¬ 
telligence,  and  untreated  by  skilful  physicians.  Others  again, 
similarly  situated,  are  seen  to  die.  Hence,  when  by  applying 
remedies  success  is  achieved  and  by  applying  them  death  also 
results,  and  by  foregoing  them  success  is  won  and  by  foregoing 
them  death  also  takes  place,  the  thought  strikes  one  that  Treatment 
and  no  Treatment  are  the  same.4 

When  Maitreya  had  said  this,  the  son  of  Atri  addressed  him, 
saying: — Thou  thinkest  erroneously.  Thou  askest  what  is  the 
cause  of  some  patients  encountering  death  and  some  meeting 
with  restoration  when  both  obtain  treatment  possessed  of  the 
six  and  ten  virtues.  Thy  doubts,  however,  are  groundless.  Verily, 
in  diseases  capable  of  being  cured  by  treatment,  treatment  does  not 
become  futile.  As  regards  those  patients,  again,  that  are  restored 
without  the  application  of  treatment  in  its  entirety,  in  their  case 
treatment  in  its  entirety  may  not  be  necessary.  An  example 
may  be  given.  A  man  falls  down.  He  is  capable  of  rising  up 
(without  assistance).  .  Another  person,  by  raising  him,  certainly 
saves  him  exertion.  In  consequence  of  such  assistance  the  fallen 

*  Here  also  treatment  is  used  in  its  widest  sense,  i.  e.,  as  including  drugs, 
nurse,  kc.—T. 

t  The  Commentator  explains  that  the  instance  of  the  dry  pit  into  which  a  small 
quantity  of  water  is  thrown  is  cited  for  showing  that  medicine  becomes  equally  futile  in 
a  fatal  case.  The  instance  of  a  tank  full  of  water  into  which  is  poured  a  small  quantity 
of  water  is  introduced  for  showing  that  the  cure  when  effected  is  not  due  to  treatment 
even  as  the  fulness  of  the  tank  is  not  due  to  the  drops  of  water  poured  into  it.  The 
instance  of  the  river  is  like  that  of  the  dry  pit,  and  that  of  the  heap  of  dust  is  like  the 
example  of  the  tank  full  of  water.— T. 


108 


charaka-samhitA. 


man  rises  up  more  quickly  and  without  being  exhausted  in  energy. 
Even  so  is  the  case  with  patients  who  have  obtained  treatment 
in  its  entirety. 

Again,  there  are  patients  that  meet  with  death  notwithstanding 
the  application  of  treatment  in  its  entirety.  All  patients,  by  ob¬ 
taining  treatment  do  not  obtain  restoration.  The  reason  is  that 
all  diseases  are  not  capable  of  cure.5 

Then  again  as  regards  all  those  diseases  that  are  capable  of 
being  cured  by  (the  application  of)  means,  success  cannot  be 
achieved  without  the  application  of  means.  In  respect  of  diseases 
that  are  incurable,  treatment  does  not  prove  efficacious.  The 
physician,  even  if  possessed  of  wisdom,  is  not  competent  to  restore 
(to  health)  the  dying  man.  Those  physicians,  indeed,  that  set 
themselves  to  the  task  of  treatment  after  a  careful  examination  (of 
every  circumstance  connected  with  the  case)  succeed  in  displaying 
their  skilfulness.  As  a  bowman,  possessed  of  good  aim  and  practice, 
taking  up  the  bow  and  shooting  the  shaft,  never  fails  in  striking 
a  big  object  that  is  not  distant  and  thereby  accomplish  his  object, 
even  so  a  physician,  possessed  of  proper  qualifications,  equipt  with 
proper  appliances,  taking  up  the  treatment  after  careful  enquiries, 
succeeds  of  a  verity  in  bringing  about  the  cure  of  a  patient  afflicted 
with  a  curable  disease.  Hence,  the  application  of  treatment  and 
its  non-application  are  not  the  same.6 

Of  these  we  have  direct  experience,  viz.,  that  we  treat  patients 
suffering  under  particular  diseases  with  medicines  possessed  of 
virtues  opposed  to  their  symptoms.* 

One  whose  humours  have  been  dried  up  is  treated  by  us  with 
drugs  possessing  opposite  virtues.  A  lean  and  weak  man  is  fat¬ 
tened  and  strengthened  by  us.  A  corpulent  and  fatty  person  we 
reduce  to  proper  dimensions.  One  whose  system  has  become 
warm  we  treat  with  drugs  that  are  cooling.  One  whose  system 
has  become  abnormally  cool  we  treat  with  drugs  possessed  of 
warming  virtues.  When  particular  ingredients  of  one’s  body 
become  diminished,  we  restore  them  to  their  proper  measure. 

*  ‘  Anaturena  ’  is  explained  by  the  Commentator  as  ‘  possessed  of  virtues  opposed 
to  the  symptoms  of  disease.’ — T. 


CHA  RA  K A-S AM  HI  TA. 


109 


When  particular  ingredients  again  increase  into  abnormal  propor¬ 
tions,  we  reduce  them  to  their  normal  measure.  In  fact,  by  treat 
ing  diseases  with  medicines  endued  with  virtues  opposed  to  their 
originating  causes,  we  succeed  in  fully  restoring  the  patients  to 
their  normal  condition.  By  acting  towards  them  in  this  way  our 
application  of  medicines  becomes  productive  of  agreeable  results.7 

( Here  occur  some  verses.) 

The  course  of  treatment  which  a  physician,  conversant  with 
the  distinction  between  curable  and  incurable  diseases,  commences 
at  the  proper  time  with  the  aid  of  intelligence,  verily  succeeds  (in 
accomplishing  its  object).]. 

That  physician  who  takes  up  the  treatment  of  a  disease  that 
is  incurable  incurs  loss  of  wealth,  loss  of  knowledge,  loss  of  fame, 
censure  of  the  world,  and  incapacity  for  practice.2 

As  regards  curable  diseases,  they  are  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  those 
that  are  easily  curable  and  those  that  are  curable  with  difficulty. 
Incurable  diseases,  also,  are  of  tw©  kinds,  viz.,  those  that  are 
capable  of  being  suppressed,  and  those  that  have  no  treatment.*3 

As  regards  diseases  that  are  curable,  they  may  again  be  re¬ 
garded  from  three  points  of  view,  viz.,  those  that  are  capable  of 
being  cured  by  the  application  of  means  that  are  easy,  those  that 
are  curable  by  means  neither  easy  nor  difficult,  and  lastly  those 
that  are  curable  by  means  that  are  difficult.  Incurable  diseases, 
which  have  no  treatment,  do  not  admit  of  being  looked  upon  from 
different  points  of  view.f  This  much  on  the  points  of  view  from 
which  diseases  may  be  looked  upon.4 

*  ‘  Yapya  ’  means  those  diseases  which  without  admitting  of  radical  cure  can,  by 
medicine  and  diet  and  change  of  air,  be  kept  in  a  state  of  partial  suppression.  “  Anupa- 
kramam”  is  explained  by  the  Commentator  as  those  for  which  there  is  no  treatment, 
i.  e.,  those  in  which  treatment  is  productive  of  no  beneficial  consequence. — T. 

+  ‘  Alpasadhya’  is  explained  is  ‘  Alpopayasadhya.’  Similarly,  ‘  Madhyasadhya  ’ 
and  *  UtkrishtasJdhya  ’  have  reference  to  the  kind  of  means  by  which  the  Cure  is  to  be 
effected.  ‘Niyatanam’  is  ‘  anupakramanam,’  i.  e.,  those  for  which  there  is  no  treat¬ 
ment.  Incurable  diseases  do  not  practically  admit  of  a  classification,  for  they  cannot 
be  cured  by  the  three  kinds  of  means,  easy,  middling,  and  difficult.  For  all  that,  the 
Commentator  points  out  that  incurable  diseases  may  be  looked  upon  from  two  points  of 
view,  viz.,  as  quickly  fatal  or  the  reverse.  The  second  classification,  it  will  be  marked, 
d  epends  upon  the  kind  of  means  necessary  for  cure. 


no 


CllARAKA-SA  mhita. 


The  characteristics  of  diseases  that  are  easily  curable  are  as 
follows.  When  the  causes,  premonitory  indications,  and  present 
symptoms  are  slight ;  when  the  derangement  lias  no  sympathy  with 
the  inducing  causes  of  the  disease,  when  the  derangement  that  has 
brought  about  the  disease  is  not  capable  of  being  aggravated  by  the 
constitution  of  the  patient;  when  the  inducing  derangement  is  not 
sympathetic  with  the  virtues  of  the  season  in  which  the  disease  has 
appeared  ;  when  the  treatment  does  not  become  difficult  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  place  where  the  disease  occurs  ;  when  the  part  affect¬ 
ed  by  the  disease  is  one  ;  when  it  is  new  ;  when  the  disease  is  free 
from  violent  symptoms ;  when  the  derangement  that  has  caused 
the  disease  is  concerned  with  only  one  (of  the  three,  viz.,  wind, 
bile,  and  phlegm) ;  when  the  body  is  such  that  it  is  capable  of  bear¬ 
ing  all  kinds  of  medicines  ;  and  lastly,  when  all  the  four  requisites 
are  present ;  diseases  are  said  to  be  easily  curable.*5-7 

The  characteristics  of  diseases  that  are  curable  with  difficulty 
are  as  follows  :  when  the  causes,  premonitory  indications,  and  pre¬ 
sent  symptoms,  are  of  force  neither  slight  nor  very  grave  ;  when 
any  of  these,  viz-,  the  season  of  the  disease,  its  nature,  and  the 
character  of  those  ingredients  of  the  body  which  are  known  by 
the  name  of  Dushya,  is  sympathetic  with  the  derangement  that 


*  ‘  When  the  causes  are  slight,’— such  as  a  little  exposure  to  cold  or  rain  bringing 
on  a  fever.  ‘When  the  premonitory  indications  are  slight,’ -such  as  the  absence  of 

headache  or  sleeplessness  before  an  attack  of  fever.  ‘  When  the  symptoms  are  slight,’ _ 

such  as  absence  of  thirst  and  great  heat  'in  a  fever.  ‘  When  the  derangement  has  no 
sympathy  with  the  inducing  causes  &c.,’ — such  as  derangements  of  the  blood  not  brought 
about  by  disorders  of  bile.  ‘  When  the  inducing  derangement  is  not  capable  of 
being  aggravated  by  the  constitution  of  the  patient,’— such  as  attacks  of  cold 
in  any  but  phlegmatic  constitutions.  ‘  Inducing  derangement  not  sympathetic 
with  the  season  in  which  the  disease  appears’;  season,  here,  refers  to  the  time  of 
the  year  as  also  to  the  age  of  the  patient.  ‘  When  treatment  does  not  become  difficult 
in  consequence  of  the  place  of  the  disease,’ — place  refers  to  both  the  division  of  the 
country  and  the  particular  part  of  the  body.  Treatment  becomes  difficult  in  a  part  of 
the  country  where  there  are  no  physicians.  In  all  internal  complaints  again  treatment 
becomes  difficult.  Then  again  in  diseases  of  the  wind,  a  dry  desert  is  unfavorable, 
or  in  those  of  phlegm  marshy  tracts  are  so.  ‘  When  the  part  affected  by  the  disease  is 
one,’ — the  parts  subject  to  disease  are  treated  of  in  the  next  Lesson.  All  afflicting 
or  violent  symptoms  are  called  ‘upadravah,’  such  as  great  restlessness  and  burning 
thirst  in  fever.  —  T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA . 


Ill 


induces  the  disease  ;  when  the  disease  appertains  to  an  elderly 
woman,  an  old  man,  and  an  infant ;  when  the  disease  is  not 
characterised  by  excessively  violent  symptoms ;  when  the  disease 
is  such  that  it  should  be  treated  with  the  aid  of  operations  by 
(surgical)  instruments,  by  caustic  alkali,  and  by  fire  ;  when  the 
disease  is  chronic  ;  when  the  disease,  affecting  some  vital  limb  or 
some  joint  of  the  body,  affects  only  one  part;  when  the  four  prin¬ 
cipal  requisites  of  treatment  are  wanting  in  some  particular  and 
the  disease  affects  two  parts;  when  the  disease  is  not  very  old; 
and  lastly  when  the  disease  has  been  induced  by  a  double  derange¬ 
ment  ;  such  diseases  should  be  known  as  curable  with  difficulty. 
Even  diseases  that  are  incurable  in  consequence  of  the  exhaustion 
of  one’s  allotted  period  of  life  may  be  kept  in  a  suppressed  state 
by  means  of  regulated  diet  and  (proper)  nursing.*8-11 

When  the  disease  is  deeply  ingrained  (into  the  marrow  and 
such  other  constituents  of  the  body),  when  it  affects  many  of  the 
constituent  parts,  when  it  is  attached  to  the  vital  limbs  and  joints 
of  the  body,  when  it  manifests  itself  continuously,  when  it  is 
chronic  and  very  old,  when  it  is  born  of  the  derangement  of  two 
of  the  three  ingredients  (of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm)  or  of  all  the 
three,  when  it  is  beyond  the  operation  of  treatment,  when  it  affects 
all  the  organs,  when  the  patient  is  thoroughly  cheerless  and 
despairing,  when  the  disease  is  characterised  by  a  stupefaction  of 
the  mind,  when  the  disease  weakens  the  strength  of  all  the  organs 
(of  knowledge  and  action),  when  the  disease  has  reached  the 
highest  limit  of  aggravation  and  the  patient  has  become  entirely 
strengthless,  and  lastly  when  the  disease  exhibits  indications  of 
the  patient’s  dissolution,  it  should  be  regarded  as  one  that  should 
not  be  taken  up  for  treatment.12-14 

Having  first  properly  examined  the  developed  symptoms  of 
diseases,  an  intelligent  physician  should  then  commence  his  treat¬ 
ment  of  diseases  that  are  curable.15  That  physician  who  is  con¬ 
versant  with  the  distinctions  between  diseases  that  are  curable  and 
those  that  are  incurable,  and  who  is  possessed  of  both  knowledge 


*  By  ‘  dushya  ’  is  meant  the  humours,  blood,  flesh,  fat,  bones,  marrow,  and  vital, 
seed.  In  Verse  9  some  texts  read  ‘Garbhini’  (pregnant)  for  ‘Gurvini’  (elderly). — T, 


112  charaka-samhitA. 

and  resourcefulness,  never  suffers  himself  to  be  beguiled  by  errors 
of  the  understanding  like  men  of  Maitreya’s  stamp.10 

( Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary),. 

In  this  Lesson  called  the  Comprehensive  Aggregate  of  four, 
have  been  indicated  the  characteristics  of  treatment,  the  importance 
attaching  to  the  adoption  of  treatment,  the  dispute  between  Mai- 
treya  and  the  son  of  Atri  on  the  utility  of  treatment  and  the 
conclusion  arrived  at  in  that  dispute,  the  four  kinds  of  disease  (in 
respect  of  their  curability)  and  the  characteristics  of  each  kind. 
Dependant  upon  these  topics  is  a  physician’s  mastery  of  the 
Science  of  Life.17-18 


LESSON  XI. 

And  now  we  shall  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  Three  Aspira¬ 
tions.  Thus  said  the  son  of  Atri. 

In  this  world  every  one,  who  has  his  eyes  directed  to  what  is 
beneficial  for  him  both  here  and  hereafter,  should  cherish  three 
aspirations  with  unimpaired  mind,  understanding,  strength,  and 
energy.*1 

Those  aspirations  are  as  follow :  viz.,  the  aspiration  for  pre¬ 
serving  Life  ;  that  for  earning  Wealth  ;  and,  lastly,  that  for  attain¬ 
ing  to  felicity  in  the  next  world.  Of  these  three  aspirations,  two 
are  connected  with  this  world  and  one  with  the  next.  Of  the  two 
touching  this  world,  the  aspiration  after  the  preservation  of  Life  is 
the  foremost.  What  is  the  reason  ?  In  relinquishment  of  Life  is 
the  relinquishment  of  everything.  The  preservation  of  Life  is  the 
preservation  of  the  health  of  the  hale  and  the  heedfulness  of  the 
ailing  in  (the  matter  of  the)  the  cure  of  their  ailments.  Both  these 
topics  have  been  treated  of  in  this  work  and  more  will  be  said  on 
them.  Hence,  carefully  observing  what  has  been  said,  one  suc¬ 
ceeds,  by  preserving  one’s  Life,  in  attaining  to  Longevity. 

The  first  of  these  (three)  aspirations  has  thus  been  treated  of.2 

The  second  of  these  aspirations,  viz.,  the  aspiration  after 
wealth,  is  now  being  treated.  Next  to  the  life-breaths  one  should 

*  ‘  Paurusham’  is  physical  strength ;  while  ‘  Parakramam  ’  is  mental  energy. — T. 


GHARAKA-SAMHITA , 


113 


seek  the  acquisition  of  Wealth.  There  is  nothing  more  miserable 
than  this  misery,  viz.,  length  of  life  possessed  by  a  person  desti¬ 
tute  of  Wealth.  Hence,  one  should  strive  for  acquiring  Wealth. 
We  shall  now  explain  the  means  of  acquiring  Wealth. 

Those  means  are  as  follow  :  agriculture,  rearing  of  cattle, 
trade,  service  of  the  king,  &c.  Whatever  other  acts  are  not  dis¬ 
approved  of  by  those  that  are  good,  and  which  are  known  to  lead  to 
the  acquisition  of  means  of  life  and  wealth,  should  be  adopted. 
By  doing  these  acts  one  succeeds  in  living  for  many  years,  honored 
by  all* 

The  second  of  these  (three)  aspirations  is  thus  explained.® 

One  should  cherish  the  third  aspiration  which  concerns  itself 
with  (a  felicitous  state  of  existence  in)  the  next  world.  Doubts 
are  entertained  with  regard  to  the  next  world.  Do  you  ask  of 
what  kind  are  they  ?  (The  doubt  is),  departing  hence,  shall  we 
exist  or  shall  we  cease  to  exist?  Whence,  however,  is  this 
doubt  ?  That  is  being  explained.  Some  there  are  that  pin  their 
faith  on  all  that  is  within  the  direct  cognisance  of  the  Senses. 
Hence,  in  consequence  of  the  next  world’s  being  beyond  the  direct 
cognisance  of  the  Senses,  they  betake  themselves  to  scepticism.f 
Others  there  are  that  have  faith  in  the  scriptures  and  believe  in 
man’s  existence  after  death.  Another  reason  of  this  difference  of 
opinion  among  men  is  the  contradictory  character  of  the  scriptures 
in  which  men  believe.  One  class  of  men  hold  that  the  mother  and 
the  father  are  causes  of  birth.}:  A  second  class  regard  that  Nature 


*  The  other  acts  are  acceptance  of  gifts,  teaching,  &c.  By  1  pushtih  ’  is  meant 
wealth  and  other  possessions.  ‘  Anavamatah  ’  and  not  ‘  anuvasatah  ’  is  the  true 
reading.  Our  educated  countrymen  should  note  in  what  light  service  was  taken  as  a 
means  of  subsistence.  It  comes  last  in  the  list.  With  us,  however,  it  has  now  become 
the  first. — T. 

t  I.  e.,  they  deny  the  existence  of  a  future  state  of  life,  of  what  are  called 
the  fruits  of  acts,  and  of  the  Soul  itself. — T. 

%  These  believe  that  the  mother  and  father  are  capable,  by  their  intercourse,  of 
creating  a  third  person  like  either  of  them,  possessed  not  only  of  a  body  and  the  usual 
organs,  but  also  of  a  Soul.  Hence,  according  to  these,  the  creature  that  is  born  did  not 
exist  before  and  will  not  exist  after  dissolution. — T. 


15 


114 


CHARARA-SAMHITA. 


is  the  cause.*  A  third  class  maintain  that  everything  in  this 
universe  is  due  to  the  agency  of  one  grand  and  supreme  Soul.'f" 
A  fourth  class  think  that  the  creation  is  due  to  the  action  of  Chance 
or  Caprice.}:  Hence  arises  the  doubt  as  to  whether,  verily,  there 
is  a  state  of  existence  after  death  or  no  such  state  of  existence. 
Respecting  this  topic,  however,  he  that  is  endued  with  intelligence 
should  cast  off  unbelief  and  that  conduct  which  is  likely  to  spring 
from  unbelief.§  The  reason  for  casting  off  unbelief  is  this  :  the 
portion  of  things  that  are  addressed  to  the  direct  cognisance  of  the 
Senses  is  small ;  while  the  portion  that  is  beyond  their  direct  cog¬ 
nisance  but  in  whose  existence  faith  is  placed  in  consequence  of  the 
declarations  of  the  scriptures,  of  immediate  inference,  and  of  reason¬ 
ing,  is  great.  The  very  Senses  by  whose  aid  we  become  cognisant 
of  objects  within  their  direct  sphere  are  themselves  beyond  direct 


*  The  advocates  of  the  doctrine  of  Nature  being  the  cause  of  birth  maintain  that 
everything  is  born  because  of  certain  principles  in  indestructible  matter.  Matter  combines 
and  creates  forms.  The  life  that  comes  to  the  combination  is  like  the  incoming  of  the 
property  of  stimulation  in  certain  objects  that  are  mixed  together  and  allowed  to  lie  for 
sometime  in  water.  Seeds,  again,  produce  large  trees.  Hence,  when  creatures  (with 
both  body  and  soul)  are  bom  of  the  combination  of  matter,  they  cease  to  exist  when 
that  combination  crumbles  away  in  death.  There  is  no  further  state  of  existence. — T. 

f  Hence,  according  to  the  followers  of  this  doctrine,  there  is  no  second  Soul  that 
will  be  alive  after  death.  It  is  only  one  grand  and  supreme  Soul  whence  Chetana  is 
infused  into  all  living  forms.  The  orthodox  doctrine  is  that  the  Soul  is  increate.  When 
it  exists  in  a  state  of  purity,  it  is  called  Chit.  Invested  with  ignorance,  it  begins  to 
attract  matter  and  ultimately  assumes  a  form  or  material  abode.  Divested  of  its 
material  abode  it  continues  to  live.  Through  the  influence  of  acts  and  desire  it  becomes 
again  clothed  in  a  material  case.  This  rebirth  goes  on  for  ever  and  ever,  in  fact,  till  the 
Soul  can  effect  its  emancipation  by  either  Yoga  or  Knowledge. — T. 

%  According  to  these,  everything  is  due  to  Chance.  There  is  nothing  like  a  chain 
of  causes  and  effects.  Chaos  reigns  supreme.  There  is  no  law,  no  regularity.  Thou¬ 
sands  of  stones  thrown  upward  have  been  seen  to  fall  down.  But  there  is  no  certainty  that 
the  next  stone  thrown  upward  will  fall  down.  Hence,  nothing  can  be  affirmed  of  what 
the  state  of  man  will  be  after  the  dissolution  of  his  body.  If  there  is  any  ingrained  com 
viction  in  the  Soul  of  its  own  immortality,  that  is  due  to  chance  and  there  is  no  certainty 
of  the  conviction  agreeing  with  the  actual  fact  of  immortality. — T. 

§  I.  e.,  Abstention  from  sacrifices  and  gifts  and  generally  from  that  course  of  con¬ 
duct  which  is  called  righteousness. — f. 


cSa  raKasa  Mr  it  a. 


115 


cognisance.*  As  regards  the  forms,  again,  of  all  existing  objects,  it 
is  known  that  if  these  be  very  Close  to  the  Senses,  or  very  distant 
from  them,  or  covered  by  other  objects,  or  if  the  Senses  be  weak  or 
deranged,  or  if  the  mind  be  otherwise  engaged,  or  if  any  of  those 
objects  be  mingled  together  with  others  of  their  class,  or  if  any  of 
them  be  overwhelmed  by  something  of  superior  energy,  or  if  any 
of  them  be  very  minute,  they  cease  to  be  directly  cognisable  even 
though  they  are  before  the  Senses.  Hence,  if  it  be  affirmed  that 
only  those  objects  exist  that  are  addressed  to  the  direct  cognisance 
of  the  Senses  and  those  that  are  not  so  addressed  do  not  exist,  it 
would  be  a  statement  unsupported  by  reason.  The  scriptures,  again, 
do  not  afford  reasons  for  the  denial  of  a  next  state  of  existence, 
since  a  cessation  of  existence  is  opposed  to  reason.f6 

If  it  is  the  mother’s  or  the  father’s  Soul  that  passeth  into  the 
offspring,  then  the  Soul  would  pass  in  two  ways,  that  is  to 
say,  either  it  would  pass  wholly  or  in  measure.6  If  it  passes 
wholly,  then  the  death  of  either  the  mother  or  the  father  or  of  both 
would  occur  instantaneously.^  (If  it  be  said  that  instead  of  passing 


*  No  one  sees  the  sclerotica  or  the  retina  of  the  eye  by  which  he  sees  other  objects. 
No  one  has  direct  cognisance  of  the  auricular  drum  against  which  the  waves  of  air  beat 
for  producing  the  sensation  of  hearing  ;  &c.  The  Senses,  then,  in  consequence  of  which 
‘  Pratyaksha  ’  is  admitted  to  exist,  are  themselves  not  ‘  Pratyaksha.’ — T. 

•f  The  Commentator  gives  the  following  examples  for  illustrating  what  is  said  here. 
Of  objects  very  close  to  the  senses  but  which  are  not  yet  perceived,  collyrium  applied  to 
the  eyes  is  one  ;  of  objects  very  distant,  birds  soaring  aloft  are  an  example  ;  of  covered 
objects,  pots  and  utensils  sunk  in  water  may  be  cited.  When  one  suffers  from  jaundice, 
one  sees  all  things  yellow,  i.  e.,  fails  to  perceive  the  real  hue  of  objects  spread  out 
before  one’s  eyes.  When  the  mind  is  otherwise  engaged  ;  such,  for  instance,  as  the 
lover’s  inability  to  hear  what  others  say  when  he  is  gazing  at  the  face  of  his  lady-love. 
Then,  again,  when  a  particular  fruit  is  mixed  up  with  others  of  its  class,  though  the  entire 
heap  is  before  the  eyes  yet  the  particular  one  cannot  be  differentiated.  So  also  when 
a  meteor  shoots  down  at  midday,  the  sun’s  light  overpowers  its  brilliancy  and  makes 
it  invisible.  Of  minute  things  before  the  eyes  but  unperceived  are  Worms  and  written 
characters  placed  at  a  little  distance. — T. 

$  The  argument  contained  in  these  two  verses  is  this  s  if  it  is  the  mother’s, 
or  the  father’s,  or  the  mother’s  and  the  father’s  Soul  that  passes  into  the  offspring, 
( that  is,  if  the  Soul  that  is  seen  in  the  offspring  is  the  mother’s  or  the  father’s  or 
of  both),  then  either  the  whole  of  the  mother’s  Soul  or  the  father’s,  or  of  both,  would 
so  pass,  or  only  a  portion  of  the  same  would  so  pass.  If  the  whole  of  the  mother’s  or 
the  whole  of  the  father’s  Soul  passes  into  the  offspring,  then  immediately  after  birth 


116 


CHAR  AKA -SA  M HIT A 


wholly,  the  Soul  passes  in  measure,  it  should  then  be  answered 
that)  the  Soul  is  subtile  and  it  can  have  no  portion,  (not  being 
divisible  like  a  gross  object).7  (If  it  be  said  that  it  is  the  Under¬ 
standing  and  the  Mind  of  the  parents  that  pass  into  the  offspring, 
it  may  be  answered  that)  the  nature  of  both  the  Understanding 
and  the  Mind  has  been  settled.  They  are  even  as  the  Soul  (i.  e., 
subtile  and  indivisible).  Those  who  hold  this  opinion  {-viz.,  that 
the  Soul  of  the  offspring  is  derived  from  the  parents)  would  fail  to 
account  for  the  origin  of  the  four  orders  of  being,  (that  is  to  say, 
the  viviparous,  the  oviparous,  vegetable,  and  the  filth-born.  The  two 
first  orders  may  derive  their  souls  from  parents.  But  the  other  two 
cannot,  for  parents  they  have  none  like  the  two  first).8  It  should 
be  known  that  whatever  attributes  appertain  to  the  nature  of  the 
six  ingredients  (viz.,  earth,  water,  light,  wind,  space,  and  soul), 
appertain  also  to  their  combinations  and  divisions.  The  action  of 
those  six  ingredients  is  the  cause  (of  living  creatures).*9  The  Soul, 
as  an  element  in  the  constitution  of  creatures,  is  without  a  begin¬ 
ning.  That,  therefore,  which  has  no  beginning,  cannot  be  conceived 
to  have  been  created  by  any  other  being.  If,  however,  that  other 
be  the  Soul  which  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  cause  (of  the  birth  of 


of  the  offspring,  either  the  mother  or  the  father  or  both  would  die,  becoming  Soul-less. 
The  word  ‘  nirantaram  ’  in  the  second  line  of  7  is  grammatically  connected  with  the 
first  line. — T 

*  What  is  said  here  is  this :  the  natural  attributes  or  properties  of  substances 
must  be  present  in  their  combinations  as  also  in  their  divisions.  Chetana  is  wanting  in 
any  of  the  five  primal  essences.  Hence,  it  cannot  come  or  inhere  into  any  of  their  com¬ 
binations,  Man,  therefore,  with  soul,  cannot  be  the  result  of  the  five  primal  essences. 
The  six  ingredients,  however,  viz.,  the  five  primal  essences  and  the  Soul,  may,  by  their 
combination,  form  living  creatures.  The  qualities  of  those  six  must  be  present  in  all 
their  combinations  and  in  all  their  divisions  or  portions.  Indeed,  as  the  attributes  of 
those  six  are  observed  in  living  creatures,  it  is  plain  that  living  [creatures  are  formed  of 
those  six.  The  density  of  earth,  the  fluidity  of  water,  the  heat  of  fire  or  light,  the 
transverse  motion  of  wind,  the  absence  of  resistance  that  attaches  to  space,  and  percep¬ 
tion,  memory,  &c.,  of  the  Soul,  are  all  found  in  the  bodies  of  living  creatures.  Hence, 
in  ascertaining  the  origin  of  living  creatures,  that  origin  must  be  ascribed  to  the  action 
of  the  six  ingredients  already  named.  The  soul  is  as  increate  as  any  of  the  five  primal 
essences.  Its  creation  by'the  mother  and  the  father  cannot  be  conceived.  It  existed 
before  in  some  other  form  Jor  abode.  With  respect  to  new  bodies,  all  that  takes  place 
is  that  the  Soul  combines  with  the  existing  five  elements  and  makes  for  itself  conti¬ 
nually  new  abodes.— -T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  117 

creatures),  then  may  the  doctrine  be  accepted  of  birth  being  due 
to  another.*10 

(Next,  as  regards  the  advocates  of  the  theory  of  Chance  :)  to 
the  unbeliever,  with  mind  affected  by  the  theory  of  everything 
being  the  result  of  Chance,  there  is  no  perception,  no  object  per¬ 
ceived,  no  acting  agent,  no  cause,  no  deities,  no  Rishis,  no  Siddhas, 
no  acts,  no  fruits  of  acts,  and  no  Soul.  The  adoption  of  such  un¬ 
belief  is  a  sin  more  heinous  than  the  most  heinous  of  sins.11-12 
The  man  of  intelligence,  therefore,  casting  off  such  an  understand¬ 
ing  that  is  set  on  a  wrong  path,  should  look  upon  all  things  with 
the  light  afforded  by  the  understandings  of  those  that  are  good 
and  wise.13 

All  things  are  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  Sat  and  Asat.  Their  per¬ 
ception  (or  knowledge)  is  of  four  kinds,  viz.,  Testimony  or  affirm¬ 
ation  of  trustworthy  teachers,  Direct  cognisance,  Immediate  Infer¬ 
ence,  and  Argumentative  Inference  or  Reasoning.-f-14 

Trustworthy  teachers  are  they  who  have  been  freed  from  the 
attributes  of  Rajas  and  Tamas  through  the  power  of  penances  and 
knowledge,  who  are  possessed  of  clear  perceptions  in  respect  of  the 
the  Present,  the  Past,  and  the  Future,  and  whose  cognisance  is 
always  unobstructed.13  These,  indeed,  are  Aptas  (trustworthy 
teachers).  With  disclipined  faculties,  they  are  possessed  of  wisdom. 


*  Verse  10  is  thus  explained  by  the  Commentator  :  the  theory,  referred  to  in 
para.  5  of  this  Lesson  ante,  of  ‘  Paranirmanam  ’  is  here  refuted.  Those  who  main¬ 
tain  that  theory  mean  either  that  the  body  without  the  Soul  is  due  to  the  agency 
of  ‘  Para  ’  (another) ;  or,  that  the  Soul  is  due  to  such  agency.  The  speaker  takes 
up  the  last  first,  and  says  that  the  Soul  being  without  a  beginning,  its  origin  cannot  be 
ascribed  to  the  agency  of  ‘Para.’  He  then  takes  up  the  question  of  the  body  without 
the  Soul,  and  says  that  if  the  origin  of  the  body  be  ascribed  to  the  agency  of  another,  and 
if  that  another  be  the  Soul  (endued  with  virtue  and  vice)  then  the  theory  would  be 
acceptable,  consistent  as  it  is  with  the  orthodox  belief, — T. 

t  Things  existent  are  included  in  the  name  Sat.  All  non-existent  things  are  called 
Asat.  Existent  and  Non-existent  things  are  otherwise  called  Bhava  and  Abhava. 
‘  Aptopode^a  ’  is  sometimes  rendered  as  ‘Right  affirmation’  or  ‘Revelation’;  ‘Praty- 
akshya  ’  is  sometimes  rendered  as  ‘  Perception.’  All  these  words,  however,  have  been 
fully  explained  in  the  following  Verses,  so  that  their  nature  cannot  be  misunderstood  by 
whatever  words  one  may  render  them. — T. 


118 


charaka-sa  mhitA. 


Their  words  are  unquestionable.  They  say  only  what  is  true.  They 
never  speak  what  is  untrue,  since  they  are  freed  from  Rajas .* * * §1B 

That  cognisance  which  flows  from,  and  displays  itself  vividly 
at  the  instant  in  consequence  of  the  soul,  the  senses,  the  mind, 
and  the  objects  of  the  senses  being  all  united  together,  is  said  to 
be  Direct  cognisance."}*17 

As  to  Inference  :  having  first  acquired  direct  cognisance,  In¬ 
ference  is  made  of  three  kinds  and  having  reference  to  three  stages 
of  time,  viz.,  Present,  Past  and  Future.  The  existence  of  concealed 
fire  from  smoke  :  the  fact  of  sexual  congress  having  taken  place 
from  conception  ;18  thus  do  men  endued  with  intelligence  infer 
what  is  past :  beholding,  again,  that  fruit  is  produced  from  seeds, 
men  of  intelligence  infer  future  fruits  of  a  similar  nature  from 
(similar)  seeds.J19 

From  the  union  of  water,  cultivated  soil,  seed,  and  favorable 
season,  the  harvest  is  produced.  After  the  same  manner  is  the 
birth  of  embryos  from  the  union  of  the  five  primal  essences  and  the 
Soul.  Likewise  is  the  generation  of  fire  ascertainable  from  the 
union  of  the  stick  to  be  rubbed  against,  the  stick  with  which  one 
is  to  rub,  and  the  person  that  is  to  rub.  The  knowledge  of  these 
is  due  to  argumentative  Inference  or  Reasoning.§20 


*  There  are  three  attributes,  called  Sattwa,  Rajas ,  and  Tamas,  i.  e..  Goodness, 
Passion,  and  Darkness.  All  acts  are  characterised  by  these  qualities,  separately  or  in 
combination.  The  Rishis  are  all  Aptas. — T. 

t  The  cognisance  must  refer  to  the  instant,  t.e.,  the  actual  time  of  such  union,  for 
having  seen  an  object  and  acquired  its  direct  perception  when  the  eye  is  withdrawn,  the 
very  next  moment  the  cognisance  of  the  object  would  be  the  result  of  memory  and  be 
thus  removed  from  the  sphere  of  direct  cognisance.— T. 

t  ‘  Sadrifam  ’  qualifies  *  phalm  ’  in  the  first  line.  Immediate  inference  or  *  Anu- 
mana  ’  is  of  three  kinds  and  has  reference  to  three  periods  of  time.  The  three  kinds  of 
Immediate  Inference  are  Antecedent,  Subsequent,  and  Analogous.  Inference  may  also 
refer  to  the  present,  the  past  or  the  future.  The  existence  of  fire  is  inferred  from 
smoke.  The  fact  of  sexual  congress  having  taken  place  is  inferred  from  conception. 
The  production  of  fruits  from  seeds  is  inferred  from  having  noticed  similar  seeds  to 
produce  similar  fruits  before. — T. 

§  ‘Yukti,’  which  I  render  ‘  argumentative  Inference  or  Reasoning,’  includes  infer¬ 
ences  from  Analogy. — T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMH1TA. 


119 


After  the  same  manner,  if  the  four  aggregate  of  appliances  be 
united  with  the  aid  of  argumentative  Inference,  it  succeeds  in 
curing  disease.21 

That  Understanding  which  beholds  conditions  resulting  from 
union  of  many  causes  acting  together  should  be  known  as  mediate 
Inference.  It  is  concerned  with  the  three  kinds  of  time  (viz., 
Past,  Present,  and  Future),  and  by  its  aid  is  the  aggregate  of  three 
(viz.,  Righteousness,  Wealth,  and  Pleasure)  won.22 

This  is  called  Observation  (or  Scrutiny).  Nothing  else  can 
be  called  so.  It  is  with  the  aid  of  this  that  all  things  are  ascer¬ 
tained.  Aided  by  this  faculty  are  Existent  and  non-Existent 
objects  ascertained.  The  fact  of  rebirth  also  is  affirmed  by  the  aid 
of  this  faculty.23 

Now  as  to  Testimony  that  is  trustworthy  :  whatever  occurs  in 
the  Veda,  whatever  else  is  not  contrary  to  the  import  of  the  Veda 
and  has  been  affirmed  by  the  observant,  whatever  has  been 
approved  by  those  called  Righteous,  and  all  the  declarations  of  the 
Scriptures  flowing  for  the  benefit  of  the  world,  constitute  testi¬ 
mony  that  is  trustworthy.  It  is  such  trustworthy  testimony  that 
inculcates  Gift,  and  Penances,  and  Sacrifice  (in  honour  of  the 
deities),  and  Truth,  and  abstention  from  all  injury,  and  the  mode 
of  life  known  as  Brahmacharyya,  all  of  which  are  causes  of  the 
prosperity  of  men  and  (the  attainment  of)  their  highest  good, 
viz.,  Emancipation.)* 

The  faultless  ones  have  inculcated  in  the  scriptures  that 
Emancipation  can  never  be  theirs  whose  minds  are  still  stained  by 
the  faults  of  Passion  and  Darkness.f24 


*  ‘  Abhyudayah  ’  or  Prosperity  refers,  as  the  Commentator  explains,  to  only  the 
attainment  of  heaven.  ‘  Nihcreyas  ’  refers  to  that  which  constitutes  the  highest  good, 
viz.,  Emancipation. — T. 

f  ‘  Anativrittasatwadoshanam  ’  are  men  the  faults  of  whose  Satwa  or  mind  (born, 
that  is,  of  Rajas  and  Tamas)  have  not  passed  away.  ‘  Adoshaih’  means  ‘by  those  that 
are  faultless,’  i.  e.,  the  great  Rishis.  ‘  Apunarbhavah ’  is  Emancipation.  ‘Dharmadwa- 
reshu  ’  means  '  in  the  Scriptures,’  for  the  Scriptures  are  the  doors  of  righteousness.  The 
object  of  this  sentence  is  to  show  that  if  Emancipation  is  to  be  attained,  all  that  has  been 
said  in  trustworthy  Testimony  should  be  followed. — T. 


120 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


The  Great  Rishis  of  remote  and  remoter  times,  who  were 
devoted  to  the  scriptures,  freed  from  fear  and  attachment  and 
aversion  and  cupidity  and  heedlessness  and  pride,  zealous  in  the 
pursuit  of  Brahma,  fully  trustworthy,  ever  engaged  in  the  perform¬ 
ance  of  all  the  obligatory  acts  ( such  as  Sacrifice,  Penances, 
Gifts,  &c.),  and  the  perceptions  of  whose  understandings  charac¬ 
terised  by  the  attribute  of  Goodness  were  never  clouded,  and  who 
were  blessed  with  spiritual  sight,  beheld  Rebirth  as  an  object  of 
direct  perception  and  laid  it  down  as  a  reality.  Rebirth,  therefore, 
should  be  admitted  as  a  fact.25 

Rebirth  may  also  be  accepted  as  a  fact  within  our  direct  ken. 
It  is  seen  that  the  offspring  of  parents  do  not  become  exactly 
similar  to  the  parents  (in  features,  &c).  As  regards  those  again 
that  have  an  equality  in  respect  of  origin,  differences  are  observ¬ 
able  in  complexion,  voice,  features,  mind,  understanding,  and 
fortune.  Some  persons  are  born  in  superior  families  and  some  in 
inferior.  Some  become  slaves  and  some  become  endued  with 
affluence.  The  lives  of  some  pass  in  happiness.  The  lives  of 
others  pass  in  misery.  Difference  is  observable  in  respect  of  the 
periods  of  life  of  human  beings.  Then  again  persons  are  seen  to 
obtain  things  for  obtaining  which  they  have  to  do  nothing.  With¬ 
out  being  taught,  children  are  seen  to  develop  evidences  of  incli¬ 
nation  to  suck  the  breasts  of  their  mothers,  to  smile,  to  take  fright, 
&c.  When  several  persons  act  in  the  same  way,  the  fruits  earned 
are  seen  to  differ.  In  some  intelligence  may  be  observed,  with 
respect  to  acts.  In  others,  intelligence  in  the  matter  of  doing  acts, 
is  not  to  be  seen.  Some  are  seen  to  remember  the  incidents  of 
their  past  lives  so  that  they  know  that  coming  from  a  particular 
family  they  have  taken  birth  in  another  family.  Objects  presenting 
the  same  appearance  become  agreeable  to  some  and  disagreeable 
to  others.  Hence  it  is  inferred  that  the  acts  done  by  one  in  one’s 
former  life,  which  are  incapable  of  being  got  rid  of  and  indestruct¬ 
ible  (except  by  the  enjoyment  and  endurance  of  their  fruits), 
follow  one’s  body  with  the  senses  in  one’s  next  life,  and  all  that 
happens  to  one  is  this  life  is  the  consequence  of  one’s  past  acts  ; 
and  further,  that  departing  from  this  life  one  has  to  take  birth 


NOTICE. 


The  English  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  will 
be  issued  in  successive  fascicules  of  4  forms,  Royal 
octavo,  each;  12  fascicules  will  be  issued  every  year. 
Under  favorable  circumstances,  the  number  of  fasci¬ 
cules  or  the  number  of  forms  in  each  fascicule  may  be 
increased.  For  subscribers  in  India  paying  in  advance 
the  charge  is  Rs.  32  for  the  whole  work.  For  sub¬ 
scribers  in  Europe  and  America,  the  charge  is  £%  in 
advance,  post  free.  The  price  for  each  part  is 
one  Rupee.  The  arrear  rate  is  Rs.  40  (in  India)  pay¬ 
able  (if  subscribers  wish)  in  instalments  of  Rs.  10  each. 
Remittances  to  be  made  to  the  Publisher,  200  Corn¬ 
wallis  Street,  Calcutta,  by  drafts  on  Indian  Banks  or 
Postal  money-orders. 


The  following  publications  relating  to  Hindu  Medical 
Science  may  be  had  at  No.  200,  Cornwallis'  Street , 
Calcutta ,  India. 

1.  Charaka-Samhita  in  original,  with  Chakrapanida- 
tta’s  Commentary  ;  edited  by  Pandit  Avinash 
Chandra  Kaviratna  (published  in  Devanagara 
character  in  successive  fascicules)  Price  Rs.  20 
in  advance. 

2.  Susruta-Samhita  (in  original)  with  Dallanacharya’s 
Commentary,  edited  by  Pundit  Avinash  Chandra 
Kaviratna  (published  in  Devai  agara  character  in 
successive  fascicules).  Price  Rs.  19  in  advance. 

3.  Bengali  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  with  the 
original  text  (complete)  in  the  Bengali  character. 
Price  Rs.  12. 

4.  Hindi  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive 
fascicules).  Price  Rs.  16  in  advance, 

5.  Bengali  translation  of  Susruta-Samhita  (published 
in  successive  fascicules).  Price  Rs.  10  in  advance. 

6.  Hindi  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive 
fascicules).  Price  Rs.  15  in  advance. 

7.  Chikitsa  Samnnlani.  (a  monthly  medical  journal 
in  Bengali).  Subscription  in  advance  for  one  year 
Rs,  3-6  ;  for  the  poorer  classes,  Rs.  2-6.  (Back 
volumes  for  seven  years  may  be  had  for  Rs.  21,  or 
Rs.  3  for  each  volume  embracing  12  numbers.) 


R  A  73?  7 

PART  V. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


PUBLISHED  BY 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVI'RATNA,  . 

Editor  of  Caharaka  Samhita  and  of  Susruta  Samhita 

(in  original)  WITH  COMMENTARIES;  BENGALI  And 

Hindi  translator  of  Charaka  Samhita  and 
of  Susruta  Samhita  ;  editor  of  Chikitsa- 
Sammilani  (  Medical  Journal  in 
Bengali);  PRACTITIONER  OF 
the  Hindu  System 
of  Medicine, 

&c.,&c.,  &c. 


CMcutt-.t ; 

Printed  by  D.  C.  Dass  &  Co., 
“Corinthian  Press,”  33,  New  China  Bazar 
and 

Published  at 
200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved. ) 


(  25  ) 


169  Mt.  Prospect,  Ave  Newark,  N.  J ., 

August  5th,  1892. 

Dear  Sir, 

After  my  long  silence  it  may  seem  to  you  that  I 
am  not  interested  in  the  great  work  that  you  have  under¬ 
taken  in  translating  Charaka  Samhita ;  but,  indeed,  I 
am  !  Had  I  acted  upon  my  first  impulse  and  sent  you  a 
simple  acknowledgment,  I  should  have  saved  my  reputa¬ 
tion  for  politeness. 

Probably  you  will  understand  me  when  I  say  that  it 
was  because  I  wished  to  do  more  that  I  did  less.  I 
thought  I  would  delay  writing  for  a  week  so  that  I  might 
read  the  number  carefully  and  express  an  opinion. 


From  what  little  I  have  been  able  to  study  the  work, 

I  cannot  share  your  hope  that  it  will  be  studied  as  a 
source  of  information  concerning  medical  science  and 
practice,  or  that  it  will  modify  the  latter  in  any  important 
way.  Its  conclusions  do  not  seem  to  me  to  be  so  much  ' 
like  scientific  deductions  as  like  the  results  of  empericism. 
This  idea  is,  I  am  sure,  likely  to  be  modified  by  what  I 
shall  see  in  later  numbers,  but  at  present  I  can  take  no 
other  view.  This  does  not  at  all  detract  from  the 
importance  of  the  work. 

As  an  historical  contribution,  its  importance  can 
scarcely  be  overestimated. — 


Faithfully,  Yours 
(Sd.)  H.  H.  RUSBY, 

{Editor,  Department  of  Botany  and  Materia  Medica.) 


(  26  ) 

(  The  Darjeeling  News,  August,  6th,  1892.) 

“  We  have  received  a  copy  of  the  third  fasciculus  of  the 
English  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  by' Pandit  Avanash 
Chandra  Kaviratna,  the  Editor  of  a  Medical  Journal  in 
Bengali.  The  work  seems  to  be  in  the  nature  of  a  reper¬ 
tory  of  hygeine  as  understood  by  the  ancient  sages,  and 
shows  clearly  that  many  important  truths  were  as  well 
known  then  as  now.  The  lessons  on  the  inadvisability 
of  suppressing  the  urgings  of  nature,  the  necessity  of 
physical  exercise,  and  the  action  of  the  passions  and  feel¬ 
ings  on  health,  cannot  fail  to  be  very  interesting  and 
instructive.  Great  credit  is  due  to  the  Pandit  for  his  able 
and  careful  translation.  We  take  this  opportunity  of 
correcting  a  misimpression  which  appears  to  have  gone 
abroad  that  Gharaka  is  entierly  a  medical  work  and  bristles 
with  technicalities.  So  far  from  this,  it  is  full  of  in¬ 
teresting  matter  which  is  sure  to  be  profitable  to  every 
one  who  reads  it ;  and  it  ought  to  find  its  way  into  every 
house  where  health  is  regarded  as  a  matter  of  supreme 
importance.” 


(  The  Indian  Mirror,  Tuesday,  November  1,  1892. 

“In  acknowledging  Pundit  Abinash  Chunder  Kaviratna’s 
English  translation  of  1  Chayaka  Samhita,  ’  .  Lord 
Ripon  has  assured  the  Pundit  of  his  interest  in  ancient 
Hindu  medical  literature,  and  hopes,  from  the  fascicules 
already  out,  that  the  work,  when  complete  will,  form  a 
valuable  accession  to  every  library.  The  history  of 
medicine  and  its  gradual  development  is  not  yet  complete. 
An  English  translation  of  ‘  Charaka,’  one  of  the  oldest 


<  2?  ) 

tfeatises  on  the  subject  of  medicine  and  medical  philo¬ 
sophy  as  understood  by  the  Hindus,  is  sure  to  supply 
European  scholars  with  a  rich  store  of  materials  for  compil¬ 
ing  that  history.  It  is  pleasant  to  note  that  Lord  Ripon’s 
interest  in  Indian  publications  remains  unabated. 
Difficult  and  costly  as  the  enterprise  is  in  which  Pundit 
A.  C.  Kaviratna  is  engaged,  the  assurance  of  such 
sympathy  on  the  part  of  eminent  personages  is  sure  to 
encourage  him  in  its  earnest  prosecution.” 


Corfu ,  Greece. 

My  Dear  Sir, 

I  beg  to  send  you  the  following  reamarks  published 
in  one  of  the  famous  journals  of  Greece,  viz.,  “  Voice 
regarding  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Yours  sincerely, 
Andrew  N.  Kaphallinos. 

“We  gladly  announce  to  our  readers  the  highly 
Commendable  contribution  to  the  study  of  the  history  of 
medicine,  which  is  afforded  by  the  learned  Avinash 
Chunder  Kaviratna,  a  native  of  Calcutta,  a  Brahmin  by 
birth,  and  a  physician  by  profession,  by  his  translation 
into  English  of  the  important  medical  work  of  the 
Indians,  viz.,  Charaka,  who  is  justly  styled  the  Galen  of 
India.  The  learned  Avinash,  director  of  an  important 
medical  journal,  who  has  already  edited  in  the  original, 
the  two  most  extensive  medical  works  of  the 
Indian  sages,  viz.,  Charaka  and  Susrut-a,  is  engaged  in 
a  Herculian  undertaking,  which  we  have  great  hopes 
he  will  luckily  accomplish,  viz.,  his  version  of  the 


(  28  ) 

said  two  works.  The  author  deserves  the  thanks  of 
all  scholars  for  his  wish  to  make  these  two-  ancient 
works  attainable  to  such  European  scientific  persons  as 
are  ignorant  of  the  Sanskrit  language.  The  study  of 
the  two  most  remarkable  medical  authors  df  India,  who, 
having  flourished  during  the  sixth  century,  B.  C.,  are 
considered  as  founders  of  the  medical  system  of  the 
Indians,  will  now  be  made  passible.  The  publication  of 
the  said  versions,  edited  in  pamphlets*  :  three  of  which 
have  hitherto  been  out,  was  commendably  announced  by 
the  European  press,  and  especially  by  the  English.  The 
wise  Max-Muller,  in  writing  to  the  translator,  promises 
every  assistance,  adding  that  the  work  is  worthy  of 
study  and  meditation,  both  by  the  Hindoos  in  general, 
and  paricularly  by  the- physicians.  It  is  well  known  that 
the  Indians  being  exceedingly  studious  have  been  occu¬ 
pied  since  many  centuries,  with  great  success,  in  medicine, 
and  more  recent  researches  have  proved  that  both  the 
Greeks  and  the  Arabs  ha.ve  received  much  knowledge 
from  the  same.  The  publication  by.  revealing  to  the 
European  doctors  the  state  of  -medical  .science  in  ancient 
India,  will ,  abundantly  supply  our  pharmacology  with 
many  new  drugs,  and  medical  plants,  which,  on  being 
well-examined  by  the  European  experts,  will  probably 
find:  out; healing  properties  very  beneficial  to  all  mankind.” 

: Reproduced,  in  the  Hastia  of  28th  October,.  1892, 
a  very  important  journal  of  Athens. 

(Sd.)  Dr.  Andrew  N.  Kaphallinos. 


(  29  ) 


Columbia  College, 

New  York  City,  U.S.A. 

Honoured  Sir  and  Doctor, — I  wish  to  congratu¬ 
late  yon  upon  the  zeal  and  untiring  energy  which  you 
show  in  giving  us  a  broader  knowledge  of  this  monument 
of  ancient  medicine.  Such  work,  performed  with  such 
spirit,  is  truly  laudable.  I  am,  indeed,  glad  to  encourage 
you  in  your  noble  task,  and  I  am  happy  to  find  that  you 
have  as  much  valued  my  words.  They  were  given  with 
sincerity. 

It  is,  indeed,  pleasing  to  see  the  fascicules  of  your 
work  appearing.  I  have  perused  them  with  interest. 
One  may  easily  imagine  how  severe  a  task  such  a  work 
as  this  is  to  undertake.  I  can  easily  see  the  difficulties 
that  at  each  step  beset  the  path  ;  the  extreme  trouble 
that  one  has  to  take  to  identify  certain  of  the  botanical 
names,  securing  the  pla'nts,  &c.,  and  then  presenting  the 
love  of  the  past,  so  as  to  be  intelligible  and  intresting  to 
occidentals  as  well  ;  it  is,  indeed,  an  arduous  labour.  I 
congratulate  you  upon  the  worthy  perseverance  that 
enables  you  to  overcome  these  obstacles. 

I  was  quite  interested  in  the  use  of  smoking  ( at  p.  54 
seq. )  certain  preparations  for  medicinal  purposes.  There 
are,  of  course,  parallels  today,  and  the  student  of  anti¬ 
quarian  manners  and  customs  in  England  need  only  to 
go  back  to  the  Elizabethan  period  to  find  the  practice  of 
smoking  for  medicinal  purposes  as  a  remedy  against  cer¬ 
tain  diseases. 

I  need  only  repeat  my  encouragement  and  good  wish¬ 
es,  and  with  appreciating  thanks.  I  remain,  dear  Sir, 
Yours  faithfully, 
(Sd.)  A.  V.  William  Jackson. 


(  30  ) 


Utterpara,  the  18th  January,  1898. 

Dear  Sir, 

Your  English  translation  of  the  Charaka-Samhita, 
so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of  a  grCat 
work  before  a'  large  class  of  readers.  Notwith¬ 
standing  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying ;  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the 
translation  must  be  accepted  as  possibly  the  best  that 
could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  hre 
beginning  to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  health 
should  form  a  prime  element  in  every  system  of  educa¬ 
tion.  They  could  look  for  no'hetter  guide  than  Charaka- 
Samhita.  It  is  a  work,  which  should  be  in  the  hands  of 
every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

Yours  very  truly, 

(Sd.)  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji. 


(  The  Indian  Mirror,  Friday,  November  2$th,  1892.) 

“We  have  received  the  fourth  fasciculus  of  the  English 
translation  of  ‘  Charaka,’  published  by  Abinash  Chunder 
Kaviratna.  The  matter  certainly  increases  in  interest. 
The  impression  very  generally  prevails  that  ‘  Charaka  ’  is 
a  mere  repertory  of  drugs  and  of  symptoms  of  diseases. 
Nothing  ean  be  more  erroneous.  ‘Charaka’  affords 
very  delightful  reading  to  even  laymen.  How  to  live  so 
as  to  live  happily,  in  so  far  as  it  was  understood  by  the 
Rishis  of  ancient  India,  is  mainly  the  subject  ipf 
‘  Charaka.’  The  lessons,  both  brief  and  comprehensive, 
on  the  qualifications  of  the  four  chief  requisites  of  treat¬ 
ment,  would  amply  repay  perusal.  The  arguments,  again, 
touching  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  lose  nothing  by 


(  31  ) 


reason  of  their  great  antiquity.  Some  of  the  opinions, 
accompanying  this  fasciculus  are  of  great  weight.  Mr.  P. 
Burthplom,  m.  d.,  of  Philadelphia,  says,-r^‘  I  have  been 
exceedingly  struck  with  the  profound  meaning,  of  many 
passages  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  have 
ever  met  before ,  in  medical  literature,  and  find  their 
parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections.’  Mr.  Burthplom’s 
admiration  is  shared  by  many  other  distinguished  savants 
of  both  Europe  and  America.  This  shpuld  settle  the 
reception,  which  our  educated  countrymen  should  give 
to  the  work.  We  believe  that  the  book  deserves  to  be 
kept  in  every  house.  Pundit  Kaviratna  deserves  the 
thanks  of  the  civilised  world  for  his  untiring  exertions  in 
making  the  contents  of  ‘Charaka’  accessible  to  all.” 


Dippelskop,  bei  fraisa,  Darmstadt,  Germany, 

qth  August,  1892. 

My  dear  Sir, — I  am  greatly  interested  by  the  con¬ 
tents  of  Part  III ,  and  sincerely  hope  that  in  spite  of  the 
materialistic  period  of  the  Kali-yuga  we  are  passing 
through  here,  in  which  men  only  take  up  things  which 
show  a  return, — that  in  spite'  of  this, — Charaka  will  be 
appreciated.  **•**. 

Yours  faithfully, 

F.  Gebhard. 


{The  Statesman,  Wednesday,  January  nth,  1893.) 

“  Charaka  Samhita. — Pundit  Avinash  Chandra 
Kaviratna’s  English  translation  of  1  Charaka-Samhita’ 
a  Sanskrit  work  on  medicine,  has  attracted  attention  sp 
far  afield  as  Greece.  In  a  commendatory  letter  address- 


(  32  ) 


ed  to  the  Pundit,  Dr.  Andrew  N.  Kephallinos  points 
out  to  him  that  the  Phone,  a  Greek  journal  published  at 
Corfu,  has  noticed  the  translation  with  warm  approval, 
and  declares  that  the  Pundit  deserves  the  thanks  of  all 
scholars  for  making  ancient  Sanskrit  works  accessible  to 
European  scholars.  This  article  was  reproduced  by 
another  Greek  journal,  published  at  Athens.” 


16,  Pimenstrasse,  Konigsberg,  Germany, 

January  10  th,  1892. 

Dear  Sir, 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  kindly  sending 
me  a  copy  of  the  first  fasciculus  of  your  English 
translation  of  “  Charaka-Samhita,”  which  is,  perhaps,  at 
least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  on  the  medical  literature  of  your  country.  I  con¬ 
gratulate  you  sincerely  on  this  undertaking  by  which  the 
great  merit  you  have  already  acquired  in  this  line  of 
Indian  literature  is  highly  augmented. 

I  shall  do  what  I  privately  can  to  call  the  attention 
of  scholars  and  medical  men  to  your  translation. 

Yours  sincerely, 
(Sd.)  R.  Garbe. 


(  The  Statesman,  Tuesday,  March  21  si,  1823.) 
“Medicine  and  Hygiene  amongst  Hindoos. — 
Amongst  the  numerous  publications  of  ephemeral  in¬ 
terest  issued  from  the  native  press,  it  is  refreshing  to  find 
a  translation  of  a  Sanskrit  work  of  enduring  merit. 
‘Charaka-Samhita  ’  is  believed  to  be  the  most  ancient 
treatise  on  medicine  ever  written  in  India.  Unfortunately, 


(  33  ) 


however,  it  is  in  parts  written  in  a  style  so  involved  that 
even  Orientalists  of  acknowedged  ability  have  found  it 
impossible  to  undertake  a  translation  of  the  whole  of  it. 
It  is  no  disparagement  to  Dr.  Mahendra  Lai  Sircar  s 
scholarship  to  recall  the  fact  that  he  translated  a  part 
of  ‘Charaka’  into  English  in  his  medical  journal ,  but 
was  obliged  to  bring  his  self-imposed  trak  to  a  premature 
/conclusion.  Subsequently,  Kabiraj  Abinsh  Kabiratna 
engaged  in  a  translation  of  the  .work  into  English  and 
Bengalee,  and  .  such  portions  as  have  been  already  put 
into  type,  and  circulated  among  Sanskritists  in  Europe 
and  America  have  been  reviewed  in  terms  of  the  highest 
praise.  *  *  * 


Philadelphia ,  U.  S.  A. 

Dear  Sir, 

Permit  me  to  thank  you  heartily  for  the  fourth 
fascicules  of  your  translation.  How  much,  my  dear  Sir, 
you  are  to  be  praised  for  the  steady  progress  of  so 
admirable  a  work  !  To  those  who  feel  the  utter  lone¬ 
liness  of  the  position  of  a  true  student  of  letters  in  the 
present  age,  your  cowitryman' s  wise  and  noble  writing 
comes  like  something  refreshing  and  consoling.  In  my  own 
country,  this  work  has  had  a  success,  I  dared  not  hope 
for  it, — a  success,  I  think,  due  to  the  profound  nattiralness 
of  the  style  and  teaching.  And  scientific  men  ought  to  be 
chiefly  benefited  by  a  perusal  oj  it,  being,  as  they  are, 
almost  wholly  dedicated  to  the  culture  of  the  ‘  relative 
spirit ’  of  mordern  times,  and  unused  to  the  greater  serious¬ 
ness  and  simplicity  of  the.  ancient  work.  Is  it  not  a 
matter  of,  rejoicing  that  men  do  homage  to  the  gravity 


I  U  ) 

tlrtd  piety  of  the  antique  spirit,  when  they  chanCe  to 
observe  it  ? 

I  am,  Sir,  With  many  thanks  very  truly  yours* 
(Sd.)  Paul  Bartholom,  M  D. 


New  York 

t)ear  Sir, 

Accept  ftiy  siricerest  thanks  for  the  three  fasci¬ 
cules  of  the  “Charaka-Samhita,”  received.  Nothing 
could  be  more  interesting  than  the  clear  glimpses  they 
give  into  the  science  of  that  remote,  yet  fascinating, 
World  of  ancient  India,  and  I  think  that  this  newest  of 
communities  will  not  be  slow  to  sympathise  with  your 
labours  in  bringing  within  reach  the  thought  and  light 
of  one  of  the  oldest  of  lores-  It  will  give  me  much 
pleasure  to  receive  the  work  as  it  appears,  and  to  send 
you  some  notice  of  it  in  the  Press. 

Yours  very  faithfully, 
(Sd,)  Titus  Munson  coan, 

Sai tit  Louis,  Missouri ,  V.  S.A. 

Dear  Sir,  *  *  *  *  * 

*  *  It  is  with  pleasure  that  I  received! the  third 

pan,  which  you  sent  me,  of  the  translation  into  English 
of  the  medical  work  Charaka-Samhita ;  and  I  have 
perused  it  with  gratification.  If  you  see  fit  to  send  me 
the  balance  of  the  work  as  you  propose,  I  shall  take 
pleasure  in  doing  all  I  can  to  lay  the  subject  before  those 
who,  I  think,  will  appreciate  it.  I  am  always  glad  to 
bring  before  the  public  our  ancient  literature,  for  I  feel 
that  I  have  been  in  this  same  business  in  past  incarnations, 


(  35  ) 


for  you  know,  whilst  we  may  have  been  born,  some  of  us, 
this  time  in  the  United  States  of  America,  we  have 
passed  through  other  incarnations,  in  countries  from 
whence  we  have  been  last  previously  sent  on  our  present 
mission.  With  many  thanks  for  your  good  and  kind 
letter, 

I  remain,  very  respectfully,  and  yours  faithfully, 

(Sd.)  William  Throckmorton, 

W.  D.  Brown,  Esq,  a  correspondent  of  the  Daily 
Tribune  of  Salt  Lake  City,  United  States,  America, 
says  :  — “It  is  a  highly  philosophical  work ;  its  deliverances 
on  many  subjects,  unsurpassed  for  brevity  and  weight,  are 
extremely  suggestive.  Locked  in  a  difficult  tongue,  these 
hints  for  ages  have  lain  unutilized.  A  careful  study  of  the 
work  may  be  of  the  utmost  importance  to  science  and  the 
sacred  cause  of  alleviating  human  misery,  It  is  a  book  of 
knowedge  concerning  the  sages  of  an  ancient  and  mar¬ 
vellous  civilization;  one  would  naturally  conclude,  by 
reading  the  various  medical  compounds  it  contains,  that 
we  had  at  last  discovered  the  long-looked-for  elixir  of 
life.” 

(The  Chicago  Apothecary ,  Vol.  II  No.  %.) 

“Physicians  and  Pharmacists  will  find  the  work 
intensely  interesting  and  to  most  of  its  readers  the  con¬ 
tents  will  prove  a  revelation,  forinstead  of  being  acollection 
of  mystic  exorcism,  the  work  abounds  in  highly  philoso^ 
phical  aphorisms  and  its  Materia  Medica  puts  to  shmae 
some  of  the  simples  and  compunds  extolled  by  European 
Medical  writers  of  compaiatively  modern  times. 


(  36.  ) 


“The  hygienic  and  dietic  rules  of  ‘Charaka-Samhita’ 
are  remarkably  terse  and  generally  as. good  as  those  now 
formulated,” 


(  The  Mail  and  Express,  New  York, 

Saturday  Evening,  February  4th,  1893.) 

A  learned  Pandit  of  Calcutta,  Avinash  Chandra  Kavi- 
ratna,  has  opened  up  a  curious  byway  of  literature  in  his 
translation  of  the  ancient  Sanskrit  medical  treatises. 
Himself  a  physician  and  practising  according  to  the  old  ■ 
system  or  the  Hindoos,  his  work  appeals  from  the  special 
point  of  view  to  physicians  and  to  the  public  in  general 
as  affording  an  insight  into  that  most  fascinating  domain, 
an  intellectual  culture  almost  wholly  different  from  our  - 


6,  Loudon  Street, 

Calcutta 


Of  course,  from  a  literary  stand-point,  your 
translation  is  welcome  anyhow,  and  should,  as  such,  be 
encouraged.  But  unfortunately,  the  Europeans  who 
appreciate  ancient  classical  literature  are  comparatively 
few  in  number  and  your  countrymen,  who  ought... well, 
you  know  they  ought  to  do,  and  how  much  of  it  they  leave 
undone. 

Wishing  you  all  success  in  your  undertaking,  which, 
whether  you  or  somebody  else  carries  it  out,  will  have  to 
be  carried  out  in  the  course  of  time  by  somebody, 

I  remain,  yours  truly, 

(Sd.)  L.  Salzek,  m.  d, 


jr-  V')  ^  -?• 

charaka-samhitA  >  V  121 

again  in  a  new  form.  From  fruits  seeds  may  be^f&fereedj'and  from 
seeds  fruits  may  be  inferred.*26 

There  is  again  this  argumentative  inference  (in  respect  of  this 
matter) :  one’s  birth  in  the  womb  is  due  to  a  combination  of  the  six 
constituents  (viz.,  the  five  primal  essences  of  earth,  water,  light, 
wind,  and  space,  and  the  soul).  The  Soul  only  is  related  with 
next  life.  Acts  result  from  the  union  of  agent  and  means.  Only 
acts  that  are  done  bear  fruits.  Acts  not  done  have  no  fruits. 
There  can  be  no  sprout  where  there  is  no  seed.  The  fruits  that  one 
enjoys  and  endures  correspond  with  the  acts  that  produce  them, 
(so  that  good  fruits  are  produced  by  good  acts  and  bad  fruits  by 
bad).  One  kind  of  seed  cannot  produce  another  kind  of  fruit. 
This  is  arrived  at  by  argumentative  inference.27 

Birth  being  thus  established  by  the  four  kinds  of  prooff  in¬ 
culcated  above,  the  following  is  being  laid  down  in  respect  of 
means  for  the  acquisition  of  Righteousness.  They  are  as  follow. 

One  should  set  one’s  mind  on  serving  one’s  preceptor  with 
reverence;  on  the  study  of  the  Vedas  and  other  Scriptures ;  on 
the  practice  of  vows  and  observances;  on  marrying  a  spouse ; 
on  procreating  children  ;  on  supporting  one’s  servants ;  on  doing 
the  duties  of  hospitality  towards  guests  ;  on  making  gifts ;  on  never 
coveting  what  belongs  to  others  ;  on  penances  ;  on  never  doing 
any  injury  to  others;  on  all  stainless  acts  of  body,  speech, 

and  mind ;  on  examination  of  the  body,  the  senses,  the  mind, 

the  objects  of  the  senses  (with  which  one  comes  into  con¬ 
tact),  of  the  understanding,  and  the  Soul.  Whatever  other  acts 

there  are  of  this  kind,  which  lead  to  heaven,  which  are  approved 
by  the  good  and  righteous,  and  which  aid  the  acquisition  of  the 
means  of  life,  one  should  endeavour  to  accomplish.  By  acting  in 
this  way,  one  earns  fame  in  this  world  and  heaven  after  departing 
from  this.  Thus  is  the  third  aspiration  which  concerns  itself  with 
the  next  world  explained.28 

*  The  acts  of  a  former  life  are,  as  it  were,  the  seeds.  The  pleasures  and  pains  of 
the  next  life  are  the  fruits  that  spring  from  those  seeds. — T. 

t  /.  e.,  trustworthy  testimony,  direct  coguisance,  immediate  inference,  and  argu¬ 
mentative  inference. — T. 


16 


CHAR  AKA  -SA  MH1TA 


There  are  three  stays  (of  the  body) ;  three  kinds  of  strength  ; 
three  kinds  of  causes  of  disease ;  three  kinds  of  disease  ;  three 
seats  of  disease  ;  three  kinds  of  physicians  ;  and  lastly  three  kinds 
©f  medicines.*29 

The  three  stays  ( of  the  body  regarded  as  a  column )  are 
eating,  sleep,  and  restraint  of  the  senses.j-  In  consequence  of  the 
three  stays  ( mentioned  above )  supporting  the  body,  the  latter 
receives  accession  of  strength  and  complexion  and  nourishment. 
As  long  as  a  man  lives,  he  should  attend  to  the  causes  that  support 
life.  Long  life  becomes  his  who  does  not  indulge  in  practices  that 
are  injurious  to  the  body.  Instructions  are  being  offerred  in 
respect  of  causes  that  support  and  lengthen  life.36 

There  are  three  kinds  of  strength,  viz.,  that  which  is  due  to 
one’s  nature,  that  which  is  due  to  a  particular  season  ( of  life  or  the 
year ) ;  and  that  which  is  due  to  exertion  (  such  as  physical  exer¬ 
cise,  the  use  of  invigorating  food  and  spices  and  liquors,  &c). 
Natural  strength  implies  that  kind  of  strength  which  inheres  to 
the  very  nature  of  one’s  body  and  mind.  By  the  second  kind  of 
strength  is  meant  that  strength  which  depends  upon  either  a 
particular  season  of  life  (such  as  youth,  manhood,  &c.),  or  of  the 
year  (as  spring,  summer,  &c),  The  third  kind  of  strength  is  that  due 
to  the  use  of  particular  kinds  of  food  and  physical  exercise,31 

There  are  three  causes  of  disease.  They  are  excess  of  corre¬ 
lation,  absence  of  correlation,  and  injudicious  correlation  in  respect 
of  perceptible  Objects,  of  Acts,  and  of  Time,  A  continuous  gaze  at 
objects  of  great  power  is  an  instance  of  excessive  correlation, 
A  total  abstention  from  excercising  the  eye  is  absence  or  want  of 
correlation.  Injudicious  correlation  arises  where  the  eye  is  direct¬ 
ed  to  objects  that  are  very  minute,  that  are  in  close  adjacence,  that 
are  very  remote,  that  provoke  anger  or  terror  or  amazement  or 
aversion,  that  are  repulsive,  and  that  are  exceedingly  ugly.38 

*  The  word  '  upastambha  ’  is  used  to  express  the  stays  which  support  a  column, 
This  sentence  is  elaborated  and  explained  in  the  next.—  T, 

+  The  practices  which  constitute  ‘  Brahjnacharyya  ’  are  detailed  in  Manu.  By 
'  Brahmacharyya as  used  here,  is  meant  a  judicious  indulgence  or  use  of  our 
faculties  and  powers,— 71 


C  HARAKA-SAMHITA.  m 

Excess  of  correlation  as  regards  objects  of  hearing  arises  from 
constantly  exposing  the  ear  to  the  stunning  report  of  thunder  or 
beat  of  drum  or  loud  cries.  To  totally  abstain  from  hearing  (by 
shutting  up  the  ears)  is  absence  of  correlation.  Injudicious  correla¬ 
tion  arises  from  hearing  hafsh  sounds,  or  words  expressive  of  the 
death  or  destruction  of  persons  and  objects  that  are  liked,  or  sounds 
produced  by  the  sudden  clash  or  impact  of  hard  substances,  or 
those  expressive  of  censure  and  dire  reproof,  or  those  expressive 
of  images  horror.®3 

Excess  of  correlation  with  respect  to  objects  of  scent  arises 
when  the  smell  is  inhaled  of  objects  whose  odors  are  so  powerful  as 
to  call  forth  tears,  or  of  those  whose  odors  lead  to  a  throwing  up  of 
the  contents  of  the  stomach*  or  of  those  whose  odors  produce  stupe¬ 
faction  ( such  as  chloroform).  Total  abstention  from  excercising 
the  organ  of  scent  is  absence  of  Correlation,  Injudicious  Correla¬ 
tion  arises  when  the  smell  is  inhaled  of  objects  that  are  putrid, 
of  those  that  are  disagreeable,  of  those  that  are  unclean,  of  those 
that  are  foul,  of  those  that  emit  poisonous  vapours,  and  of 
corpses.® 1 

Excess  of  correlation  with  respect  to  taste  arises  when  objects 
producing  any  of  the  six  tastes  are  taken  in  ah  excessive  degree, 
Total  abstention  from  tastihg  is  absence  of  correlation.  Injudici¬ 
ous  correlation  arises  from  eating  food  made  up  of  ingredients  that 
do  not  harmonise  (such  as  honey  and  ghee,  milk  and  meat,  &c.)* 
This  particular  direction  about  food  made  of  ingredients 
that  do  not  harmonise  is  given  even  here  in  treating  of  the  cause 
of  diseases.34 

Exccess  of  correlation  in  respect  of  touch  arises  from  exposure 
to  excessive  heat  and  cold,  and  excessive  indulgence  in  bathing,  and 
rubbing  the  limbs  with  oil,  and  indulgence  in  sudden  changes  of 
temperature.  Total  abstention  from  suffering  the  body  to  be 
touched  or  from  enjoying  the  Sense  of  touch  is  want  or  absence  of 

*  The  Commentator  explains  ‘rSci,  &c.’  as  implying  food  made  up  of  ingredients 
that  do  not  agree  with  one  another.  It  can  never  imply  either  excess  of  food,  or  total 
abstention  from  food,  for  these  would  fall  under  the  two  previous  heads.— -T, 


124 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA. 


correlation.  Walking  or  sitting  or  lying  on  uneven  land,  and  in¬ 
dulgence  in  touch  in  respect  of  unclean  objects  and  practices 
constitute  injudicious  correlation,9® 

As  regards  the  senses,  touch  is  the  one  sense  among  all  the 
senses  that  is  conterminous  with  them  all.  It  has,  again,  a  perpe¬ 
tual  connection  with  the  mind.  And  because  the  sense  of  touch 
covers  all  the  senses,  therefore  the  wind  also  is  said  to  cover  (  or 
be  conterminous  with)  all  the  senses.  Then  again  the  impres¬ 
sions  caused  by  touch,  which  (as  already  said)  is  conterminous  with 
all  the  senses,  are,  in  consequence  of  the  variety  of  objects  that 
produce  them,  of  five  kinds.  Each  of  those  five  kinds  resolves  itself 
(as  shown  before)  into  three  kinds  of  contact  of  objects  with  the 
mind.  By  contact  of  objects  is  meant  their  contact  with  the  mind.*37 
Act  means  the  exertion  of  speech,  of  mind,  and  of  body. 
Excessive  exertion  in  respect  of  any  of  these  is  called  excess  of 
correlation.  A  total  abstention  from  exertion  in  respect  of  any  of 
them  is  called  absence  of  correlation.  Injudicious  correlation  in 
respect  of  body  arises  from  suppression  of  all  kinds  of  urging, 
great  exertion  in  respect  of  urging,  walking  over  uneven  land,  or 
tumbling  down  thereupon  or  falling  from  a  great  height,  or  a 
stretching  of  the  body  on  such  land,  or  scratching  the  body,  or 

*  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  all  the  senses  resolve  themselves  into  touch.  The  eye 
sees  because  of  the  contact  of  the  rays  of  light  with  the  retina.  The  ear  hears  because 
of  the  contact  with  its  drum  of  the  waves  of  air.  Scent  arises  from  contact  of  particles 
or  effluvia  with  the  olfactory  nerves.  As  to  taste,  it  arises  only  upon  food  being  brought 
into  contact  with  the  tongue.  Touch,  then,  is  conterminous  with  all  the  senses.  Its  con¬ 
nection,  again,  with  the  mind  is  perpetual  or  nitya,  so  that  when  touch  ceases,  the  mind 
ceases,  and  when  the  mind  ceases,  touch  ceases.  If,  then,  touch  is  conterminous  with 
all  the  senses,  and  has  perpetual  connection  with  the  mind,  the  question  arises,  why 
cannot  the  mind  experience  the  ideas  of  all  the  senses  at  one  and  the  same  time  ?  The 
answer  is,  the  mind  is  Anu,  i.  e.,  incapable  of  overspreading  or  being  conterminous  with 
the  whole  body  at  the  same  time.  It  runs  thither  whither  touch  arises  for  the  time  being. 
Hence,  it  sees  and  hears  and  smells  and  tastes  and  touches  at  successive  moments  of 
time.  However  quickly  the  ideas  may  arise,  they  cannot  be  simultaneous  but  must  be 
successive.  Hence,  though  touch  is  conterminous  with  all  the  senses,  the  ideas  of  the 
senses  must  still  resolve  themselves  into  five  varieties.  Each  of  these,  again,  are  of  three 
kinds,  in  consequence  of  the  degrees  of  correlation  adverted  to  in  the  previous 
aphorisms. — T. 


craraKa-samrita. 


125 


subjection  of  the  body  to  beating  or  to  violent  rubbing,  or  suppres¬ 
sion  of  the  breath,  or  such  acts  as  are  known  by  the  name  of 
Sankleqana  (which  include  drinking  alcholic  stimulants,  exposure 
to  the  sun,  and  exposure  to  water  for  a  long  time,  &c).38 

Injudicious  correlation  in  respect  of  Speech  consists  in 
speaking  words  that  are  expressive  of  malice,  words  that  are  false, 
words  that  are  untimely,  words  that  lead  to  disputes  and  quarrels, 
words  that  are  disagreeable,  words  that  are  unconnected  -with  facts, 
words  that  are  productive  of  pain  to  others,  words  that  are 
harsh,  &c.39* 

Injudicious  correlation,  in  respect  of  Mind  includes  indul¬ 
gence  in  fear  and  grief  and  anger  and  cupidity  and  errors  and 
arrogance  and  envy  and  the  study  of  false  scriptures.40 

Without  referring  to  excess  of  correlation  in  respect  of  these, 
everything,  in  brief,  that  is  an  injurious  or  harmful  exertion  of 
speech,  mind  and  body,  though  omitted  in  the  above  enumeration, 
should  be  taken  as  falling  within  injudicious  correlation  in  respect 
of  those  three.  Correlation,  as  shown  above,  is  of  three  kinds. 
These  three  kinds  of  acts  or  exertions  are  regarded  as  faults  of  the 
Understanding.4 1f 

Heat,  cold,  and  rain,  or  autumn,  summer,  and  rain,  constitute 
the  indications  of  the  year.  That  is  also  called  Time.  When  the 
particular  indication  of  a  particular  period  of  Time  manifests  itself 
in  excess,  that  is  called  excess  of  correlation  in  respect  of  Time, 

*  The  Commentator  explains  that  the  consequence  of  such  words  is  sin,  and  through 
sin  comes  disease,  for  all  sin  is  abnormal. — T. 

f  What  is  said  here  is  this.  Act  has  been  defined  to  be  exertion  of  speech,  mind, 
and  body.  The  different  kinds  of  correlation  in  respect  of  each  are  explained.  In¬ 
judicious  correlation,  however,  is  sought  to  be  explained  more  elaborately.  It  is  stated 
here  that  all  instances  of  exertion  in  respect  of  speech,  mind,  and  body,  that  are  produc¬ 
tive  of  any  kind  of  injury  or  harm,  must  be  taken  as  falling  within  injudicious  correla¬ 
tion.  The  theory  is  that  sin,  which  is  abnormal,  is  productive  of  disease.  The  Com¬ 
mentator  points  out  that  this  opinion  is  not  accepted  universally,  for  sin,  some  sages 
hold,  does  not  produce  its  consequences  immediately  or  even  in  the  sinner’s  own  life 
however  certain  the  manifestation  of  those  consequences  may  be  in  the  next  world.  The 
aphorism  is  concluded  with  the  observation  that  the  three  kinds  of  exertion  adverted  t® 
are  regarded  as  instances  of  error  of  the  Understanding.  —  T. 


126 


CHARAKA-SAMBITA. 


(as  excess  of  cold  in  winter*  or  excess  of  heat  in  siinimer,  of  excess 
of  rain  in  the  rainy  season).  When  such  indication  manifests 
itself  in  a  measure  less  than  normal,  that  is  called  want  or 
absence  of  correlation  (such  as  want  of  cold  in  winter  or  of  heat 
in  summer).  When  indications,  that  are  the  reverse  of  those 
which  are  normal,  ate  manifested,  that  is  called  improper  correla¬ 
tion  ( such  as  heat  in  winter  or  cold  in  summer).  Time  has 
another  name,  viz.,  Ratinanta . 

Thus  are  the  three  subjects  treated  of,  Viz.,  the  improper 
contact  of  objects  of  sense  with  the  Mind,  faults  of  the  Understand¬ 
ing,  and  Time  or  Parinama.42 

These  three,  (viz.,  the  improper  contact  of  objects  of  sense  with 
the  Mind,  faults  of  the  Understanding,  and  Time,)  each  sub¬ 
divided  into  three  kinds,  constitute  the  causes  of  disease.  Connec¬ 
tion  therewith  in  normal  or  judicious  proportions  is  the  cause  of 
health.  The  presence  or  absence  of  all  objects  which  occur  in  the 
world,  acts  on  the  body.  Such  action,  it  is  seen,  takes  place  only 
through  proper  correlation,  excess  ©f  correlation,  and  injudicious 
or  improper  correlation  ( including  the  total  absence  thereof ),  and 
not  through  any  other  means.  In  fact,  the  presence  or  absence  of 
objects,  for  producing  action  on  the  body,  depends  upon  contact 
or  correlation  with  the  body.43 

Diseases  are  of  three  kinds,  viz.,  Physical,  Accidental,  and 
Mental.  Physical  diseases  are  those  that  arise  from  some  abnormal 
condition  of  the  body.  Accidental  are  those  that  arise  from  the 
action  of  spirits,  of  poison,  of  wind,  of  fire,  of  acts  of  violence  done 
to  the  body,  such  as  beating,  &c.  Mental  diseases  are  those  that 
arise  from  non-attainment  of  objects  desired  or  coveted,  or  from 
accession  of  those  that  are  disliked.44 

Amongst  them,  an  intelligent  person,  when  afflicted  by  a 
Mental  desease,  should,  with  an  well-directed  understanding, 
reflect  carefully  upon  what  is  beneficial  and  what  is  injurious,  and 
himself  exert  for  abstaining  from  indulgence  in  every  thing 
opposed  to  Religion,  Wealth,  and  Pleasure,  and  for  betaking 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  127 

himself  to  the  practice  of  everything  that  is  beneficial  to  those 
three.*45 

In  this  world  there  can  be  no  happiness  or  misery  except 
through  considerations  connected  with  Religion,  Wealth,  and 
Pleasure.  Hence,  those  considerations  must  be  attended  to  that 
secure  these  three.  One  should,  therefore,  always  strive  to  wait 
reverentially  upon  those  that  are  learned  and  old  in  years.  One 
should  also  duly  attend  to  the  considerations  connected  with 
one’s  own  country,  race,  time,  physical  strength  and  mental 
energy.  Here  occurs  a  verse. 

The  treatment  for  all  mental  diseases  is  attention  to  the 
considerations  of  Religion,  Wealth,  and  Pleasure,  and  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  how  to  reverentially  wait  upon  persons  that  are  well- 
conversant  with  those  three  topics,  as  also  the  knowledge  of  how  to 
attend  to  the  considerations  connected  with  one’s  own  self  (viz., 
consideration  in  respect  of  one’s  own  country,  race,  time,  physical 
strength,  and  mental  energy).46 

The  seats  of  disease  are  three.  They  are  (i)  £akh5,  (2)  vital 
parts  and  bone-joints,  and  (3)  Koshtha.-f 

Amongst  these,  £akha  includes  blood  and  the  like,  the 
humours  known  by  the  name  of  Dhatu,  and  skin.  These  consti¬ 
tute  the  External  seat  of  disease. 

The  Vital  parts,  again,  are  the  arms,  the  heart,  the  brain,  and 
the  like.  The  Bone-joints  are  the  joints  of  the  different  bones, 


*  In  the  Hindu  Scriptures,  man’s  concern  in  this  world  embraces  three  things, 
viz..  Religion,  Wealth,  and  Pleasure.  The  first  includes  all  acts  of  righteousness  and 
due  obervance  of  all  rites  and  ceremonies  laid  down  in  the  Scriptures.  The  second 
includes  all  kinds  of  possessions  that  have  an  exchangeable  value.  The  last  includes  all 
objects  that  gratify  the  appetites.  To  these  three,  a  fourth  is  sometimes  added,  viz.. 
Emancipation,  that  is,  a  merging  in  the  Supreme  Godhead  so  that  there  may  be  no  return 
or  re-birth  after  death.  The  Hindu  regulates  his  life  not  in  view  of  this  short  visible 
span  but  in  view  of  unending  eternity.  His  ideal  of  felicity  is  the  cessation  of  separate 
existence  by  attaining  to  an  identification  with  immutable  Brahma.— T 

t  As  the  words  fdkhd  and  koshtha  are  both  technical,  I  do  not  endeavour  to  render 
them  into  English.  Both  have  been  fully  explained  in  the  text  lower  down  in  this 
very  aphorism. — T 


128  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

and  the  arteries  and  veins  attached  to  them.  These  two  (  viz., 
the  vital  parts  and  bone-joints)  constitute  what  is  called  the 
second  seat  ( in  our  enumeration)  of  disease. 

Koshtha  is  otherwise  called  the  great  Stream  within  the  body. 
The  great  cavity  below,  the  cavity  containing  undigested  food, 
the  cavity  where  digestion  takes  place,  and  other  words  occurring 
together  in  medical  treatises  and  expressive  of  the  same  part  of  the 
human  frame,  are  also  used  for  Koshtha.  Koshtha  is  the  Internal 
seat  of  disease.*47 

Bronchocele,  ulcers,,  tubercles,  indolent  tumours,  warts, 
tumours,  fleshy  excrescences,  soft  corns,  leprosy,  dark  spots  on 
the  cheek,  and  other  ailments  of  this  kind,  are  diseases  that  apper¬ 
tain  to  External  seats. 

Erysepelas,  abscesses,  tumours  (in  the  stomach  and  the  arms), 
piles,  deep-seated  abscesses,  and  similar  other  maladies  are  diseases 
that  appertain  to  External  seats.49 

Hemiplegia,  pains  (in  different  limbs),  spasmodic  contractions, 
facial  paralysis,  pulmonary  consumption,  phthisis,  pains  in  bones 

*  The  word  ‘  Marga  ’  literally  means  path  or  way.  In  medical  treatises,  as  applied 
to  disease,  it  implies  seat  or  the  parts  subject  to  disease.  ‘  Cakha  ’  literally  means  branch. 
As  a  techinacal  word  in  medical  science,  it  implies,  as  explained  in  the  text.iblood  and 
the  like,  the  humours  and  the  skin.  Of  course,  it  includes  flesh,  marrow,  fat,  bones,  and 
seminal  fluid.  The  humours  are  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm.  Skin  is  included  within  it 
and  implies,  in  this  connection,  the  liquids  or  juices  that  appertain  to  it.  The 
Commentator  observes  that  9akha  is  used  to  indicate  these  constituent  elements  of 
the  body  because  of  their  analogy  to  the  similar  constituents  of  vegetables.  The  analogy, 
however,  is  not  obvious.  ‘  Asthi-sandhi  ’  is,  literally,  bone-joints.  As  a  technical  word 
in  medicine,  it  implies  the  parts  mentioned  in  the  text.  ‘  Snayu  ’  is,  as  some  suppose, 
the  sinews.  The  Commentator  explains  that  it  means  the  minuter  arteries  and  veins 
running  through  every  part  of  the  body.  ‘  Kandara  ’  implies  the  grosser  arteries  and 
veins.  In  fact,  these  two  words  imply  all  the  channels  or  ducts  through  which  blood  and 
the  other  liquid  substances  flow.  ‘  Maha-ijrota  ’  I  have  rendered  ‘the  great  Stream.’ 
Mahanimnam  ’  is  the  great  cavity  below,  evidently  the  stomach.  The  stomach  consists  of 
various  parts  or  subdivisions.  These  are  the  ‘  Amacaya’  or  that  part  where  undigested 
food  finds  its  place  ;  the  ‘Agnyacya’  or  that  part  where  the  digestive  fire  (gastric  juice) 
exists  ;  the  ‘Pakkaijaya’  or  that  part  where  the  digested  food  remains  ;  the  bladder  which 
contains  urine  ;  the  chief  duct  (aorta)  leading  to  the  heart ;  and  the  lungs.  Koshtha 
besides  these,  includes  the  juices  flowing  from  the  liver  and  the  spleen. — T 


CHRA'RA-SA  ma  HIT  A.  129 

&nd  bone-joints,  prolapsus  ani,  and  other  diseases  of  the  head* 
<af  the  heart,  and  of  the  arms,  all  appertain  to  the  Second  seat.49 

Fever  with  diarrhcea,  nausea,  tympanitis,  cholera  and 
choleraic  diarrhoea,  asthma,  consumption,  hiccup,  epistisis  (sup¬ 
pression  of  urine),  spleen,  and  other  diseases  of  the  stomach 
appertain  to  that  which  has  been  called  the  Internal  seat.  Besides 
these,  erysipelas,  intumescence,  internal  tumours,  piles,  all  deep- 
seated  abscesses,  and  other  diseases  of  a  similar  kind,  are  said  to 
appertain  to  the  seat  known  by  the  name  of  Koshtka  (as  explained 
before).60 

Physicians  are  of  three  kinds  :  hypocrites  or  quacks  dressed 
&s  physicians  form  one  class ;  physicians  by  common  report  form 
the  second  class,  and  physicians  that  really  possess  the  accom¬ 
plishments  which  such  men  should  possess,  form  the  third  class. 
These  ate  the  three  classes  of  physicians  that  practice  on 
Earth.* 5 1 

Those  ignorant  persons  who,  having  equipt  themselves  with 
the  utensils,  the  medicines,  the  books,  and  the  bracelets  of  physi¬ 
cians  and  assumed  their  manners  and  conduct,  acquire  the 
title  of  physicians,  are  said  to  be  hypocrites  or  quacks  in  the 
guise  of  physicians.6  2 

Those  persons  who  without  really  possessing  them  pretend  to 
prosperity,  fame,  knowledge,  and  success  such  as  true  physicians 
have,  and  acquire  the  title  of  physicians,  are  said  to  be  physicians 
by  report.’j*33 

The  true  accomplishments  of  a  physician  are  said  to  reside  in 
those  persons  that  have  a  practical  knowledge  of  the  application  of 
drugs,  and  acquaintance  with  the  medical  scriptures  and  the  affairs. 


*  The  Commentator  points  out  that  ‘  bhuvi’.  or  ‘  on  Earth  is  used  by  way  of  dis¬ 
tinction  from  heaven,  where  there  is  only  one  kind  of  physician,  viz. ,  the  true  ones  in 
the  two  Agwinikumars.  —  71 

t  The-sense  is  that  those  men  who,  without  being  true  physicians,  pretend  to  be 
such  and  speak  of  their  imaginary  successes  of  treatment  in  other  places,  are  called 
physicians  by.  report. — 71 


17 


230 


CM  A  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


of  men,  that  are  celebrated  for  cheir  success  in  treatment,  that  coil' 
tribute  to  the  real  happiness  of  their  patients,  and  that  are  restorers 
of  life  and'  strength.64 

Medicines  are  of  three  kinds;  those  that  depend  for  their 
action  upon  the  deities  and  invisible  influences  ;  those  that  depend 
for  their  application  and  action  upon  knowledge  and  reason  ;  and 
those  that  appertain  to  the  subjugation  of  the  mind. 

Among  these,  mantras.,  herbs  and  plants  of  invisible  virtue 
( if  kept  in  contact  with  the  body),  gems,  auspicious  rites,  offer¬ 
ings  in  sacrifices,  offers  of  articles  to  the  deities  in  course  of  wor¬ 
ship  or  religious  rites,  libations  of  meat  and  ghee  on  the  sacred 
fire,  practice  of  vows,  expiatory  ceremonies  and  rites,  fasts,  pro¬ 
pitiatory  rites,  bows  to  the  deities,  and  pilgrimage  to  sacred  waters 
and  shrines,  constitute  medicines  of  the  first  kind. 

Diet  and  articles  of  medicinal  virtue  that  are  applied  with  the 
aid  of  knowledge  and  reason  are  medicines  of  the  second  kind. 

The  subjugation  of  the  mind  by  withdrawing  it  from  every 
kind'  of  injurious  or  harmful  acts  and'  objects  of  the  senses,  cons¬ 
titutes  medicine  of  the  third  kind.*56 

When  the  sources  of  the  faults  of  the  body  {viz.,  wind,  bile, 
and  phlegm)  become  disordered,  it  is  very  generally  seen  that  three 
kinds  of  medicines,  all  of  which  must  be  brought  in  contact  with 
the  body,  become  necessary.  These  three  kinds  are  (i)  those  for 
internal  application,  (2)  those  for  external  application,  and  (3)  the 
application  of  surgery. 

Those  medicines  which  are  taken  internally  and  which,  entering 

*  The  third  kind  of  medicines  is  otherwise  called  penancesor  asceticism.  Ascetics  as 
a  rule,  are  free  from  every  kind  of  physical  and  mental  disease.  The  first  kind'  of 
medicine,  viz.,  that  which  depends  few  its  action  upon  the  favor  of  the  deities  and  invi¬ 
sible  influences,  is  still  extensively  resorted  to  in  this  country  by  almost  all  classes  of 
people.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  no  one  relies  on  such  medicine  exclusively, 
the  fact  being  that  regular  treatment  is  sought  to  be  supplemented  by  it.  The  Hindus 
are  a  highly  religious  people,  and  hence  their  recourse  to  religious  acts  by  way  of  supple¬ 
menting  regular  treatment  of  disease.  To  this  day,  when  medicines  are  prepared,  «rtain 
supplemental  religious  acts  are  simultaneously  performed.— T. 


CHARAKA-SaMHITA  131 

the  body,  destroy  the  disorders  thereof,  are  said  to  be  medicines  for 
internal  application. 

Those  medicines  which  are  applied  to  the  skin  and  which 
destroy  disease  by  means  of  being  rubbed  gently,  or  by  produc¬ 
ing  perspiration,  or  by  being  used  as  plaster,  or  by  fomentation,  or 
by  being  rubbed  with  force,  are  said  to  belong  to  the  second  class 
of  medicines,  viz.,  those  for  external  application. 

Application  of  surgery  includes  lopping,  breaking,  piercing, 
cutting,  tearing,  extracting,  puncturing,  sewing,  exploring  (  by 
needles  and  catheters  and  tubes),  burning  by  salts,  and  applying 
leeches.6* 

Here  occur  some  verses . 

It  is  said  that — When  disease  manifests  itself,  the  man  of 
wisdom,  dispelling  it,  attains  to  health  by  external  or  internal  appli¬ 
cation  of  medicines  or  by  help  of  surgical  operation.67 

A  person  destitute  of  intelligence,  without  doubt,  fails,  through 
stupefaction  or  eror  of  judgment,  to  notice  a  disease  as  soon  as  it 
arises,  even  as  a  fool  fails  t©  detect  a  foe  ( before  the  latter  ruins 
him  outright). 6  8 

Appearing  at  first  in  a  very  subtile  form,  disease  afterwards 
increases,  till,  driving  its  roots  deeply,  it  destroys  the  strength  and 
cuts  short  the  period  of  life  of  the  man  of  little  intelligence.6 9 

The  man  of  little  intelligence  does  not  awake  to  a  conscious¬ 
ness  of  his  situation  till  he  is  sorely  afflicted  by  disease.  When  he 
becomes  sorely  afflicted  it  is  then  only  that  he  sets  his  mind  upon  the 
cure  of  his  ailment  * 80  It  is  then  that  summoning  his  sons  and 
spouses  and  kinsmen  he  says  unto  them, — Let  some  physician  be 
brought  even  if  I  have  to  give  away  the  whole  of  my  property!0 1 — But 
what  physician  is  there  that  is  able  to  rescue  such  a  person  who, 
afflicted  with  disease,  has  been  reduced  in  strength,  who  has  be¬ 
come  emaciated,  whose  senses  have  been  weakened  in  respect  of 
their  functions,  who  has  become  exceedingly  cheerless,  and  who 

*  Some  texts  read  1  martyah’  for  ‘mudah,’  and  ‘Craddham’  for  ‘samjnam.’  Both  these 
readings  are  fauky.—  T. 


132 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA 


is  on  the  point  up  death  ?62  Such  a  man  of  foolish  understanding, 
from  want  of  a  rescuer,  has  to  give  up  his  life,  even  as  a  reptile  of 
the  iguana  species  gives  up  its  life  when  dragged  by  the  tale  by  a 
strong  foe. 6  3 

Hence,  before  an  ailment  is  contracted,  or  while  it  is  new,  it 
should  be  counteracted  with  the  aid  of  medicines  by  one  who 
wishes  for  one's  own  happiness,64 

H ere  are  two  verses  containing  a  summary. 

The  intelligent  son  of  the  dark-complexioned  Atri,  in  this 
Lesson  on  the  Three  Aspirations,  has  set  down  these  eight  points, 
viz.,  aspirations,  the  stays  or  supports  of  the  body,  strength,  the 
causes  of  disease,  disease,  the  seat  of  disease,  physicians,  and  medi¬ 
cine,  each  of  which  has  been  subdivided  into  three  heads. 
Endued. with  competence,  the  Rishi  has  pointed  out  that  upon  these 
twentyfour  existent  and  non-existeat  things  depends  medical 
science  in  its  entirety.* 

Thus  ends  the  Eleventh  Lesson,  entitled  the  Three  Aspirations, 
in  the  treatise  of  Agnive^a  as  revised  by  Charaka, 


LESSON  XII. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  merits  and  faults  of 
the  Wind.  Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.f 1 

The  great  Rishis,  seated  at  their  ease,  and  desirous  of  acser- 
taining  the  truth  about  the  merits  and  faults  of  the  Wind,  asked  one 
another,  saying, — What  are  the  virtues  of  the  Wind  ?  What  is  meant 
by  the  provocation  of  the  Wind  ?  What,  again,  are  those  things  that 
can  allay  that  provocation  ?  The  Wind,  again,  is  never  stationary 
*  Some  texts  read  ‘  Bhavaveshwasaktena.’  If  this  reading  be  adopted,  then  a 
stop  occurs  after  ‘Bhavah,’  the  h  being  dropped  by  rule  of  stftidhi.  It  should  then 
be  taken  as  the  substantive  of  the  numeral  adjective  ‘ash tan.’  The  next  words 
would  be  ‘  bhaveshwasaktena’,  i.e.,  ‘unattached  to  the  objects  of  the  senses’  and  would 
qualify  ‘  the  son  of  Atri.’  ‘  Sarvam’ may  mean  also  dharmarthakamah.’ — T. 

f  Vatakalakaliyam’  is  explained  variously,  The  Commentator  sayS  that  ‘  kala’ 
means  merits,  and  ‘  akala’  means  faults.  He  suggests  another  meaning,  for  ‘  kalakala’ 
may  imply  part  of  part,  that  is,  a  very  subtile  part ;  hence,  the  Lesson  may  be  taken  as  one 
devoted  to  the  treatment  ofjhe  subtile  constituents  of  the  Wind, — T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHI TA. 


133 


(being  ceaselessly  mobile).  It  is  also  impalpable  ( i .  e.,  neither  solid 
nor  liquid).  Those  things  that  are  said  to  provoke  and  allay  it  can¬ 
not  come  in  contact  with  it.  How  then,  without  coming  in  contact 
with  it,  can  they  provoke  or  allay  it  ?  The  provoked  or  unprovoked 
Wind  moves  within  the  body  and  without  the  body.  What,  indeed, 
is  its  action  within  the  body  and  what  outside  the  body  ?2 

The  questions  being  propounded,  Kri$a  the  son  of  Sankriti, 
answered  : — The  Wind  has  six  qualities  ;  these  are  dryness,  light¬ 
ness,  coldness,  fierceness,  heat,  and  poisonousness.  Hearing  these 
words,  Kumara^ra-Bharadwaja  said, — It  is  even  so  as  the  illustri¬ 
ous  one  has  said.  Truly,  these  are  the  attributes  of  the  Wind. 
By  frequent  recourse  to  objects  possessed  of  similar  attributes,  and 
acts  productive  of  similar  attributes,  the  Wind  becomes  excited. 
The  presence  of  objects  possessed  of  similar  properties  is  the  cause 
of  the  increase  of  each  of  these  elements  of  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm.3 

Hearing  those  words,  Vaditja-dhamargava  said, — It  is  even  so 
as  the  illustrious  one  has  said.  These  (objects  and  acts)  are 
excitants  and  mitigating  causes  of  the  wind.  We  shall  presently 
expound  how  these  excitants  and  mitigating  causes  achieve  their 
respective  functions  of  exciting  and  mitigating,  without  actually 
coming  into  contact  with  the  wind  which  is  impalpable  and  unstable. 
Without  doubt,  things  that  are  dry,  light,  cold,  fierce,  hot,  poison¬ 
ous,  and  wasting,  are  excitants  of  the  Wind  in  the  body.  The 
Wind  occurring  in  bodies  fed  with  substances  of  such  attri¬ 
butes,  increases  in  consequence  thereof  and  becomes  excited. 
Substances,  again  that  mitigate  or  allay  the  Wind  in  the  body 
are  those  that  are  juicy,  heavy,  hot,  jelly-like,  soft,  oily,  and  consti¬ 
pating.  The  Wind  occurring  in  bodies  fed  with  such  substances, 
moves  in  contact  therewith  and  becomes  mitigated  or  allayed.4 

Hearing  these  words  of  Vadi§a  that  were  just  and  approved 

*  The  question  proposed  is— what  excites  the  wind  ?  The  answer  is  that  the  wind 
has  certain  properties.  When  objects  or  acts  that  have  or  that  produce  similar  proper¬ 
ties  are  used  or  done  by  a  person,  the  wind  in  his  system  becomes  excited.  Among 
acts,  night-keeping,  &c.,  may  be  noticed  for  their  tendency  to  excite  the  wind  in  the 
system, — T, 


134 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


by  all  the  Rishis,  the  royal  sage  Varyovida  said, — It  is  even  so  as 
the  illustrious  one  has  said.  All  this  is  faultless.  Bowing  unto 
the  Wind,  I  shall,  according  to  my  lights,  declare  with  the  aid  of 
direct  perception,  of  inference,  and  of  authority,  the  nature  of  those 
functions  which  the  excited  and  unexcited  wind,  dwelling  in  the 
body  and  out  of  it,  accomplishes  while  moving  within  the  body 
and  out  of  it.® 

The  Wind  upholds  the  constituents  of  the  body  ( such  as 
blood,  flesh,  marrow,  fat,  &c.)  and  their  courses  through  the  body. 
It  exists  in  the  fivefold  form  of  Prana,  Udana,  Samana,  Vyana,  and 
Apana.  It  is  the  urging  cause  of  movements  of  diverse  kinds.* 

It  restrains  the  mind  (  from  all  undesirable  objects  )  and  con¬ 
centrates  it  (  on  objects  that  are  desirable).  It  causes  all  the  ( ten  ) 
senses  (  of  knowledge  and  action  )  to  perform  their  functions.  It 
bears  all  the  objects  of  the  senses  (after  contact  with  the  senses) 
to  the  mind.  It  holds  together  all  the  elements  of  the  body.  It 
assists  the  cohesion  of  the  particles  of  the  body.  It  causes  speech. 
It  is  the  prime  cause  of  touch  and  sound,  and  the  root  of  scent  and 
touch.  It  is  the  origin  of  joy  and  cheerfulness.  It  excites  the 
heat  of  fire.  It  dries  up  all  faults.  It  throws  out  all  impurities. 
It  pierces  through  all  the  ducts  of  the  body,  gross  and  fine.  It 
gives  form  to  the  embryo  in  womb.  It  furnishes  the  evidence  of  the 
existence  of  life.  The  Wind,  when  unexcited,  achieves  all  these 
functions.6 

When  excited  within  the  body,  it  pains  the  body  with  diverse 
afflictions.  It  destroys  and  injures  strength,  complexion,  happi¬ 
ness  and  period  of  life.  It  agitates  the  mind.  It  injures  all  the 
senses.  It  kills  the  embryo  and  causes  miscarriage.  It  maims  the 
embryo  (by  suspending  the  development  of  particular  parts).  It 
holds  the  foetus  longer  than  usual.  It  causes  fear,  grief,  stupefaction, 
cheerlessness,  and  delusions.  It  destroys  life.7 

As  regards  the  Wind  that  blows  out  of  the  body,  when  it  is  in 
its  normal  condition,  it  achieves  the  following  functions. 

*  The  Commentator  (Chakrapanidatta)  takes  ‘  uchchavachanam’  as  an  adjective  of 
‘cheshtanam.’  The  Bengali  Commentator  errs  in  taking  the  word  as  indicative  of 
*  Cabdanam’ — T, 


charaka-samhitA. 


185 


It  upholds  the  Earth  (in  space) ;  it  causes  the  fire  to  blaze 
forth  ;  it  causes  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  and  the  planets  to 
move  ceaselessly  in  their  respective  orbits.  It  creates  the  clouds. 
It  causes  the  clouds  to  pour  rain.  It  causes  all  currents  or  streams 
to  flow.  It  causes  all  flowers  and  fruits  to  appear.  It  causes  all 
vegetables  to  grow.  It  causes  the  change  of  seasons.  It  causes  all 
solid  substances  to  assume  different  forms.*  It  ordains  the 
density  of  different  substances  as  also  their  shapes.  It  causes 
seeds  to  sprout  forth,  and  produces  the  kernel  in  fruit  and  crops. 
It  protects  crops  and  fruits  from  putrefaction  while  unripe  and  dries 
up  crops  when  ripe.  It  prevents  things  from  putrefying.8 

When  moving  in  the  world  in  an  excited  state,  without  doubt, 
it  achieves  the  following  functions. 

It  breaks  the  summits  of  mountains.  It  uproots  trees.  It 
agitates  seas.  It  swells  the  waters  of  lakes  causing  them  to  rise 
upwards.  It  causes  the  currents  of  rivers  to  run  in  opposite 
directions.  It  makes  the  Earth  tremble.  It  urges  the  clouds.f 

It  causes  frost,  thunder,  dust,  sand,  fish,  frogs,  snakes,  ashes, 
blood,  stones,  lightning,  to  fall  down  on  the  Earth.  It  causes  excess 
of  virtues,  absence  of  virtues,  and  contrariety  of  virtues  in  respect  of 
the  six  seasons.  It  causes  failure  of  crops.  It  produces  disease  and 
plagues.  It  destroys  many  objects.  It  causes  those  clouds  and  suns 
and  fire  and  winds  which  bring  about  a  universal  dissolution  at  the 
end  of  the  four  Yugas.  Possessed  of  divine  attributes,  the  Wind  is  the 
cause  of  both  production  and  destruction  (of  the  universe).  It 
causes  all  existent  objects  to  start  into  life  and  also  brings  about 
their  destruction.  It  ordains  both  happiness  and  misery.  It  is 
Mrityu,  Yama,  Niyantri,  Prajapati,  Aditi,  and  Vicwakarman.  It  is 
of  universal  form.  It  is  capable  of  going  everywhere.  It  is  the 
ordanier  of  all  acts  or  rules.  Of  all  existent  objects  it  is  exceed¬ 
ingly  subtile,  exceedingly  gross,  omnipresent  and,  therefore, 

*  It  causes  solid  substances  to  become  earth  or  stone  or  gold  or  silver  &c 
explained  by  the  Commentator. — T. 

f  Some  texts  read  ‘adhamanam,’  meaning  ‘causes  the  clouds  to  roar.’ _ T. 


i36 


charaka-sa  mhitA. 


embraces  all  things.  The  Wind  is  a  divine  object.*9 

Hearing  these  words  of  (the  royal  sage)  Varyovida  (about  the 
virtues  and  nature  of  the  Wind),  the  son  of  Marichi  said, — If  it 
be  as  thou  sayest,  what  power  can  medical  science  possess  in  the 
matter  of  either  understanding  or  describing  this  topic  of  discourse? 
Or,  why  has  our  discourse  on  this  topic  commenced  in  connection 
With  medical  science  ?-f- 

Varyovida  said, — If  the  physician  do  not  hear  that  the  Wind 
is  possessed  of  great  might,  that  it  is  very  fierce,  that  it  is  charact¬ 
erised  by  great  celerity  in  respect  of  all  its  operations,  and  that  it  is 
productive  of  evil,  why  shall  he  make  haste,  with  concentrated 
faculties,  to  restrain  it  at  the  outset  when  it  becomes  suddenly- 
excited?  Indeed,  the  physician  should,  at  the  very  outset,  seek 
to  allay  or  restrain  the  Wind  from  fear  of  the  injury  it  is  capable 
of  doing.  The  just  propitiation  of  the  Wind  leads  to  health,  the 
growth  of  strength  and  complexion ;  energy,  the  increase  of 
vitality,  the  growth  of  knowledge,  and  extension  of  the  period 
of  life.10 

The  son  of  Marichi  said, — The  heat  dwelling  in  the  body, 
within  the  Bile,  when  excited,  produces  evil  and  when  in  its 
normal  condition  leads  to  beneficial  consequences. 

This  is  as  follows  : — In  its  normal  condition  it  aids  digestion, 
vision,  the  proper  measure  of  warmth  (of  body),  propriety  of  com¬ 
plexion,  courage,  cheerfulness,  and  free  play  of  the  faculties,  &c. 
When  excited,  it  produces  indigestion,  weakness  of  vision,  an 
improper  measure  of  warmth,  an  unhealthy  complexion,  fear,  wrath, 


*  ‘  Mrityu  ’  is  represented  as  a  goddess  who  sprang  from  Brahman  the  Creator. 
When  asked  to  destroy  all  creatures,  she  refused  to  do  so,  moved  by  compassion.  She 
was,  however,  ultimately  prevailed  upon  by  the  Creator  to  accomplish  the  purpose  for 
which  she  was  created.  Yama  is  the  infernal  Judge.  It  is  his  province  to  judge  of  all 
persons  after  death,  and  to  award  punishments  to  those  that  deserve  them  of  different 
grades  of  severity.  ‘  Niyantri’  is  a  male  deity  that  is  employed  in  ordaining  the  occur¬ 
rences  of  the  lives  of  every  person.  ‘  Prajapati’  is  the  Regent  that  supervises  the  world. 
*  Aditi’  is  the  mother  of  the  celestials.  ‘  V^wakarman’  is  the  divine  artificer.  He  is 
like  Vulcan  of  Greek  mythology. —  T. 

t  Grammatically,  ‘  kim’  should  be  supplied  after  ‘  katha’ : —  7 


CHA  kA  KA-SA  M HIT  A. 


137 


fcrror,  &c.  Excited  and  ummixed,  it  produces  similar  pairs  of 
Opposites. li 

Hearing  these  words  of  Marichi’s  son,  Kacyapa  said, — Shoma 
that  dwells  in  the  body  with  the  pfilegm,  unexcited  and  excited, 
produces  beneficial  and  evil  consequences.  They  are  as 
follow  : — 

Tightness  of  limbs  and  their  relaxation  ;  growth  and  weak¬ 
ness  ;  exertion  and  langour  ;  virility  and  its  reverse  ;  knowledge 
and  ignorance ;  understanding  and  stupidity,  and  similar  other 
pairs  of  opposite  virtues.12 

Hearing  these  words  of  Kacyapa;  the  illustrious  Punarvasu, 
the  son  of  Atri,  said, — All  of  your  illustrious  selves  have  said  what 
is  sufficient  and  proper  in  respect  of  what  is  beneficial  and  what 
is  injurious  for  man.  Without  doubt,  all  the  (three)  elements, 
•viz.,  Wind,  Bile,  and  Phlegm,  when  in  their  normal  condition,  keep  a 
man’s  senses  in  good  order ;  bring  about  an  accession  of  strength, 
complexion,  and  happiness;  and  bestow  length  of  life  upon  him, 
even  as  religion,  wealth,  and  pleasure,  judiciously  sought,  unite 
one,  both  here  and  hereafter,  with  what  is  highly  beneficial.  When 
Wind,  Bile,  and  Phlegm  become  abnormal,  they  bring  about  an 
accession  of  immeasurable  evil  upon  him  even  as  the  three  seasons, 
when  fraught  with  abnormal  manifestations,  bring  about  an 
accession  of  much  evil  upon  the  world,  when  their  calamities 
begin  to  develop  themselves. — All  these  words  of  the  illustrious 
son  of  Atri  were  fully  accepted  by  the  Rishis  and  approved  of 
by  them.13 

Here  is  a  verse. 

Hearing  these  words  of  Atri’s  son,  all  the  Rishis  (there 
present)  accepted  and  approved  of  them  even  as  the  deities 
accept  and  approve  the  words  of  Indra.14 

Here  are  two  verses  containing  a  summary. 

The  six  qualities  of  the  Wind,  the  two  kinds  of  causes,  {viz., 
excitement  and  unexcitement),  the  diverse  functions  of  the 
Wind  when  excited  and  unexcited,  the  four  kinds  of  functions  of 
Bile  and  Phlegm,  the  opinions  of  the  several  Rishis,  and  the 


18 


138 


at  A  RA  KA  -SA  MHI7A. 


opinions  of  Punarvasu,  have  all  been  expounded  in  this  Lesson  an 
the  merits  and  faults  of  the  Wind. 

Thus  ends  the  Twelfth  Lesson  called  the  Merits  and  Faults  of 
the  Wind  in  Agniveca’s  treatise  as  revised  by  Charaka. 

LESSON  XIII. 

We  shall  next  expound  the  Lesson  on  Oils.  Thus  said 
the  illustrious  son  of  Atri. 1 

Once  on  a  time,  as  Punarvasu  was  seated  in  the  midst  of  a 
number  of  Rishis  who  were  all  followers  of  the  Sankhya  doctrine 
and  who  were  well  conversant  with  the  four  and  twenty  topics 
relating  to  Soul  and  Nature,  Agnivecja,  moved  by  the  desire  of 
benefiting  the  world,  questioned  him  for  a  soultion  of  his  own 
doubts  (His  questions  were  as  follow).2 

What  are  those  substances  that  are  the  sources  of  Oils? 
How  many  kinds  altogether  are  there  of  Oils?  What  are  the  res¬ 
pective  virtues  of  the  several  kinds  of  Oils  ?  At  what  time 
which  of  them  should  be  taken  and  with  what  drugs  ?  What  are 
the  rules  in  respect  of  the  uses  of  each  ?  8  How  many  kinds  of 
measure  are  there  in  respect  of  Oils?  What  quantity 
should  how  be  used  in  what  diseases  ?  Which  of  them  is  beneficial 
for  whom  ?  Which  of  them  are  superior  as  Emollients  ?  4  Who 
are  those  for  whom  these  should  be  prescribed  ?  Who  are  those 
for  whom  these  should  not  be  prescribed  ?  What  are  the  indica¬ 
tions  of  the  substances  that  are  oily  and  what  are  the  substances 
that  are  excessively  oily?  What  is  beneficial  and  what  is  not 
so  for  one  before  drinking  oils,  after  drinking  them,  and  after 
they  have  been  digested  ?  5  Which  of  them  are  mild  purga¬ 
tives,  and  which  strong  purgatives  ? 

What  are  the  dangers  that  await  upon  the  improper  applica¬ 
tion  of  oils,  and  what  are  the  methods  for  removing  those  dangers? 
What  conduct  should  be  followed  for  neutralising  the  faults  of 
oils  and  for  correcting  those  faults  ?  6 

By  what  rules  should  what  kind  of  men  be  made  to  use  these 
medicines  ?  I  desire,  O  master,  to  learn  everything  about  the 
science  of  oils  and  their  application  !  7 


charakasamhitA. 


139 


Thus  questioned,  Punarvasu,  the  remover  of  Agniveca’s  doubts, 
answered  him  thus  : 

O  amiable  one,  the  source  of  oils  is  of  two  kinds,  viz., 
mobile  and  immobile. 

Tila  (a),  Piyala  (3),  Abhishuka  (c),  Vibhitaka  ( d ).  Chitra  ( e ), 
Abhaya  (f),  Eranda  (g),  Madhuka  (k),  (jlarshapa  .(*),  Kusumbha  (  j ) 
Vilwa  (k),  Aruka  (/),  Mulaka(w),  Atasi  («),  Nikochaka  ( o ),  Akshoda 
(/>),  Karanja  ( q ),  and  <^igru  (r),  are  immobile  substances  that 
contain  oils.  Among  mobile  objects  that  are  sources  of  oils 
are  fishes  and  animals  and  birds.  Of  the  latter,  curds,  milk,  ghee, 
flesh,  fat,  and  marrow,  are  taken  for  preparing  oils.8 

Of  all  kinds  of  oils,  the  oil  that  is  produced  from  Sesamum 
Indicum  is  the  best  for  purposes  of  giving  strength  and 
of  emollients.  The  oil  extracted  from  castor-seeds  is  the  best  for 
purposes  of  purgatives.*9  Of  ail  oils  extracted  from  mobile 
sources,  ghee,  fat,  and  marrow  are  regarded  as  the  foremost. 
Among  these  again,  ghee  is  the  best  in  consequence  of  its  adopt- 

(a.)  Sesamum  Indicum. 

(b)  Buchanania  latifolia  ;  the  fruits  are  called  cheraunji. 

(c)  A  kind  of  nut  obtained  from  the  Hiinalyan  regions. 

( d)  Terminalia  bellerica. 

( e)  Called  also  Manjishta.  Rtibia  Cordifolia  ;  syn,  Rubia  Munjista  ;  Roxb. 

(f)  Terminalia  Chebula. 

(g)  Ricinns  Communis.  The  Castor-oil  plant. 

(h )  Liquorice. 

(i)  Mustard  seeds. 

(j)  Carthamus  tinctorius.  Safflower. 

(k)  rEgle  Marmelos. 

(/)  A  kind  of  nut  obtained  from  the  Himalyan  regions. 

( m)  Raphanua  sativus.  The  garden  raddish. 

( >')  I.inum  usitatissimum.  (  The  Bengali  name  of  this  is  Masina,  and  the  Hindi 

(o)  A  llangium  hexapotalum. 

(P)  Juglans  regia. 

( q)  Pongamia  glabra  ;  syn.  Galedupa  Indica. 

( r)  Moringa  pterygosperma. 

*  1  Agryam  ’  the  Commentator  explains,  is  connected  with  *  Erandam.  ’—T. 


140 


CHRAKA-SAMHITl. 


ing  the  virtues  of  those  objects  with  which  it  is  mixed  for 
curing  it.+10 

Ghee  corrects  the  faults  of  Bile  and  Wind.  It  is  beneficial  for 
the  juicy  or  liquid  elements  in  the  body,  for  the  vital  seed,  and  for 
strength.  It  quenches  all  undue  heat ;  and  softens  every  part  of 
flie  body.  It  also  improves  the  voice  and  the  complexion.11 

Oil  cures  all  faults  of  the  Wind.  It  reduces  Phlegm*  It 
enhances  strength.  It  is  beneficial  for  the  skin.  It  possesses  the 
property  of  heat.  It  contributes  to  the  durability  of  the  body.*  It 
corrects  the  faults  of  the  sexual  organs.12 

Fat  is  beneficial  in  cases  of  wounds,  fractures,  cuts  caused  hy 
sharp  weapons,  inversions  of  the  uterus,  diseases  of  the  ear  and  the 
head,  in  enhancing  the  vital  seed,  iq  emollients,  and  in  physical 
exercises.13 

Marrow  enhances  strength,  vital  seed,  the  juicy  elements  of 
the  body,  phlegm,  fat  and  marrow.f  In  particular,  it  adds  to  the 
strength  of  bones,  and  is  approved  as  a  good  emollient.14 

Ghee  should  be  drunk  in  autumn  ;  fat  and  marrow  in  spring  ; 
and  oil  in  the  season  of  rains.  One  should  not  drink  oils  when 
it  is  very  hot  or  very  cold.15 

One  should  drink  such  liquids  at  night  in  the  summer  season 
if  one’s  wind  and  bile  be  excited.  If  the  (wind  and)  phlegm  be 
excited,  one  should  drink  such  preparations  at  the  day  time  during 
the  cold  season.  If  the  bile  ( and  phlegm  )  be  excited,  one  should 
drink  them  at  midday  when  the  sun  becomes  very  bright. 

Oils,  if  drunk  when  it  is  very  hot  or  during  day  time, 
by  one  whose  wind  and  bile  have  been  excited,  produce 
swoons,  thirst,  madness,  and  jaundice.17 

t  ‘  Samskara  ’  is  a  process  to  which  Ghee  and  other  oily  liquids  are  subjected  for. 
adding  to  their  virtues  and  neutralising  their  strength. — T.  t 

*  That  oil  produces  durability  is  seen  from  the  fact  that  in  this  country  sticks  of 
bamboos,  books,  and  many  other  things  of  common  use  are  always  steeped  in  oil  and 
made  to  soak  as  much  oil  as  possible.  Such  things,  when  steeped  in  oil,  always  last 
longer  than  those  which  are  not  steeped  in  it. — T. 

f  The  fact  is,  fat,  if  eaten  by  persons  given  to  physical  exercise,  becomes  benefi 
cial.  ‘  Viddha  ’  implies  wounds  caused  by  pingierc  weapons. — T, 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHI TA 


141 


By  drinking  such  substances  at  night-time  during  the  cold 
season,  a  person  whose  phlegm  has  been  excited  gets  stomachic 
disorders  arising  from  suppression  of  the  wind,  disgust  for  food, 
shooting  pains  in  the  abdomen,  and  general  anaemia.18 

One  should  drink  warm  water  after  having  taken  ghee,  and 
broth  of  flesh  after  having  taken  oil.  After  taking  fat  or  marrow, 
one  should  eat  gruel  of  rice.  As  an  alternative,  warm  water  is 
recommended  to  be  drunk  after  taking  all  kinds  of  oily  sub¬ 
stances.  1 

There  are  four  and  twenty  ways  of  taking  oils,  They  are 
as  follow  : — 

Oils  may  be  taken  with  rice  or  with  ointments  and  plasters, 
or  with  broth,  or  with  meat,  or  with  milk,  or  with  curds,  or  with 
gruel  of  barley,  of  with  soup  ( of  flesh ),  or  with  potherbs, 
or  with  ( ordinary )  gruels,  or  with  those  called  kamvalika,  or 
with  those  called  khada,  or  with  flour  of  ( fried  )  barley,  or  with 
cakes  of  sesame,  or  with  limes,  or  with  such  semi-liquids  as  are 
licked  up  with  the  tongue,  or  with  solid  food  or,  with  liquids  used  for 
rubbing  the  body,  or  with  enemata,  or  with  those  drugs  that  are 
used  after  the  application  of  enemata,  or  with  liquids  injected  into 
the  ear,  or  with  things  used  as  snuffs  or  with  washes  or 
collyria  used  for  the  eyes.*2o.?i 

Of  those  oily  substances  which  are  taken  without  being  mixed 
with  any  other  object,  there  can  be  no  classification.  Physicians, 
jn  treating  of  oily  substances,  regard  those  as  of  the  first  kind.22 

By  permutations  and  combinations  of  the  six  different  kinds 
of  tastes,  Oils  mixed  with  these,  come  up  to  three  and 
sixty  varieties.  Unmixed,  they  are  of  only  one  kind  ( as  said 
above).  Hence,  in  all,  there  are  four  and  sixty  varieties  of  oily 
substances.  The  physician  possessed  of  knowledge  should  apply 
them  in  the  cases  of  persons,  always  taking  into  consideration  the 
nature  of  the  disease,  the  time  or  season  of  application,  and  the 
peculiarities  of  the  patients  as  dependent  on  the  places  they  in-, 

*  . 1  Kamvalika  ’  is  a  kind  of  gruel  prepared  from  some  vegetables.  ‘  Khada  ’  is 
hutter  milk  boiled  with  some  acid  vegetables  and  spices,—?’, 


1 42  CH  A  RA  KA-SA  M  HI  TA . 

habit,  their  age  and  strength  and  habits.*23-24 

The  dose  in  respect  of  oils  is  of  there  kinds,  viz.,  the 
full  dose,  the  middling  dose,  and  the  small  dose.  As  regards 
tne  periods  necessary  for  digestion,  a  full  day  and  night  is  required 
for  the  full  dose,  a  full  day  only  for  the  middling  dose,  and  half  a 
day  for  the  small  dose.  These  are  the  three  doses  of  oils 
in  respect  of  quantity.  I  shall  now  expound  to  thee  their  applica¬ 
tion  in  respect  of  individual  patients.se-2  7 

For  men  that  habitually  take  large  quantities  of  such  substan¬ 
ces,  for  those  that  have  keen  appetites  and  thirst,  for  those  whose 
digestive  fire  is  strong,  for  those  that  are  endued  with  great 
strength,  for  those  that  have  abdominal  tumours,  for  those  that 
have  been  bitten  by  snakes,  for  those  that  have  erysepelas,  for 
those  that  are  mad,  for  those  whose  urine  is  not  copious,  and  for 
those  whose  stools  are  hard,  the  full  dose  is  recommended.  Listen  to 
the  benefits  expected  from  thefull  dose  in  such  cases.  Well  applied, 
it  quickly  alleviates  disorders.  Affecting  every  part  of  the  physical 
system,  it  corrects  its  faults.  It  imparts  strength  to  the  body. 
It  revives  (  invigorates)  the  body,  the  senses,  and  the  mind.28.31 

They  that  are  afflicted  with  Aruska  (a),  malignant  boils, 
Pidaka  (3),  pustules  producing  an  itching  sensation,  and  Pama  ( c ), 
they  that  are  afflicted  with  leprosy,  gonorrhoea,  and  hemorrhages 
caused  by  disorders  of  the  wind,  they  that  do  not  eat  much,  they 
whose  stools  are  not  hard,  and  they  that  are  not  very  strong, 
should  take  the  middling  dose  The  middling  dose  acts  as  a  mild 
purgative,  does  not  reduce  the  strength,  agreeably  softens  the  body, 
and  corrects  many  disorders. a  2-34 

They  that  are  aged,  they  that  are  young  in  years,  they  that 
are  infants,  they  that  are  very  delicate,  they  whose  intestines  have 


*  ‘  Oka  ’  implies,  literally,  the  habitat,  i.e.,  the  country  or  place  inhabited  by 

the  person  treated.  It  is  taken  here  as  implying  the  age,  strength,  and  habits  also  of  the 
person. — T. 

(a)  Probably,  Tinea  favosa. 

(b)  Pustules  (  common  ). 

( ()  Herpes. 


CHARAKA-SAMBITA.  143 

been  emptied  by  undue  administration  of  purgatives;  they  whose 
digestive  fire  is  not  strong,  they  that  are  labouring  for  a  long 
time  under  fever  with  diarrhoea  and  cough  and  phthisis,  and  they 
that  are  weak  in  strength,  should  take  the  small  dose.  It  can 
always  be  given  up  easily  ;  it  cools  the  body  ;  it  enhances  blood 
and  the  elements  of  the  body  ;  it  increases  strength,  and  keeps  the 
body  free  from  disesse  for  a  long  time.33-37 

The  following  persons  should  drink  Ghee  : — 

They  that  have  constitutions  characterised  by  a  predominance 
of  wind  and  bile  ;  they  that  are  desirous  of  strengthening  their  eye¬ 
sight  ;  they  that  are  wounded ;  they  that  have  been  weakened 
by  disease  ;  they  that  are  advanced  in  years  ;  they  that  are  young 
in  years  ;  they  that  are  weak  ;  they  that  are  desirous  of  lengthening 
their  lives ;  they  that  are  desirous  of  improving  their  strength, 
complexion,  and  voice ;  they  that  desire  nourishment ;  they  that 
desire  brilliancy  of  complexion,  or  energy,  or  vigor  of  memory,  or 
strength  of  understanding,  or  a  powerful  digestive  fire  ;  or  great 
intelligence,  or  strength  of  the  senses  ;  and  they  that  are  afflicted 
with  burns,  or  with  wounds  inflicted  with  the  aid  of  weapons,  or  with 
poison.38'40 

The  following  persons  should  drink  oil,  and  drink  it  in  the 
cold  season  : — 

They  whose  phlegm  has  been  excited  and  who  have  abundance 
of  fat ;  they  whose  necks  and  abdomens  are  lax  and  large  ;  *  they 
that  are  afflicted  with  diseases  of  the  wind  ;  they  in  whose  consti¬ 
tutions  the  wind  predominates  ;  they  who  desire  strength  of  body, 
or  its  leanness,  or  lightness,  or  hardness,  or  durability  of  limbs,  or 
coolness  and  softness  and  thinness  of  the  skin  ;  they  that  have  worms 
in  their  stomachs  ;  they  that  labour  under  constipation  of  bowels  ; 
and  they  that  have  sores  in  their  intestines.41'43 

Amongst  those  for  whom  oily  substances  should  be  prescribed 
the  following  are  the  persons  that  should  drink  fat : — 

They  that  are  constantly  exposed  to  the  wind  and  the  sun  ;  they 
whose  constitutions  are  dry  ;  they  who  have  been  reduced  by  bearing 

*  ‘  Chala’  is  lax,  i.e.,  exceedingly  fleshy.  —  T, 


144 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


heavy  burthens  or  by  excessive  walking  ;  they  whose  vital  seed  or 
blood  has  been  dried  up  ;  they  whose  phlegm  and  fat  have  been 
reduced  ;  *  they  whose  bones,  joints,  nerves,  sinews,  vitals,  and 
stomach,  have  much  pain  ;  they  whose  ducts  and  other  hollow 
parts  of  the  body  are  filled  with  strong  wind ;  and  they  that  are 
habituated  to  the  drinking  of  fat.44'46 

Amongst  those  that  deserve  the  administration  of  oily  substan¬ 
ces  the  following  are  those  that  should  drink  marrow  : — 

They  that  have  a  strong  digestive  fire  ;  they  that  are  constantly 
exposed  to  the  drain  of  exertion  and  labour  ;  they  that  are  capable 
of  eating  much  ;  they  that  are  inured  to  the  administration  of  oily 
substances ;  they  that  labour  under  disorders  of  the  wind  ; 
and  they  that  have  constipitated  bowels.47 

I  have  thus  told  thee  for  what  men  what  class  of  oily  substances 
should  be  prescribed. 

The  periods  for  which  oily  substances  should  be  taken  are  two, 
viz.,  seven  nights  and  three  nights. 

The  persons  for  whom  oily  substances  should  be  prescribed  are 
those  that  require  copious  perspiration  ;  those  whose  blood  should 
be  corrected  by  emetics  and  purgativers  ;  those  whose  bodies  are 
dry;  those  that  have  disorders  of  the  wind;  and  those  that  are 
habituated  to  physical  exercises,  alcoholic  drinks,  and  sexual 
congress.49 

Oily  substances  should  not  be  administered  unto  those  whose 
constitutions  require  to  be  made  dry  without  the  application  of 
emetics  and  purgatives  and  errhines.  They  should  not  also  be  ad¬ 
ministered  unto  those  that  have  become  divested  of  phlegm  and 
fat.  They  also  from  whose  mouths  and  anal  and  sexual  canals 
discharges  take  place  ;  they  whose  digestive  fire  is  always  weak  ; 
they  that  are  always  thirsty  ;  they  that  are  subject  to  swoons  ;  they 
that  are  quick  with  child  ;  they  whose  palates  have  become  dry  ;  they 
that  have  no  appetite;  they  that  have  nausea;  they  that  have 
diseased  stomachs  ;  they  that  are  afflicted  with  dysentery  or  with 

*  In  1  nisphita  the  particle  ‘  ni  ’  is  equivalent  to  ‘  na.  ’  Hence  the  componud 
means  “  Kshina-kapha  ’  and  ‘  kshina-medas.’ — T. 


C  HA  RA  KA -SA  MHI TA. 


143 


poison  ;  they  that  are  weak ;  they  that  are  very  emaciated ;  they 
with  whom  such  substances  do  not  at  all  agree  ;  and  they  that  are 
drunkards,  are  persons  unto  whom  Oils  should  not  be  administered. 
Nor  should  they  be  prescribed  for  persons  when  errhines  and 
enemata  have  been  administered;  These  men  become  afflicted  with 
serious  diseases  if  they  drink  Oils.50'5® 

Hardness  and  dryness  of  stools,  abnormal  state  of  the  wind, 
weakness  of  the  digestive  fire,  and  roughness  and  dryuess  of 
the  skin,  are  symptoms  which  indicate  that  the  adminstration  of 
Oils  has  not  been  productive  of  beneficial  results.*3  4 

Restoration  of  the  wind  to  its  normal  condition,  a  blazing 
digestive  fire,  oily  and  soft  stools,  and  softness  and  smoothness  of 
the  skin,  are  the  indications  of  one  in  whose  case  the  administration 
of  Oils  has  been  successful.55 

Paleness  (of  complexion),  heaviness  and  inactivity  (of  the 
limbs),  the  presence  of  undigested  food  in  the  stools,  drowsiness, 
disgust  for  food  and  drink,  and  vomiting,  are  indications  of  an 
over-adminstration  (of  Oils).00 

One  desirous  of  taking  Oils  the  next  day  should,  as  far  as 
authority  goes,  take  on  the  previous  day  food  that  is  liquid  and 
warm,  that  emits  no  secretion,  that  is  not  very  oily,  and  that 
is  unmixed.* 07 

When  one  feels  hungry  and  longs  for  food,  one  should,  at 
the  time  of  gratifying  that  hunger,  take  mild  oils.  When, 
again,  Oils  are  taken  for  purifying  ( the  blood  and  other  elements), 
one  should  take  them  when  the  food  taken  on  the  previous  night 


*  One  of  the  questions  asked  has  been, — What  are  the  indications  of  a  successful 
administration  of  oils?  In  this  Verse  that  question  is  answered.  Indeed,  this  Verse 
points  out  the  symptoms  of  ‘ayoga’  of  ‘sneha.  ’ — T. 

+  This  is  the  answer  to  the  question, — ‘  What  is  beneficial  for  one  to  take  before 
the  administration  of  Oils  ?  ’  ‘  Anabhishyandi  ’  is  food  from  which,  when  kept,  nothing 

is  secreted  in  the  form  of  impurities.  ‘  Sankirna  ’  is  food  prepared  by  mixing  two  or 
three  or  more  substances.  The  reverse  of  this  is  beneficial  in  the  case  of  one  who  wishes 
to  take  Oils  the  next  day, —  T. 


19 


146 


CHAR  AKA  -SA  MH I TA 


has  been  digested  and  the  hour  comes  for  taking  food  again.*68 

One  that  has  taken  Oils  and  digested  them  already  should  use' 
warm  water  (for  purposes  of  both  drinking  and  bathing),  should 
conduct  oneself  like  a  BrahmachcLrin  ( i.  e.,  abstain  in  particular 
from  sexual  congress  ),  should  never  sleep  at  day  time  and  take  to 
night-keeping,  should  never  suppress  the  urgings,  when  they  become 
pronounced,  of  stools  and  urine  and  wind  and  eructations,  and 
should  avoid  physical  exercises,  loud  speech,  indulgence  in  wrath 
and  grief,  exposure  to  cold  and  heat,  and  all  places  that  are 
breezy.50'60 

Upon  a  person  taking  Oils  before  those  taken  previously  have 
been  digested,  many  grave  disorders  are  seen  to  arise  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  such  improper  administration  of  Oils.f  61 

When  Oils  are  administered  for  purifying  purposes,  one  whose 
stools  are  soft  is  sufficiently  oiled  in  three  nights.  As  regards 
persons  whose  stools  are  hard,  they  are  sufficiently  oiled  in  seven 
nights.  J  62 

Treacle,  juice  of  sugarcane,  milk  from  which  the  butter  has 
been  extracted,  churned  curds,  rice  and  milk  boiled  with  sugar, 
rice  and  sesame  boiled  with  sugared  milk,  Ghee,  the  nuts  of  Gme- 
lina  arborea,  decoction  of  the  triple  fruit  (  viz.,  Terminalia  chebula, 
Phyllanthus  emblica,  and  Terminalia  bellerica),  juice  of  Vitis 
Vinifera,  juice  of  Salvadora  Persica,  warm  water,  and  newly- 
distilled  wines, — these  are  the  articles  that  are  used  for  purging 
men  of  soft  stools  after  the  administration  of  Oils.6* 

As  regards  men  with  hard  stools,  the  above-mentioned  articles 


*  In  his  Commentary,  Kaviraj  Gangadhara  observes  that  Verse  58  answers  the 
question  as  to  what  should  be  done  thff  next  day  by  one  that  has  taken  Oils  on  the 
previous  day. — T. 

t  Both  ‘  nare  ’  and  ‘  pratibhunjane  ’  are  locatives,  the  locative  termination  of  the 
next  word  having  been  dropped  by  rule  of  Sandhi.  Hence,  as  the  Commentator  explains, 
the  construction  is  ‘  sneham  pitwa  (  aparam  sneham  )  patibhunjane  nare  &c.’  The 
reading  ‘narah  ’  is  a  blunder. — T. 

J  The  Commentator  observes  that  stools  are  to  be  examined  after  administration 
of  Oils.  If  soft,  the  administration  is  to  be  continued  for  only  three  nights.  If  the  stools 
emain  hard,  the  longer  period  is  laid  down. — T. 


GHARAKA-SA  mhita. 


147 


Jail  to  purge  them.  0a  the  other  hand,  by  administering  these 
articles  to  one  whose  stools  are  hard,  chronic  and  lienteric 
diarrhoea  is  brought  about  accompanied  with  excited  wind.*84 

One  whose  stools  are  soft  owns  a  Grahani  which  is  charac¬ 
terised  by  excess  of  bile,  deficiency  of  phlegm,  and  dearth  of  wind. 
Hence,  such  a  person  is  fit  for  administration  of  purgatives. f6  5 

He  whose  Grahani  is  characterised  by  an  excess  of  bile  and 
whose  digestive  fire  is  strong,  succeeds,  by  the  strength  of  that  fire, 
in  speedily  consuming  the  Oils  drunk  by  him.  That  digestive  fire, 
having  consumed  the  measure  of  Oil  that  has  been  taken,  becomes 
(more)  powerful  and  then  weakens  the  dhatu  called  Ojas.  That 
fire,  strenthened  by  the  oils  taken,  excites  great  thirst  with  diverse 
other  painful  symptoms.  The  heaviest  food  that  one  may  take  is 
not  competent  to  quench  the  fire  that  is  strengthened  by  the  ad¬ 
ministration  of  Oils.  Indeed,  if  such  a  man  fails  to  obtain  at  such 
a  time  cold  water,  he  is  sure  to  burn  as  a  snake  of  virulent  poison 
burns  with  the  fire  of  its  own  poison  when  kept  confined  in  a  hole 
or  basket  of  straw.Jee-es 

If  one,  after  taking  Oils,  feels  thirsty  before  they  are  digested, 
one  should  be  made  to  throw  them  out  (by  the  administration 
of  some  emetic).  If  by  this  method  the  whole  quantity  be  not 
ejected,  one  should  then  drink  cold  water  and  eat  dry  food  and 
once  more  seek  to  throw  out  (with  or  without  the  aid  of  an 
emetic). « » 


*  In  Verses  62-64,  the  softness  and  hardness  of  stools  refer  to  softness  and  hard¬ 
ness  after  administration  of  Oils.  —  T. 

t  By  the  word  ‘  Grahani  ’  Hindu  physicians  understand  a  certain  duct  in  the 
abdomen.  It  lies,  says  Susruta,  between  the  ‘  amacaya  ’  and  the  ‘pakkafaya.’  When 
this  duct  is  affected  with  sores  and  white  flux  is  discharged,  the  disease  is  also  called 
by  the  same  name. — T. 

+  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  if  a  man  whose  digestion  is  very  strong  takes  Oils,  these 
are  quickly  digested.  The  digestive  fire,  in  consequence  of  this,  becomes  more  power¬ 
ful  than  before  and  one  feels  very  thirsty.  When  this  happens,  one  should  not  take 
heavy  food,  but  only  cool  water  is  the  remedy.  Unless  one  takes  cool  water  at  such  a 
time,  one  is  sure  to  burn  in  pain.  The  analogy  of  the  snake  is  very  doubtful.  Whether 
the  snake,  when  confined  within  a  hole  or  a  straw  basket,  actually  burns  with  its  virulent 
poison  or  not,  is  more  than  one  can  say. — T. 


148 


CI1A  RA  KA  -SA  MHITA . 


One  should  not  take  Ghee  when  one’s  bile  only  has  been  ex-> 
cited,  especially  when  one’s  bile,  as  existing  with  undigested  food, 
has  been  excited.  Ghee  taken  under  such  circumstances  would 
spread  over  the  whole  body  and  bring  about  death  itself.  70 

Stupefaction,  nausea,  epistasis  or  suppression  of  urine, 
fever,  partial  paralysis,  coma,  all  the  varieties  of  skin-disease,  itches, 
phlorosis,  anaemia,  and  jaundice,  inflammation,  hemorrhoids,  thirst, 
cramps  in  the  abdomen,  diseases  of  the  Grahani,  shrivelling  of  the 
skin,  stoppage  of  speech,  sharp  pains,  and  diseases  of  the  stomach, 
arise  from  improper  administration  of  Oils. 71-73 

In  these  diseases  brought  about  by  improper  administration 
of  Oils,  the  remedies  laid  down  are  vomiting  by  administering 
emetics,  the  production  of  perspiration  (by  vapours),  abstention 
from  food  till  the  Oils  taken  are  digested.  Indeed,  in  the  case  of 
each  disease,  its  weakness  or  violence  shouldbejudged,  and  vomiting 
should  be  resorted  to  by  the  application  of  proper  emetics.  The 
administration  of  vinous  spirits  also,  that  are  manufactured  from 
butter-milk,  the  use  of  dry  food  and  drinks,  of  ( the  eight  kinds 
of  animal)  urine,  and:  pf  decoction  ofthe  three  fruits  (OT£t.,Terminalia 
chebula.or  Chebulic  myrobalans,  Terminalia  bellerica,  and  Phyllan- 
thus  emblica),  are  also  resorted  to. 7  3-71 

If  a  person  takes  Oils  unseasonably,  or  those  that  are  unsuitable 
to  his  constitution,  or  in  measure  that  exceeds  what  is  proper,  or 
repeatedly,  he  is  sure  to  fall  into  distress  in  consequence  of  such 
improper  adminstration  of  Oils.7s 

One  who,  after  having  taken  Oils,  wishes  to  take  a  purgative, 
should  wait  for  three  days,  eating  during  that  period  food  that  is 
oily,  liquid,  and  warm,  and  that  is  mixed  with  the  juice  of  meat.*76 


*  This  Verse  is  read  and  interpreted  differently  by  Kaviraj  Gangadhar  in  his  edition. 
Instead  of  ‘  Praskandanam  yastuh  ’  he  reads  ‘  Praskandano-jantuh  ’  He  takes 
>  Prakandanah  ”  to  imply  ‘snehapanat-prachalitah  san,’  which  he  further  explains  as 
‘  snehapanam-vihaya.’  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  is  in  error.  In 
this  Verse,  the  author  speaks  of  ‘  Praskandanam’  as  in  the  next  of  ‘  Prachcchardanam.’ 
That  ‘  praskandanam,’  therefore,  implies  a  purgative  as  ‘  prachcchardanam  ’ 
an  emetic,  seems  to  be  very  plain.  Chakrapanidatta  adopts  the  reading  ‘  Praskandu- 
ham  yastuh,’  and  ‘  snehavat  ’  in  the  second  line  instead  uf  ‘snehancha’  as  Gangadhar 


Cli  A  RA  KA-SA  MU  /  TA, 


149 


One  who,  after  having  taken  Oils,  wishes  to  take  an  emetic, 
should  wait  for  one  day  after  having  eaten  the  same  kind  of  food 
(  as  is  mentioned  in  the  last  Verse  )  during  that  day. 

When  Oils  are  administered  of  an  unmixed  kind,  the  conduct 
to  be  observed  by  the  patient  should  be  like  that  of  one  who  has 
taken  a  purgative.77 

In  respect  of  persons  unto  whom  Oils  are  repulsive,  of  persons 
that  are  accustomed  to  take  Oils,  of  them  that  pass  soft  stools,  of 
them  that  are  of  delicate  constitutions  (  so  as  to  be  unable  to  bear 
a  heavy  strain  of  any  kind),  and  of  them  that  are  habituated-  to  the 
use  of  alcoholic  drink,  Oils  mixed  with  other  substances  should  be 
prescribed.78 

The  broth  of  Lavas,  of  Tittiris,  of  peacocks,  of  ducks  and  geese, 
of  pork,  of  fowl  (cocks  and  hens),  of  beef,  of  goats,  of  sheep,  and 
of  fish,  is  beneficial  if  mixed  with  Oils.79 

Yava  (a),  Kola  ( b ),  Kulattha  (c),  the  different  kinds  of  Oil, 
with  molasses  and  sugar,  Dadima  ( d '),  curds  and  black  pepper,  long 
pepper,  and  dry  ginger,  these  in  brief  are  the  articles  that  may 
be  mixed  with  the  several  kinds  of  broth  named  above.f80 

Sesame  seeds,  taken  before  dinner,  with  Oils  and  the  inspissated 
juice  of  the  sugarcane,  oilifies  the  body.  Such  Kricaras  also 
as  are  very  oily,  taken  before  dinner,  produce  the  same  effect. 


kaviraja.  The  fact  is,  the  administration  of  Oils  is  no  longer  resorted  to  and,  therefore, 
the  error  is  immaterial  so  far  as  practice  is  concerned. — T. 

+  The  sense  is  that  the  broth  of  these  animals  should  be  mixed  with  Oils  if  mixed 
O  Is  have  to  be  prescribed.  Lavas  are  a  sort  of  quail,  viz. ,  the  Perdix  Chinensis.  Tittiri 
is  the  Francoline  Partridge. — T. 

(a)  Hordeum  hexasiichum. 

(b)  Zizyphus  Jujuba. 

(c)  Dolichos  biflorus.  , 

(d)  Punica  Granatum. 

+  The  sense  is  that  these  are  some  of  the  articles  that  may  be  mixed  with  the 
broth  which  is  to  be  mixed  with  the  Oils’prescribed.  The  gruel  of  the  first  of  these  is  to 
be  taken.  The  juice  of  .the  Punica  Granatum  is  to  be  used.  The  spices  are  to  be 
powdered.  —  T. 


150  GHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

Similarly,  gruels  with  abundance  of  sesame  seeds,  act  in  the 
same  way.*81 

One  whose  body  has  become  dry  should  drink  wine  mixed 
with  the  inspissated  juice  of  the  sugarcane  and  powdered  ginger 
and  oil  of  mustard,  and  after  the  wine  thus  taken  has  been  digested, 
one  should  eat  food  mixed  with  roasted  meat.f82 

When  one’s  wind  has  been  excited,  one  should,  with  the 
barm  of  the  wine  called  Varuni,  drink  oil  of  mustard  seeds,  or  fa,t 
or  marrow ;  or  milk  with  the  inspissated  juice  of  the  sugarcane. 
By  doing  this,  one  becomes  sufficiently  oiled. J83 

By  drinking  warm  milk  as  it  comes  out  of  the  udders  (  of  the 
cow),  mixing  it  with  Oils  and  sugar,  or  by  drinking  the  cream  of 
curds,  mixed  with  the  inspissated  juice  of  the  sugarcane,  one  be¬ 
comes  sufficiently  oiled.81 

The  five  ( well-known )  substances,  each  of  the  measure  of 
two  Palas,  should  be  drunk,  ft  drunk,  the  beverage  will  oilify  the 
drinker.  Then,  again,  the  Payasa  made  by  boiling  Masha  (a)  in 
milk  and  which  is  known  to  be  very  oily,  if  drunk,  will  oilify  the 
drinker.il85 


*  *  Purvam  ’  is  explained  by  the  Commentators  as  implying  ‘before  dinner’  i.e,, 

before  taking  substantial  food,  or  while  the  stomach  is  empty.  ‘  Kriyara  ’  is  a  kind  of 
pudding  prepared  with  milk  and  sesame-seeds  and  Sugar.  ‘  Kamvalika  ’  is  a  kind  of 
gruel.  ICrifaras  that  are  very  oily  are  gruels  of  sesame  and  Phaseolus  Roxburghii — T. 

t  The  three  things,  viz.,  inspissated  juice  of  sugarcane,  powdered  ginger,  and 
mustard  oil,  should  all  be  mixed  with  wine.  ‘  Bhrita  ’  is  ‘  Bhatitrikrita  ’  or 
roasted.—  T. 

J  The  sense  is  this :  when  one’s  wind  becomes  excited,  one  becomes  dry.  At 
such  a  time,  one  should  drink  barm  of  Varuni  wine  with  either  mustard  oil,  or  animal  fat, 
or  animal  marrow  ;  or,  one  may,  at  such  a  time,  take  milk  with  the  inspissated  juice 
of  the  sugarcane. — T. 

||  In  this  Verse  two  separate  drinks  are  spoken  of.  The  first  drink  is  called  by 
the  name  of  ‘  Pancha-prasritaki.’  The  second  drink  is  the  kind  of  ‘  Payasa  ’  indicated. 
( Peya  is  feminine,  ‘  payasah  ’  is  masculine).  ‘  Prasritaki  ’  implies  a  measure  of  2 
Palas,  or  about  a  handful.  The  five  articles,  each  of  whifh  is  to  be  taken  of  this 
measure,  are,  as  explained  in  the  next  Verse,  Ghee,  mustard  oil,  fat,  marrow,  and  rice, 
«  Payasa’  is  a  kind  of  pudding,— 2', 


C1IA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


1 51 


A  drink  made  of  Ghee,  mustard  oil,  fat,  marrow,  and  the  cold 
infusion  of  rice,  each  of  the  measure  of  two  Palas,  is  called  the  five¬ 
fold  Prasritaki.  This  drink  should  be  taken  by  one  that  is  desirous 
of  oilifying  one’s  body.80 

One  afflicted  with  leprosy  or  dropsy,  or'  urinary  affictions, 
should  not,  in  oilifying  one’s  body,  use  the  meat  of  domestic 
animals  or  of  those  that  belong  to  marshy  regions,  or  of  those  that 
belong  to  water.  Such  a  person  should  not  also  use  molasses  or 
curds  or  milk  or  sesame  seeds.  For  persons  afflicted  with  such 
diseases,  such  articles  as  may  be  beneficial  to  their  respective 
constitutions  should  be  boiled  with  the  unmixed  Oils  that  may  be 
prescribed  for  them  and  thus  should  the  physician  correct 
the  Oils  he  is  to  administer  by  boiling  them  with  the  juice  of 
Draksha,  Amlaka,  curds,  and  Amla,  mixing  the  corrected  Oils  with 
the  three  spices.*87'88. 

The  juice  of  Yava,  of  Kola,  and  of  Kulattha,  milk,  wine,  and 
curds,  and  the  Ghee  of  milk,  — these  should  be  boiled  together  for 
producing  a  Ghee  that  is  regarded  the  best  for  purposes  of 
oilifying  the  body .f  8  9 

Oil,  marrow,  fat,  and  Ghee,  corrected  by  being  boiled  with 
the  juice  of  Vadara  and  the  infusion  of  the  triple  fruit,  should  be 
administered  in  diseases  of  women  in  respect  of  the  genital 
organ  and  of  men  in  respect  of  the  vital  seed.j;90 

*  The  Oils  are  to  be  corrected  in  this  way  for  persons  afflicted  with  the  diseases 
mentioned  in  the  previous  Verse.  The  Commentators  point  out  that  the  Oils  are  to  oe 
boiled  either  with  Pippali  or  with  Haritaki,  or  with  the  infusion  of  the  tr  ple  fruit,  or 
with  the  juice  of  Draksha  and  Amlaka  and  curds  and  Amla  mixed  together.  Pippali 
is  Piper  longum,  syn.  Chavica  Roxburghii.  Haritaki  is  Terminalia  chebula ; 
Draksha  is  Vitis  Vinifera.  (  The  dried  fruits  are  called  Kismiss.)  Amlaka  is  Phyllanlhiis 
emblica.  Amla  here  refers  to  the  juice  of  any  kind  of  sour  fruit  or  vegetable.  —  T. 

j-  The  juice  of  the  three  things  mentioned  and  the  three  other  articles,  forming 
altogether  a  tale  of  six,  should  be  boiled  with  Ghee  or  milk.  ‘  Kshirasarpi  ’  is 
‘sarpi’  from  ‘kshira.  ’  Yava  is  Hordcum  hexastichum  ;  Kola  is  Zizyphns  Jujuba  ) 
and^Kulattha  is  Dolichos  biflora,  Roxb.—T. 

J  The  Commentators  explain  that  the  juice  of  Vadara  ( Zizyphus  Jujuba')  and 
infusion  of  the  triple  fruit,  should  all  be  mixed  together.  This  liquid  then  should  be 
boiled  either  with  each  of  the  four  articles  mentioned,  viz.,  oil  or  marrow  or  fat  or  Ghee  • 
or  it  may  be  boiled  with  all  the  four  oily  articles.  The  physician  should  exercise  his 
discretion  in  prescribing  the  kind  of  the  five  snehas  to  be  thus  got.  —  7. 


152 


CHRA  RA-SA  M  HIT  A. 


As  a  piece  of  dry  cloth  sucks  only  a  limited  quantity  of  water 
so  that  if  more  water  be  poured  upon  it,  the  excess,  without  being 
sucked  in,  escapes  and  flows  away,  after  the  same  manner,  Oils, 
when  administered  in  proper  measure,  are  assimilated  by  the 
digestive  fire,  but  when  administered  in  overdose,  they  escape 
from  the  body  (in  the  purging,  without  producing  the  benefits 
desired).01  As  water,  when  quickly  poured  upon  a  clod  of  earth, 
drenches  it  only  partially  and  flows  away  without  dissolving  it  at 
all,  after  the  same  manner,  Oils  taken  quickly,  escape  from  the 
system  (in  the  form  of  purging,  without  producing  the  result 
desired,  viz.,  oilifying  and  cooling  the  body).*92 

The  diverse  kinds  of  Oils  mentioned  before,  when  mixed  with 
salts,  succeed  in  quickly  oilifying  the  body,  Since,  mixed  with 
salts,  they  acquire  the  virtue  of  expelling  diverse  kinds  of  secre¬ 
tions  from  the  system,  become  soft  without  retaining  their  charac¬ 
ter  for  dryness,  Succeed  in  penetrating  into  the  most  subtile  parts 
of  the  body,  become  warm,  and  all-pervading  or  extensively 
diffusive.t93 

Oils  should  be  administered  first.  After  this  should  heat  be 
administered  for  producing  perspiration.  For  one  unto  whom 
both  Oils  and  heat  have  beeii  administered,  the  procceses  should 
be  resorted  to  of  purging  and  vomiting.94 


*  In  these  two  Verses,  the  Rishi  explains  a  point  not  occurring  in  the  questions 
addressed  to  him  by  his  disciples.  In  the  first  Verse  he  points  out  that  an  overdose  of 
Oil  cannot  be  assimilated.  The  digestive  fire  fails  to  consume  it.  In  the  second  Verse 
he  points  out  that  a  rapid  succession  of  doses  proves  futile.  A  clod  of  earth  can  be 
•dissolved  by  a  certain  quantity  of  water.  This  water,  or  even  much  more,  when  poured 
upon  it,  drenches  the  clod  very  partially  and  then  escapes  or  flows  away  without  pro¬ 
ducing  the  intended  result,  viz.,  dissolution  of  the  clod.  A  rapid  succession  of  doses, 
similarly,  without  being  able  to  sufficiently  oilify  the  body  or  make  it  cool,  escapes  from 
the  system.  Medicated  Oils  and  Ghee  are  often  administered  as  mild  purgatives. 
A  rapid  succession  of  doses,  without  producing  benefit,  escapes  from  the  body. — T. 

t  All  kinds  of  Oils  are  directed  to  be  mixed  with  salts.  ‘Ushnam  ’  is  warm  ; 
hence,  the  Commentator  points  out,  they  aid  digestion.  ‘Vyavayi  ’  does  not  mean 
‘increases  virility  ’  but  only  *  all-pervading.’  In  consequence  of  being  all-pervading,  they 
succeed  in  quickly  oilifying  the  body. — T. 


NOTICE. 


The  English  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  will 
be  issued  in  successive  fascicules  of  4  forms,  Royal 
octavo,  each;  12  fascicules  will  be  issued  every  year. 
Under  favorable  circumstances,  the  number  of  fasci¬ 
cules  or  the  number  of  forms  in  each  fascicule  may  be 
increased.  For  subscribers  in  India  paying  in  advance 
the  charge  is  Rs.  32  for  the  whole  work.  For  sub¬ 
scribers  in  Europe  and  America,  the  charge  is  in 
advance,  post  free.  The  price  for  each  part  is 
one  Rupee.  The  arrear  rate  is  Rs.  40  (in  India)  pay¬ 
able  (if  subscribers  wish)  in  instalments  of  Rs.  10  each. 
Remittances  to  be  made  to  the  Publisher, .  200  Corn¬ 
wallis  Street,  Calcutta,  by  drafts  on  Indian  Banks  or 
Postal  money-orders. 


The  following  publications  relating  to  Hindu  Medical 
Science  may  be  had  at  No.  200,  Cornwallis'  Street , 
Calcutta,  India. 

1.  Charaka-Samhita  in  original,  with  Chakrapanidat- 
ta’s  Commentary  ;  edited  by  Pandit  Avinash 
Chandra  Kaviratna  (published  in  Devanagara 
character  in  successive  fascicules)  Price  Rs.  20 
in  advance. 

2.  Susruta-Samhita  (in  original)  with  Dallanacharya’s 
Commentary,  edited  by  Pundit  Avinash  Chandra 
Kaviratna  (published  in  Devat  agara  character  in 
successive  fascicules).  Price  Rs.  19  in  advance. 

8.  Bengali  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  with  the 
original  text  (complete)  in  the  Bengali  character. 
Price  Rs  12. 

4.  Hindi  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive 
fascicules''.  Price.  Rs.  16  in  advance, 

5.  Bengali  translation  of  Susruta-Samhita  (published 
in  successive  fascicules).  Price  Rs.  10  in  advance. 

6.  Hindi  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive 
fascicules  .  Price  Rs.  15  in  advance. 

7.  Chihrtsa  Samniilani.  (a  monthly  medical  journal 
in  Bengali).  Subscription  in  advance  for  one  year 
Rs.  3-6  ;  for  the  poorer  classes,  Rs.  2-6,  (Back 
volumes  for  seven  years  may  be  had  for  Rs.  21,  or 
Rs.  3  for  each  volume  embracing  12  numbers.) 


PART  VI. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH \ 


Published  by 

AVlNASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Caharaka  Samhita  and  of  Susruta  Samhita 

(  in  original)  .WITH  COMMENTARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND 

Hindi  translator  of  ChAraka  Samhita  and 
of  Susruta  Samhita;  editor  of  Chikitsa- 
Sammilani  (  Medical  Journal  in 
Bengali) ;  Practitioner  of 
the  Hindu-SYstem 
of  Medicine, 

&c.,  &c>,  &c. 


Cnkidta ; 

Printed  by  D,  C.  Dass  &  Co.( 
"Corinthian  pRESSj”  33,  New  China  BA2AR 

Published  at 
goo,  Cornwallis  Street, 


(  The  fight  of  translation  is  reserved-. ) 


<  37  ) 

(The,  Universal  Medical  Journal ,  Philadelphia, 
February  28th,  1898.) 

The  first  four  fasciculi  of  this  valuable  result  of 
painstaking  labor  have  reached  us.  Of  all  the  works 
constituting  the  medical  literature  of  ancient  and  medi¬ 
aeval  India,  that  most  universally  studied  by  the  Hindu 
profession,  is  Charaka-Samhita,  written  about  nine  cen¬ 
turies  ago.  The  richness  of  its  contents,  which  led 
Dr.  Sircar  to  remark  before  an  English  audience  that 
“  there  is  much  in  it  that  even  an  accomplished  physi¬ 
cian  will  profit  by  learning,”  and  the  fact  that  the  Hindu 
system  of  medicine  was  not  faithfully  pourtrayed  by  the 
English  versions,  induced  Pundit  Abinash  to  undertake 
the  translation  which  forms  the  subject  of  this  review. 
That  ancient  books  contain  much  that  is  of  value  hid¬ 
den  from  the  estimate  and  appreciation  of  students, 
hardly  expresses  with  sufficient  force  their  relative  posi¬ 
tion  as  regards  our  progressive  age.  If  we  compare 
asepticism,  that  greatest  of  modern  contributions  to  the 
welfare  of  suffering  humanity,  with  the  procedures  in 
vogue  among  the  Zullus  for  centuries,— -earliest  possible 
obturation  of  all  wounds,  subsequent  charcoal  treatment, 
and  results  far  outstripping  those  obtained  by  European 
physicians ;  the  Siamese  method  of  protecting  the  system 
against  small-pox,  in  existence  before  the  fifteenth  cen¬ 
tury, — another  of  the  greatest  of  modern  achievements ; 
and  the  Japanese  manuscripts,  prepared  over  three 
.centuries  ago,  giving  full  description  of  the  obstetric 
forceps  and  the  rules  for  its  manipulation  ( introduced 
by  Dutch  physicians  in  the  reign  of  Tokuawa  ),  we  can 
hardly  deny'  the  value  of  ancient  records,  of  hidden* 


(  38  ) 


dusty  piles,  which,  unfortunately,  racial  prejudices  so 
often  seek  to  bury  in  the  tomb  of  scorn. 

The  Hindus,  less  engaged  in  efforts  to  develop  the 
mechanical  commodities  which  constitute  the  greater 
part  of  our  civilization,  cannot  but  have  contributed  much 
to  the  art  of  healing.  They  may  have  entered  many  false 
channels  of  thought  ( which  proclivity  has  not  been 
absent  from  Western  medicine),  but  a  careful  perusal  of 
Pundit  Abinash’s  work  will  prove  beyond  a  doubt  that 
their  mental  labor  was  not  sterile. 

Charaka’s  fanciful  pathology  and  quaint  therapeutics 
simply  accord  with  the  local  customs  and  belief  of  the 
period  during  which  they  were  formulated.  Ancient  civi¬ 
lization,  which  has  furnished  so  many  hints  to  modern 
art,  would  likewise  inspire  us,  were  its  medical  lore  read 
in  the  light  of  modern  research.  In  a  mass  pf  rubbish 
-could  be  found  many  hints,  much  food  for  thought,  many 
seeds  then  and  now  deprived  of  proper  attributes  for 
development,  but  which  time  will  some  day  render  fruit¬ 
ful. 

Pundit  Abinash  is  rendering  a  great  service,  not 
only  to  medical  men  who  take  ap  interest  in  historical 
medicine,  but  also  to  Sanskrit  scholars.  It  is  the  author’s 
firm  belief  that  if  his  work  ‘f  succeeds  in  attracting  the 
attention  of  scientific  men  in  Europe  and  America,  it  is 
sure  to  produce  many  important  changes  is  modern 
systems  of  treating  disease.  .  .  .  Charaka  is  a  highly 
philosophical  work.  Its  deliverances  on  many  subjects, 
unsurpassed  for  brevity  and  weight,  are,  like  those  of 
Bacon,  extremely'suggestive.  Locked  in  a  difficult  tongue, 
those  hints,  have  for  ages  lain  unutilized.  Whether 


(  39  ) 

employed  in  teaching  students  or  practicing  their  system, 
Hindu  physicians  have  moved  too  much  in  a  groove. 
The  vigorous  intellect  of  the  West,  by  taking  up  those 
hints,  may  produce  results  of  the  utmost  importance  to 
Science  and  the  sacred  cause  of  alleviating  misery.” 
We  bespeak  for  him  the'  deep  appreciation  and  en¬ 
couragement  he  trulydeserves. 

C.  E.  Sajous. 


(The  Apothecary,  Chicago ,  December ,  1892.) 

Charaka  Samhita. — India  has  a  voluminous  medical 
literature.  One  of  the  most  ancient  and  best  known 
and  studied  of  the  Hindu  works  on  medicine  is  “Charaka 
Samhita,”  which  cannot  be  less  than  a  thousand  years  old, 
and  is  believed  to  be  much  older.  Charaka  was  a  Hindu 
sage,  and  his  work — Charaka-Samhita — is  based  upon 
a  treatise  of  a  pupil  of  Punarvasu,  of  the  race  of  Atri. 
The  Vedas  frequently  mention  the  names  of  Atri  and 
Punarvasu.  The  Ayurveda  (Science  of  Life)  was  obtained 
by  Bharadwaja  from  Indra,  “  the  chief  of  the  Celestials.” 
Punarvasu  got  it  from  Bharadwaja  and  communicated 
it  to  his  pupils,  one  of  whom  was  Agniveca,  who  wrote 
the  treatise  (based  upon  the  Ayurveda)  which  Charaka 
edited  and  corrected,  and  which  is  known  by  the  title  of 
Charaka-Samhita  (the  sacred  writing  of  Charaka). 

This  ancient  work  is  translated' into  English  by  Pun¬ 
dit  Abinash  Chandra  Kaviratna  of  Calcutta,  to  whose 
kind  courtesy  the  editor  of  The  Apothecary  is  indebted 
'for  the  translation,  of  which  three  parts  (88  pages)  have 
so  far  been  issued. 


(  40  ) 

The  publication  of  this  English  translation  of  Charaka- 
Samhita  is  not  a  mercenary  venture,  but  a  labor  of  love 
?  on  the  part  of  Abinash  Chandra  Kaviratna,  who  desires 
to  make  known  to  the  modern  world  the  achievements  of 
the  Rising  in  medical  science,  and  who  says,  in  a  letter 
referring  to  his  work,  that  “  many  of  the  discoveries  of 
modern  science  were  well  known  to  the  sages  of  ancient 
India.” 

Physicians  and  pharmacists  will  find  the  work  intense¬ 
ly  interesting,  and  to  most  of  its  readers  the  contents 
will  prove  a  revelation,  for,  instead  of  being  a  collection 
r  of  mystic  exorcisms,  the  work  abounds  in  highly  philoso¬ 
phical  aphorisms,  and  its  materia  medica  puts  to  shame 
some  of  the  simples  and  compounds  extolled  by  Euro¬ 
pean  medical  writers  of  comparatively  modern  times.. 

The  medicines  mentioned  in  Charaka-Samhita  are 
principally  plant  drugs.  Among  them  we  find  Artemisia 
vulgaris ,  Calamus,  Glycyrrhiza,  Zingiber,  Azedarach, 
Ricinus  communis,  Hordeum,  Granatum,  Aconitum 
keterophytlum,  Asafcetida,  Gardamomum,  Solanum  nigrum 
Cinnamomum,  Piper  nigrum,  Piper  longum,  Catechu, 
Santalum  rubrum,  Cassia  fistula,  Sinapis,  Coriandrum, 
Santalum  album,  Crocus,  Caryopkyllus,  Cuminwn,  etc. 
Species  of  Strychnos,  Convolvulus,  Berberis  Asclepias, 
Solanum,  Rumex,  etc.,  are  also  enumerated.  Sulphate 
of  iron  is  among  the  inorganic  remedies. 

The  remedies  include  the  principal  classes  now  re¬ 
cognized,  as  tonic,  alterative,  febrifuges,  anodines,  stimu- 
ants,  sedatives,  emetics,  cathartics,  anthelmintics, 
diuretics,  diaphoretics,  expectorants,  astringents,  etc. 


(  41  ) 

The  pharmaceutical  preparations  mentioned  are  prin¬ 
cipally  the  infusions,  decoctions,  powders,  ointments  and 
plasters. 

The  hygienic  and  dietetic  rules  of  Charaka-Samhita 
are  remarkably  terse  and  generally  as  good  as  those  now- 
formulated. 


(The  Boston  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal, 
Thursday,  October,  1892.) 

Charaka-Samhita — The  medical  literature  of  an¬ 
cient  and  mediaeval  India  is  extensively  voluminous.  Be¬ 
sides  a  large  number  of  comprehensive  treatises  there  are 
also  several  abridgments.  It  appears  that  in  ancient  times 
all  professors  of  medicine  considered  it  incumbent  upon 
themselves  to  write  text-books  for  their  students,  or  at 
least  to  make  an  abridgment  of  somebody  else’s  treatise. 
The  oldest  of  these  treatises  and  the  most  famous  of 
them  is  “Charaka-Samhita,”  which  appeared  at  least 
as  early  as  the  ninth  or  tenth  century,  and  perhaps  very 
much  earlier.  The  translation  of  “  Charaka”  into 
English  has  been  undertaken  by  an  eminent  scholar, 
Abinash  Chandra  Kaviratna,  of  Calcutta,  who  is  himself  a> 
practitioner  of  the  Hindu  system  of  medicine. 

**#*-**■ 
Medical  abuses  similar  to  those  existing  to-day  must 
also  have  been  in  existence  some  centuries  ago,  for  we 
find  that  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  tells  his  disciples  that 
“  the  unknown  drug  is  like  poison,  or  weapon,  or  fire  or 
thunder,  while  a  well-known' drug  is  like  nectar.  Drugs 
unknown  by  name,  appearance  and  properties,  or  misap¬ 
plied  even  if  known;  produce  mischief.  Well  applied, 


(  42  ) 


a  yirulent  poison  may  become  an  excellent  medicine, 
while  a  medicine  misapplied  becomes  a  virulent  poison. 
A  thunderbolt  falling  upon  the  head  may  leave  a  hope  of 
life,  but  a  medicine  prescribed  by  an  ignorant  person 
will  not  leave  a  patient  a  hope  of  life.  It  is  better  to 
drink  the  poison  of  a  snake  or  the  solution  of  copper,  or 
swallow  red  hot  balls  of  iron,  than  assume  the  garb  of  a 
learned  man  and  take  food  and  drink  and  money  from 
one  afflicted  with  diseases  and  sobering  relief.” 

The  translation  of  this  vast  work  into  English  will 
bring  it  before  many  who.  previously  had  heard  of  it,  but 
were  unable  to  judge  of.its  merits.  The  book  is  of  great 
importance  both  to  Sanskrit  scholars  and  to  medical  men 
who  take  an  interest  in  the  historical  development  of 
medicine,  and  we  hope  to  lay  before  our  readers,  as  the 
translation  progresses,  any  points  of  special  interest  which 
it  may  contain. 


( Medical  Record,  New  Tori,  October  15th  1892.) 

Charaha-Samhita.— It  may  be  that  some  readers 
are  weary  at  times  of  the  medicine  of  to-day,  with 
its  arid  science,  its  disappointing  art,  and  the  politics  of 
its  prophylaxis.  If  so,  we  commend  them  to  “  Charaka- 
Samhita,”  a  treatise  on  Hindu  medicine  which  has 
recently  been  put  in  English  by  Dr.  Abinash  Chandra 
Kaviratna.  This  treatise  comes  in  parts  or  lessons,, 
and  takes  us  into  new  realms  of  medical  thought 
and  new  modes  of  scientific  teaching.  The  right  of  tran¬ 
slation  is  reserved,  but  we  can  give  a  little  idea,  perhaps, 
of  how  Lesson  III.  appears  in  modern  English. 


(  43  ) 

(Meyer  Brothers  Druggist,  St.  Louis,  January,  1893.) 

The  following  extracts  from  this  interesting  old  work- 
will  give  an  idea  of  its  contents. 


(University  Medical  Magazine,  Philadelphia,  May,  1892..) 

Charaka-Samhita. — To  the  great  mass  even  of 
the  learned  of  the  worldr  this  book,  clothed  in  ancient 
Sanskrit,  has  remained  a  sealed  volume  ;  but  now  the 
scholar,  Abinash  Chandra  Kaviratna,  through  the  lens  of 
translation,  is  about  to  diffuse  its  light  among  all  people. 

As  a  study  in  primeval  history,  as  a  shooting  forth  of 
the  germs  which  in  modern  times  have  blossomed  out 
into  great  gardens,  this  book  will  be  most  interesting  ; 
as  a  practical  guide  to  the  treatment  of  disease  we  venture 
to  doubt  its  value. 


( The  Medical  Fortnightly,  St.  Louis,  June  15th,  1892.) 

Ancient  Medicine  in  India. — Some  time  ago  Dr. 
Curtman,. of  this  city,  received  from  the  author,  Abinash 
Chandra  Kaviratna,  of  20a  Cornwallis  Street,  Calcutta, 
the  fi,rst  fascicule  of  an  interesting  work.  The  second 
fascicule  arrived  a  few  days  ago. 

It  is  a  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita,  an  old  Brahmin 
treatise  on  medicine,  written,  as  it  is  claimed,  some 
thousands  of  years  ago  in  the  Sanskrit  language.  Kavi¬ 
ratna  is  a  Brahmin,  by  birth,  a  Pundit  by  education,  and 
a  physician  by  profession,  and  has  taken  almost  incre¬ 
dible  pains  not  only  to  translate  the  venerable  treatise  of 
Charaka,  bu  t  also  to  annotate  it  in  such  a  manner  as  to 


(  44  ) 

carefully  indentify  the  plants  and  other  remedies  men 
tioned  in  the  work.  We  are  greatly  surprised  in  finding 
in  this  venerable  relic  of  past  ages  not  incantations  and 
superstitious  ceremonies  recommended  for  the  cure  of  all 
the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to,  but  a  regular  materia  medica, 
comprising  many  hundereds  of  medicinal  plants  and  other 
remedial  agents.  True,  there  are  many  quaint  and  un¬ 
couth  articles  enumerated  amongst  them,  such  as  eight 
varieties  of  urine  and  the  like,  but  this  is  no  worse  than 
the  stercoraceous  remedies  employed  in  European  prac¬ 
tice  even1  after  the  middle  ages,  on  the  use  of  which  books 
were  written  and  are  found  yet  as  curious  relics  in  the 
libraries.  One  of  them  in  the  library  of  the  Verein 
Deutscher  Aerzte  of  this  city  has  the  motto  :  “  Stercora 
sut  varia,  si  non  vis  credere,  gusta.” 

Charaka,  the  learned  physician,  is  not  really  the 
originator  of  this  work,  but  the  editor  and  commentator  of 
a  still  more  ancient  author,  Agnivesa.  The  latter  publish¬ 
ed  his  Tantra  (scientific  treatise)  with  the  approval  of  a 
conclave  of  sages,  headed  by  the  son  of  Atri.  The  claim 
is  put  forth  that  the  knowledge  thus  given  to  posterity 
was  derived  through  a  chain  of  sages  from  Deity  itself. 

Charaka  edited  and  corrected  Agnivesa’s  treatise  and 
while  the  extreme  claim  of  antiquity  may  possibly  be 
somewhat  extravagant,  it  is  certain  that  Arabian  writers  of 
the  eighth  century  quoted  from  and:  commented  on 
Charaka’s  work  as  a  very  ancient  one  in  their  time.  A 
few  passages  are  quoted  here  selected  at  random  from 
the  pages  of  Charaka-Samhita, 


(  45  ) 

( The  Bulletin  af  Pharmacy,  Detroit,  Mich,  August  1892.) 

Everyone  who  takes  the  slightest  interest  in  the 
history  of  the  medical  sciences  finds  fascinating  reading  in 
the  literature  of  Indian  Medicine.  In  this  edition  of 
Charaka-Samhita  we  have  ssmething  better  than  the 
scrappy  extracts  which  occasionally  reach  us.  Carefully 
read,  it  will  give  us  a  thoroughly  good  idea  of  ancient 
Indian  Medicine,  which  means  a  pretty  fair  idea  of  the 
modern  article.  Its  appearance  in  short  monthly  instal¬ 
ments  will  enable  even  our  busy  physicians  and  pharma¬ 
cists  to  read  it  without  being  greatly  burdened. 

But,  considering  the  age  in  which  it  appeared,  Charaka- 
Samhita  is  truly  a  wonderful  production,  and,  questions 
of  present  utility  aside,  we  can  heartily  agree  with  the 
sentiment  here  quoted :  “  Modern  criticism  and  scholar¬ 
ship  have  clearly  established  that  the  people  of  ancient 
India  constituted  the  oldest,  the  most  civilized,  and  the 
most  philosophic  section  of  the  Aryan  race*  and  that  they 
gave  to  the  rest  of  the  world  its  literature  and  science,  in 
fact,  its  materials  of  thought  and  culture  of  every  kind. 
That  the  greatest  medical  work  of  such  a  people  should 
remain  a  sealed  book  to  the  largest  portion  of  mankind, 

'  is  a  slur  on  civilization.”  From  this  point  of  view  alone, 
the  publisher  deserves  the  thanks  of  the  entire  civilized 
world  for  undertaking  the  translation,  a  work  which, 
performed  in  the  manner  in  which  he  is  performing  it,  is 
really  stupendous.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  two  pro¬ 
fessions  in  America  will  not  be  slow  in  lending  their  sup¬ 
port  to  the  'enterprise  by  becoming  subcribers  to  the 
work. 


(46  1 

(The  Cblttge  hnd  Clinical  Rectirch,  Philadelphia; 

September ,  1893. ) 

An  Interesting  Revival. — In  this  practical  age 
tve  are  apt  to  overlook  much  that  is  being  done  to 
enrich  medical  literature  and  to  add  to  the  general 
store  of  professional  knowledge  in  other  countries, 
especially  in  those  whose  language  is  not  intimately 
allied  to  our  own.  It  may  interest  many  Of  oui' 
readers,  especially  those  of  a  literary  turn,  for  instance,  to 
know  that  in  India  one  of  the  oldest  medical  writings  of 
that  empire,  “  Charaka-Samhita,”  is  being  translated,  arid 
that  at  least  two  of  the  fasciculi  have  already  appeared, 
published  by  Abinash  Chandra  Kaviratna,  of  Calcutta. 

It  is  said  that  the  medical  literature  of  ancient  arid 
mediseval  India  is  exceedingly  voluminous ;  and  this  revi¬ 
val  of  a  distinctly  valuable  medical  treatise  must  be  regard¬ 
ed  as  important,  whether  considered  philologieally,  histori¬ 
cal^  or  from  a  literary  standpoint,  by  American  medical 
men.  Generally  speaking,  there  seems  to  be  more  touch 
between  the  people  of  the  United  States  and  those  of  India 
in  matters  intellectual  than  between  the  Indians  and 
Englishmen.  The  insular  prejudices  of  the,  latter  very 
often  stand  in  the  way  of  their  appreciating  the  literary 
and  scientific  remains  of  that  very  old  country.  Very 
possibly,  the  politcal  supremacy  of  Englishmen  in  India 
lies  at  the  root  of  this  contempt  for  everything  Indian. 
Be  that  as  it  may,  the  truth  is  obvious  that  America 
always  sympathizes  with  the  productions  of  ancient  Indian 
genius  more  readily  than  any  other  country.  America  is 
free  from  prejudices.  This  is  very  probably  the  cause. 
The  recent  labors  of  Protapa  Charidra  Roy  in  publishing 
an  English  translation  of  the  great  Indian  epic,  “  Maha- 


(  47  ) 


bharatam,”  are  more  appreciated  in  America  by  American 
scholars  than  eyen  in  Germany. 


( North  Carolina  Medical  Journal ,  March,  1893.) 

Chauaka-Samhita. — We  have  received  the  fourth 
fasciculus  of  his  very  interesting  work.  Charaka  and 
Snsruta  are  the  acknowledged  authqrities  qn  Hindu 
medicine.  They  are  written  in  Sanskrit,  but  their  true, 
philosophical  and  weighty  deliverances  are  being  given  tq 
the  English-speaking  world,  through  the  labors  of  Avinash 
Chandra  Kaviratna,  a  distinguished  physician  of  India.  It 
is  a  great  and  laborious  work  he  has  undertaken,  and  will 
be  duly  appreciated  by  all  who  feel  an  interest  in  the 
history  of  the  healing  art.  The  translator  has  added  many 
foot-notes  alluded  to  in  the  text,  and  giving  the  English 
and  botanical  equivalents  for  the  names  of  Indian  drugs. 


(American  Journal  of  Pharmacy,  February,  1893.) 

When  noticing  the  publication  of  the  first  fascicule  on 
p.  286  of  our  last  volume,  a  history  of  this  ancient  work 
was  given  as  far  as  known,  and  its  importance  for  the 
Study  of  medicine  in  general,  and  of  materia  medica  in 
particular,  was  pointed  out.  Three  fascicules  of  the  Eng¬ 
lish  translation  are  now  before  us,  containing  seven 
lessons  which  treat  of  longevity ;  of  drugs  ahd  gruels 
useful  in  curing  diverse  diseases ;  of  purgatives  and  astrin¬ 
gents  ;  of  proper  diet ;  of  food  in  different  seasons,  and 
of  the  inadvisability  of  suppressing  the  urgings  of  nature. 
The  explanatory  annotations,  added  by  the  translator, 
Will  be  especially  appreciated  by  the  reader.  In  this 


(  48  ) 


form  the  work  is  unqestionably  a  most  valuable  addition 
to  the  history  of  medicine  in  earlier  times,  made  acces¬ 
sible  to  those  who  are  not  conversant  with  the  ancient 
languages  of  Eastern  countries. 


( American  Journal  of  Pharmacy,  May,  1892.) 

This,  the  oldest  medical  work  known,  was  written  in 
Sanskrit,  and  translations  of  it  into  several  of  the  Eestern 
idioms  have  been  published  heretofore,  among  others  by 
the  physician  who  is  now  engaged  with  its  translation 
into  English,  and  the  publication  of  this  English  version, 
with  explanatory  comments.  Some  twelve  years  ago  an 
attempt  was  made  by  Dr.  Mahendra  Lai  Sircar,  to  issue 
such  a  translations,  and  a  portion  of  the  work  was  pub¬ 
lished  in  a  medical  journal  in  Calcutta ;  but  the  effort 
was  finally  abandoned  owing  to  impaired  health.  We 
believe  that  no  translation  into  any  Europeon  language 
is  in  existence,  and  the  one  now  under  way  will,  there¬ 
fore,  be  the  first  to  make  that  ancient  work  accessible  to 
those  not  conversant  with  the  language  of  India. 

Aside  from  the  philological  value,  which  a  correct 
translation  will  undoubtedly  possess,  its  attractiveness  to 
the  physician  and  the  student  of  natural  history  lies  in  its 
historical  character,  by  showing  the  principles  upon  which 
hygienic  measures  were  based  at  that  remote  period,  and 
the  means  then  employed  for  preserving  health  and  com¬ 
batting  disease.  That  many  of  the  important  remedial 
a»ents  of  the  present  day  are  derived  from  India,  is  well 
known  they  have,  as  a  rule,  been  employed  there  from  a 
very  remote  period. 


CHARAKA-SaMHITA. 


153 


Here  is  a  Verse  containing  a  Summary. 

The  different  kinds  of  oils,  the  rules  about  their  administra- 
*  tion,  the  evil  consequences  of  the  improper  administration 
ef  Oils,  with  the  medicines  that  should  be  used  on  such  occasions, 
have  all  been  expounded  (in  this  Lesson)  by  the  illustrious  son  of 
Chandrabhaga  {viz.,  Punarvasu  )  unto  Aginvefa  agreeably  to  the 
questions  he  asked. 

Thus  ends  the  Thirteenth  Lesson  on  Oils  in  Agniveja’s 
treatise  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  XIV. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  on  Sweda.  Thus  said 
the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  *1 

I  shall  now  explain  the  different  kinds  of  Sweda.  By 
duly  administering  them,  diverse  diseases  generated  by  disorders 
of  wind  and  phlegm  that  admit  of  being  removed  by  such  pro¬ 
cesses,  are  alleviated  and  cured.2 

If  the  wind  be  subjugated  by  administering  Sweda  after  the 
proper  use  of  Oils,  stools  and  urine  and  vital  seed  are  easily  passed 
or  discharged  without  any  kind  of  obstruction.3  Even  wood  that  is 
dry,  can,  by  the  proper  application  of  oil  and  heat,  be  made  to  bend. 
What  then  need  be  said  of  human  beings  having  life  ?4 

When  consistent  with  the  diseases  ( in  which  it  is  applied), 
the  season  (of  its  application),  and  the  constitution  of  the  person 
treated,  Swedana,  consisting  of  the  proper  materials  properly 
selected,  and  applied  to  the  proper  parts  of  the  body,  is  regarded 
beneficial.  Only  it  should  not  be  very  hot  nor  very  mild.ffi 

*  To  render  the  word  ‘  Sweda  ’  into  ‘  diaphoretic,’  would  be  incorrect.  It  should  be 
explained  that  Sweda  is  often  used  to  signify  the  application  of  heat  or  fomentation  even 
when  the  causing  of  perspiration  is  not  the  end  proposed.  It  includes  also  warm 
water  baths,  vapour  baths,  and  hot  cataplasms  of  medicinal  plants.  I  shall,  there¬ 
fore,  use  the  word  sweda  or  swedana  in  the  original,  for  diaphoretics  would  not  be 
a  good  substitute. — T, 

t  The  word  ‘  apekshah  ’  is  grammatically  connected  with  all  the  three  words 
preceding  it.  ‘  Dravyavan  ’  is  consisting  of  the  proper  materials  or  articles.  ‘  Mridu’ 
is  literally  mild,  i.e.,  cool. — T. 


20 


154 


CHRA  HA-S  A  M  HIT  A. 


In  diseases  generated  by  cold,  and  when  the  body  becomes  cold 
( in  certain  diseases ),  Sweda  should  be  resorted  to.  If  the 
patient  happens  to  be  endued  with  great  strength,  the  Swedana  to 
be  applied  should  be  strong  ;  if  the  patient  be  of  middling  strength, 
the  Swedana  to  be  applied  should  of  be  middling  force  ;  and,  lastly, 
if  the  patient  be  weak,  the  Swedana  to  be  applied  should  be 
mild.6 

In  disease;?  of  wind  and  phlegm,  of  wind  only,  and  of  phlegm 
only,  the  Swedana  that  should  be  resorted  to  should  respectively 
be  both  cool  and  dry,  cool,  and  dry.*7 

If  the  wind  in  the  Ama§aya  be  excited,  the  Sweda  that  is  bene¬ 
ficial  in  the  first  instance  is  the  dry  one.  S°  if  the  phlegm  in  the 
Pakka5aya  be  excited,  the  Sweda  that  is  beneficial  in  the  firs^ 
instance  is  the  cool  one.f8 

Sweda  should  never  be  applied  to  the  testicles,  the  region 
about  the  heart,  and  the  eyes.  If  at  all  necessary,  the  mildest 
Sweda  should  be  used  with  regard  to  those  parts.  As  regards  the 
pubic  and  iliac  region,  Sweda  of  middling  force  should  be  applied. 
With  respect  to  the  rest  of  the  regions  of  the  body,  Sweda  of  the 
desirable  force  may  be  used.9 

If  Sweda  is  ever  to  be  applied  to  the  eyes,  the  eyes  should  be 
first  shut  and  then  pure  cotton  cloth,  or  soft  balls  made  of  the 
flour  of  wheat,  or  the  petals  of  the  lotus  or  other  flowers,  should 
be  used  for  the  purpose.!10 

If  Sweda  is  ever  to  be  applied  to  the  region  of  the.  heart, 
it  should  be  with  cool  strings  of  pearls,  with  cool  vessels  (made  of 
metals),  with  lotus-petals,  and  with  hands  cooled  in  water.11 

When  the  body  has  become  cool  or  the  pain  has  been  allevia¬ 
ted,  when  the  stiffness  and  heaviness  of  the  body  or  limbs  have. 

*  The  meaning  is  this  :  in  diseases  of  wind  and  phlegm,  the  Swedana  should  be 
both  cool  and  dry  ;  in  diseases  of  wind  only,  it  should  be  cool ;  and  in  those  of  phlegm 
only,  it  should  be  dry. — T. 

f  The  ‘  amacaya  ’  is  that  part  of  the  stomach  where  the  food  goes  immediately  • 
after  being  eaten  ;  while  the  ‘  pakkafya  ’  is  that  part  of  the  stomach  where  digestion 
takes  place. — T, 

%  ‘  Naktaka  ’  is  a  piece  of  cloth  or  a 

dust.’ — 7’. 


wiper  made  of  cotton.  ‘  Pure  ’  is  ‘  free  from 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


155 


■disappeared,  when  the  body  has  become  soft,  the  process  of  Sweda 
should,  it  is  said,  be  discontinued.  Excitement  of  the  bile,  swoons 
or  loss  of  consciousness,  langour  of  limbs,  thirst,  burning  sensation 
in  the  skin,  perspiration,  and  weakness  of  limbs,  are  indications  of 
one  unto  whom  Sweda  has  been  administered  in  excess.13-14 

The  course  of  conduct,  depending  upon  the  use  of  sweet 
unctions  and  cooling  things,  that  has  been  laid  down  in  the 
Lesson  called  Tasyajitiya  (VI).,  in  respect  of  thfe  hot  season, 
should,  in  its  entirety,  be  followed  by  one  unto'  whom  Sweda 
has  been  applied  in  excess. 

Sweda  should  not  be  applied  to  the  following  persons,  viz., 
those  that  are  habituated  to  eat  or  drink  astringents,  those  that 
regularly  drink  alcoholic  stimulants,  women  that  are  quick 
with  child,  persons  subject  to  hemorrhage  caused  by  excite¬ 
ment  of  the  bile,  those  whose  bile  has  been  excited,  those  that 
have  diarrhcea,  those  that  are  dry,  those  that  are  afflicted  with 
diabetes,  those  that  are  suffering  Under  prolapsus  ani  or  prolapsus 
uteri,  those  whose  constitutions  have  been  injured  or  disorderd  by 
poison  or  alcohol,  those  that  are  fatigued,  those  that  are  in  a  swoon, 
•those  that  are  adipose,  those  that  are  afflicted  with  gonorrhoea 
through  disordered  bile,  those  that  are  thirsty,  those  that  arfc 
hungry,  those  that  have  given  way  to  wrath,  those  that  are  under 
the  influence  of  grief,  those  that  are  afflicted  with  ansemia  and 
dropsy,  those  that  have  sores  on  their  bodies,  those  that  are  afflict¬ 
ed  with  hemorrhages  caused  by  disorders  of  the  wind,  those  that 
are  very  weak  or  very  emaciated,  those  whose  constituent  elements 
have  dried  up,  and  those  that  labour  under  gutta  serena.*1 5-1 8 

Sweda  is  regarded  as  beneficial  in  all  the  following  diseases, 
viz.  catarrh,  phthisis,  hiccup,  asthma,  heaviness  of  limbs,  otalgia, 
wry  neck;  head-ache,  hoarseness  of  voice,  choking  up  of  the  voice, 
facial  paralysis,  paralysis  of  a  particular  limb  or  of  the  whole  body, 
in  spasms  and  contortions  of  the  body,  suppression  of  stools  and 


*  Chakrapanidatta  points  out  that  notwithstanding  this  prohibition,  if  the  disease 
•to  be  treated  be  such  that  nothing  but  the  application  of  Sweda  will  cure  it,  then.  Sweda 
should  be  applied  on  the  principle  of  choosing  the  lesser  to  the  greater  evil.  By 
‘  Madhu-meha  ’  every  kind  of  Meha  is  supposed  to  be  indicated.  ‘  Meha  ’  is  a  com¬ 
mon  term  by  which  various  affections  of  the  urine  are  indicated. — T. 


156 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


urine,  obstruction  in  the  flow  of  the  vital  seed,  yawning,  pains  in  the 
sides  or  back  or  loins  or  abdomen,  sciatica,  strangury  or  painful 
micturition,  enlargement  of  the  testicles,  pains  all  over  the  body, 
diseases  in  the  feet,  the  thighs,  the  knees,  and  the  calf,  and  pains  in 
those  parts  of  the  body,  swelling  or  intumescence,  spasms,  diseases  of 
the  stomach,  exposure  to  cold,  tremblings  and  tre.mours,  diseases  in 
ancles  caused  by  the  wind  being  excited,  diseases  in  which  the  body 
becomes  contracted  in  consequence  of  the  provocation  of  the  wind, 
diseases  called  Ayama  (due  to  the  wind),  sharp  and  shooting 
pains  of  every  kind,  stiffness  of  limbs,  heaviness  of  limbs,  and  loss 
of  the  sensation  of  touch.19'23 

Sweda  should  be  applied  with  balls  made  of  Sesamum 
Indicum,  Phaseolus  radiata ,  Dolichos  uniflorus  ( syn,  Dolichos 
biflorus,  Roxburgh ),  rice,  ghee,  oil,  meat  boiled  with  rice,  Payasa, 
Kr^ara,  and  meat.*24 

With  the  dung  of  the  cow,  the  mule,  the  camel,  the  boar  and 
the  horse,  mixed  with  chaff  (  of  paddy  )  or  wheat,  as  also  with  sand, 
dust,  pounded  stone,  dried  and  pounded  cowdung,  and  iron  dust, 
collected  together  within  a  piece  of  cloth  and  made  into  a  loose  ball, 
Sweda  should  be  applied  to  persons  of  phlegmatic  constitutions. 
With  the  articles  mentioned  in  Verse  24,  Sweda  should  be  applied 
to  persons  whose  constitutions  are  subject  to  the  influence  of  the 
wind. 

In  Prastara-sweda  the  articles  mentioned  above  are  applaud¬ 
ed,  the  selection,  of  course,  depending  upon  the  particular  disor¬ 
der  or  disease  that  is  sought  to  be  removed.t25'26 

In  subterranean  chambers,  rooms  specially  designed  for  the 

*  Each  of  these  articles  is  to  be  used  for  being  converted  into  a  ball.  The  Bengali 
Commentator  explains  that  this  is  cooling  Sweda.  *  Pinda-sweda  ’  is  explained  by  the 
Commentator  as  *  Pinda  rupa  Sweda  ‘  Sweda  ’  here  means  the  articles  with  which  the 
operation  is  to  be  performed.  Of  course,  the  sense  is,  as  already  said,  that  the  operatic 
is  to  be  performed  with  balls  made  of  the  articles  indicated. —  T. 

f  Having  spoken  of  the  ‘  Pinda-sweda,’  the  speaker  refers  here  to  the  ‘  Prastara- 
sweda.’  The  difference  between  the  two  is  that  in  the  former  the  articles  used  are  first 
converted  into  a  jelly-like  substance  and  then  formed  into  balls.  In  the  latter,  the 
articles  remain  partially  or  totally  dry,  and  are,  therefore,  put  into  a  piece  of  cloth  and 
made  into  a  loose  ball. — T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MH  IT  A.  15? 

purpose  and  called  Jentakas,  and  chambers  having  no  windows 
and,  therefore,  very  warm,  all  heated  for  sometime  by  smokeless 
fire,  the  patient,  after  being  rubbed  with  oil,  may  easily  undergo 
the  operation  of  Swedana."J*2  7 

The  flesh  of  domestic  animals  ( such  as  goat  or  sheep),  of 
animals  living  in  marshes  ( such  as  buffalos),  of  aquatic  animals 
(  such  as  tortoises ),  and  the  head  of  the  goat,  as  also  the  middle 
portion  of  the  boar,  its  bile  and  blood,  oily  seeds  ( like  those  of 
the  castor-oil  plant ),  sesame,  and  rice,  should  all  be  boiled 
together  and  with  the  decoction  thus  obtained  should  a  patient 
be  subjected  to  the  operation  called  Nadi-sweda  by  the  learned 
physician,  experienced  in  the  modifications  brought  about  by 
country  and  season,  and  guided  by  reason.2 8-2 9 

Varuna  (a),  Amritaka  (5),  Eranda  (c),  Sigru  (d),  Mulaka  (e), 
Sarshapa  (/),  the  leaves  of  Vasa  (g),  and  Vangga  (h),  and 
Karanja  (z'),  and  Arka  (/),  and  Agmantaka  (£),  as  also  the  leaves 
of  Sobhanjanaka  (/),  of  £airiya  ( m ),  of  Surasa  (zz),  and  of  Arjjuka 

f  ‘  Bhugriha  ’  is  any  subterranean  chamber.  Throughout  the  North  West  such 
chambers  still  occur  in  almost  all  respectable  mansions.  ‘Jentaka,’  as  used  here,  means 
an  artificially  heated  chamber.  1  Ushnargabha  griha  ’  is  one  into  which  no  air  is  admit¬ 
ted  either  because  there  are  no  windows  or  because  of  the  windows,  if  any,  not  being 
opened.  All  these  chambers  are  directed  to  be  heated  by  means  of  burning  charcoal  from 
which  no  smoke  should  emanate.  ‘  Avyakta  ’  is  rubbed  with  oil.’ — T. 

J  The  operations  of  Swedana  spoken  of  in  Verses  27  and  28  are  intended,  the 
Commentators  remark,  for  persons  whose  wind  has  been  excited. — T. 

(a)  Cratceva  religiosa,  sy n. ,  Capparis  trifoliata,  Rox. 

(b)  Another  name  of  Guduchi.  Tinospora  cordifolia ,  syn  ;  Mcnisptrmum  cordi- 
folium. 

(c)  Ricitius  communis. 

(d)  Moringa  pterygosperma. 

(c)  Garden  radish.  Raphanus  sativus. 

(f)  Mustard  seeds. 

(g)  Justicia  Adhatoda  ;  syn,  Adhatoda  Vasica. 

(h)  Bambusa  arundinacea,  Reiz.  The  Bamboo. 

(i)  Pongamia  Glabra  ;  syn,  Galedupa  Indica. 

(j)  Calalropis  Gigantea  ;  syn,  Asclepias  Gigantea. 

(k )  Called  also  Pashanbhedi.  Coleus  Amboinicus. 

(l)  Moringa  pterygosperma  (of  the  red  variety.) 

(pi)  Called  also  Nila-  Jhinti.  Berleria  cristata,  Linn. 

(n)  Ocimum  Sanctum. 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  MHITA. 


158 

(a),  should  all  be  boiled  together.  With  the  decoction  thus  obtained, 
a  patient  should  be  subjected  to  the  operation  called  Nadi- 
Sweda.30'31 

Another  kind  of  Nadi-Sweda  consists  of  the  decoction  obtained 
by  boiling  together  the  following,  viz.,  Bhutika  (/),  Panchamula! 
(y),  wine,  butter-milk,  the  eight  kinds  of  animal  urine,  the  several 
acids,  and  oil.3* 

Keeping  these  several  kinds  of  decoctions  in  a  trough,  or 
filling  the  trough  with  ghee,  milk,  and  oil,  Sweda  should  be 
administered  by  the  physician.33 

Plasters  made  of  the  flour  of  wheat  and  barley  mixed  with 
Kanjika  and  other  acids,  as  also  with  Oils,  the  seeds  with  which' 
fermentation  is  set  about  for  making  wines,  arid  salt,  are  spoken  of 
as  highly  beneficial.34 

The  physician  should  apply  plasters  made  of  fragrant  sub¬ 
stances  (  such  as  sandal  &c. ),  the  seeds  with  which  fermentation  is 
produced  for  making  wines,  Jivanti  (a),  (jlatapushpi  (6),  Uma.  (c), 
Kushtha  ( d ),  and  Oils.4135 

After  applying  the  plaster,  it  should  be  bound  with  some  hairy 
skin  that  should  be  free  from  bad  odor  and  that  should  be  capable  of 
imparting  heat  or  keeping  off  cold.  If  such  a  piece  of  skin  cannot 
be  found,  then  some  silken  cloth  or  warm  blanket  or  petticoat 
may  be  used. 3  A 

A  plaster  bound  up  in  this  way  in  the  night  should  be  exposed 

(o)  Ocimum  Basilicum. 

(p)  Called  also  Yamani.  Ptychotis  Ajowan. 

(q)  This  is  a  technical  term  in  Charaka,  Susruta,  and  other  medical  works.  There 
are  three  kinds  of  Panchamula,  viz.,  Trina  Panchamula,  Swalpa  ditto,  and  Mahat 
ditto.  Here  the  last  kind  is  indicated.  It  consists  of  the  barks  of  A Igle  Marmelos, 
Colosanthes  Indica,  Stcriospermum-Suave-olens ,  Gmelina  arborea,  and  Pretnna 
scrratifolia. 

(a)  Ccelogyne  ovalis. 

(b)  Pucedanum  Sowa. 

(c)  Linurn  usitatissimum. 

(d)  Saussurea  auriculata  ;  syn.,  Aplotaxis  auriculata. 

*  The  Commentators  explain  that  in  cases  of  phlegm,  Uma,  Kushtha,  and  Oils  are  not 
necessary.  Only  when  wind  and  phlegm  are  both  excited,  all  the  drugs  are  necessary, — T. 


CHARAKA-SA  MHiTA. 


159 


l  by  the  bandage  being  taken  off)  during  day  time.  Similarly,  if  it 
be  bound  up  during  the  day,  it  should  be  expose, d  (by  the  bandage 
being  taken  off)  at  night.  This  is  necessary  for  letting  off  the 
excess  of  heat.  In  the  cold  season,  however,  the  bandage  may 
be  kept  for  a  longer  time.37 

There  are  altogether  thirteen  kinds  of  Sweda.  There  are  (i) 
Sankara,  (2)  Prastara,  (3)  Nadi,  (4)  Parisheka,  (5)  Avagahana,  (6) 
Jentaka,  (7)  A^maghana,  (8)  Karshyu,  (9)  Kuti,  (10)  Bhu,  (11) 
Kumbhi,  (12)  Eupa,  and  (13)  HolakaA8"39 

When  the  Sweda  is  applied  by  means  of  pounding  the  drugs, 
placing  them  within  a  piece  of  cloth,  and  heating  them  on  fire,  it 
is  called  Sankara-sweda.*40 

The  Sweda  that  is  applied  to  a  patient  by  first  rubbing  him 
properly  with  oil,  and  making  him  lie  down  upon  a  piece  of  stone 
,or  on  a  silken  cloth  or  woollen  blanket,  (and  wrapping  him  there¬ 
with),  or  on  a  bed  made  of  the  leaves  of  Panchangula  (a), 
U ruvaka  (6)  and  Arka  (c),  with  a  loose  ball  made  of  boiled  £uka 
and  £ami  and  Pulaka  paddy,  or  with  Vefavara,  or  Payasa,  or 
Kritjara,  or  Utkarika,  is  known  by  the  name  of  Prastara-sweda.f 
.  Take  the  articles  indicated  beforehand  as  fit  for  purposes  of 
Swedana,  viz.,  the  roots  and  fruits  and  leaves  and  calyxes  of  buds, 
and  the  flesh,  heads,  and  feet  of  the  animals  and  birds  (named 


*  This  process  is  very  simple.  The  drugs  mentioned  are  all  pounded  together  and 
placed  in  a  piece  of  cloth.  The  four  corners  of  the  cloth  are  then  tied  together  for 
preventing  the  drugs  from  falling  down.  The  knot,  however,  is  generally  tied  very 
Joosely,  so  that  the  pounded  drugs  have  sufficient  space  to  turn  or  move  abput  within 
the  cloth.  The  drugs  within  the  cloth  are  then  heated  along  with  the  cloth  by  exposure 
to  a  smokeless  fire.  When  the  proper  measure  of  heat  is  obtained,  the  cloth  with  the 
drugs  within  it,  is  then  applied  to  the  part  directed. —  T. 

(a)  A  variety  of  Eranda,  i.  e.,  Ricinus  communis.  It  is  called  Panchangula 
because  its  leaves  have  indentations  at  the  edge  so  that  there  are  altogether  five 
projections  that  look  like  the  five  fingers  projecting  from  the  palm  of  the  hand. 

( b )  Uruvaka  is  a  variety  of  the  above  plant. 

(r)  Caldtropis  ^igantea  or  procera  ;  syn. ,  Asclepias  gigantea. 

j-  Cuka,  Cami,  and  Palaka  are  varieties  of  paddy  that  are  indegenous  and  are 
gathered  by  the  poorer  classes  for  food.  Vecavara  is  prepared  by  pounding  a  quantity 
of  boneless  flesh  and  boiling  it  with  treacle,  Ghee,  Piper  longum,  and  Piper  nigrum. 
Payasa  and  Krigara  are  particular  preparations  resembling  pudding.  Utkarika  is  a  kind 
of  pudding  made  of  Phaseoius  radiaius,  Roxb. — T. 


160 


QHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


before  )  as  also  of  such  as  are  warm  or  hot  by  nature.  Mix  them 
with  the  proper  acids  and  salts  and  oils  or  with  the  proper  varieties 
of  urine  and  milk.  Cast  all  these  into  a  pot  or  vessel  and  boil 
them  together  in  such  a  way  that  no  vapour  may  escape  therefrom, 

( that  is,  by  shutting  the  mouth  of  the  vessel  properly.)  Make  a 
tube  then  with  any  of  these  leaves,  viz.,  those  of  the  blade  of  the 
Saccharum  Sara,  Rox  ;  or  of  the  bamboo,  or  of  Pongamia  Glabra, 
or  of  Calatropis  gigantea.  The  tube  should  be  as  thick  as  the  fore 
part  of  an  elephant’s  trunk.  Its  length  should  a  Vyama  (about  a 
fathom).*  Its  circumference  or  calibre  at  one  end  should  be 
of  the  measure  of  the  fourth  part  of  a  Vyama  while  at  the  other 
end  it  should  be  of  the  measure  of  an  eighth  part  of  a  Vyama.  The 
tube  should  be  made  air-tight  by  means  of  such  leaves  as  are  thick 
and  not  porous.  It  should  have  two  or  three  bends.  The  patient 
should  first  be  rubbed  with  prepared  Oils  that  have  the  virtue  of 
curing  all  disorders  of  the  wind.  Dipping  the  thicker  end  of  the 
tube  into  the  boiling  vessel,  the  vapour  should  be  conducted  through 
it  to  the  body  of  the  patient.  The  vapour,  in  consequence  of 
its  not  passing  in  a  straight  course  as  also  owing  to  its  force  being 
broken  by  the  several  bends  of  the  tube,  will  serve  the  purpose  of 
a  delightful  Sweda.  Such  Sweda  is  called  Nadi-sweda.41 

Take  the  roots  and  fruits  and  calyxes  of  such  plants  and  trees 
as  are  destructive  of  wind  as  also  of  all  the  three  faults  when  they 
exhibit  themselves  with  force.  Boil  them  together  for  obtaining 
their  decoction.  When  agreeably  warm,  pour  the  decoction  into 
a  jar  or  a  smaller  vessel  (metallic  or  earthen)  or  into  a  tube. 
Rub  the  patient  with  some  Oils,  having  boiled  it  previously  wdth 
the  proper  ingredients,  and  cover  his  body  with  a  piece  of  cloth. 
Gently  pour  or  sprinkle  over  the  patient  the  said  decoctions, 
(using  the  jar  or  smaller  vessel  or  tube ).  This  kind  of  Sweda  is 
Parisheka.*42 


*  A  Vyama  is  the  lengthmeasured  by  the  outstreched  arms  of  a  grown  up  per¬ 
son. — T. 

t  ‘Vatika’  means  ‘  Vatahara,’  i.e.  capable  of  destroying  disorders  of  the  wind. 
‘Uttara — vatikani’  is  ‘  pravala-vatatridoshaharani,’  i.e.,  capable  of  destroying  all 
the  three  faults  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  even  when  they  appear  in  a  violent  form 
‘  Varshunika  ’  is  a  kind  of  small  vessel.  Its  exact  shape  is  not  known.  ‘  Pranadi  ’  i 


.  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


161 


Take  of  the  articles  that  are  destructive  of  wind  a  sufficient 
-quantity.  Boil  them  together  for  obtaining  their  decoction.  Mix 
the  decoction  with  Milk,  Oil,  Ghee,  and  broth  of  the  proper  meat. 
Pour  the  mixture  into  a  large  tub  or  trough  of  warm  water  and 
cause  the  patient  to  bathe  in  that,  tub  or  trough,  Such  Swedanam 
is  called  Avagaha.43 

If  the  sixth  kind  of  Sweda,  which  is  jentaka,  has  to  be  applied,  the 
land  must  first  be  examined,  Some  spot  to  the  east  or  the  north 
(of  the  residence  of  the  patient)  should  be  selected.  It  should  be 
fertile  and  of  wide  extent.  The  soil  should  be  black  in  color  and 
sweet  to  the  taste,  or  it  may  be  of  a  golden  complexion.  It  should 
be  situated  on  either  the  south  or  the  west  of  some  river  or  lake  or 
tank  full  of  Water,  and  very  near  to  its  shore  or  bank.  It  should 
be  perfectly  level.  Selecting  a  particular  spot  removed  from  the 
water  by  about  seven  or  eight  cubits,  a  round  chamber  should  be 
erected,  facing  either  the  east  or  the  north.  It  should,  however, 
face  the  piece  pf  water  near  to  Which  it  is  to  be  erected.  Its 
height  should'  be  sixteen  cubits,  Its  circumference  also  should 
be  of  -the  same  length.  The  walls  and  the  roof  should  be 
of  Earth  and  should  be  well-plastered  over  with  mud.  There 
should  be  many  holes  Or  Windows  in  the  walls.  Within  this  cham¬ 
ber,  there  should  be  constructed,  ( touching  the  Walls  )  all  around, 
but  excluding  only  the  space  about  the  door,  a  ridge  of  mud  whose 
height  should  be  one  cubit  and  breadth  the  same.  Upon  the  floor 
sould  then  be  constructed  an  oven  whose  Cricumference  should  be 
four  cubits,  and  height  twice  that  of  a  full  grown  man.  This  oven 
should  be  of  earth.  It  should  have  many  small  holes,  and  its 
mouth' should  be  covered.  A  hollow  space  should  be  left  within 
it  for  holding  (  burning )  charcoal.  Fill  the  oven  with  the  wood  of 
Khadira,  of  Atjwakarna,  and  of  other  kinds  of  sacred  trees,  and  set 
fire  to  the  wood  thus  placed  therein.  When  the  physician  under¬ 
stands  that  the  wood  has  been  burnt  off' and  that  only  a  smokeless 


‘Nalika.’  The  jar,  smaller  vessel,  and  the  tube  must  all  have  many  holes  in  them  for 
the  facility  of  pouring  the  liquid  gradually  or  in  little  quantities.  The  warmth  should  be 
agreeable,  i.e.,  capable  of  being  borne  without  torture.  —  T, 

21 


162 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


fire  has  been  left,  consisting  of  burning  charcoal,  and  the  degree 
of  heat  has  become  such  as  to  be  fit  for  the  purpose  of  Swedana, 
the  patient  should  then  he  introduced  into  the  chamber,  after 
having  been  first  rubbed  with  such  oils  as  are  destructive  of  wind 
and  covered  with  a  piece  of  cloth.  Before  introducing  .the  patient 
into  the  chamber,  he  should  be  addressed  in  these  words  :-t-0 
amiable  one,  do  thou  enter  this  chamber  for  thy  good  and  for 
being  cured  of  thy  ailments !  Having  entered  the  chamber,  lie 
dowp  at  thy  ease,  on  thy  right  or  left  side,  upon  the  ridge  running 
all  around  the  floor.  Thou  shouldst  not  leave  the  ridge  however 
copiousjy  thou  mayst  perspire  and  near  thou  mayst  feel  to  the  point 
of  losing  thy  consciousness.  In  fact,,  thou  must  adhere  to  the  ridge 
as  long  as  thou  art  not  deprived  of  breath,  that  is,  till  thou  feelesft 
thyself  to  be  on  the  point  of  death  itself.  If  thou  leavest  the  ridge 
for  coming  to  the  door  of  the  room  (  from  desire  of  escaping  from  it), 
thou  shalt  then,  in  consequence  of  thy  copious  perspiration  and  the 
reeling  state  of  thy  senses,  immediately  meet  wjth  death.  Thou 
shalt  not,  therefore,  on  any  account,  leave  the  ridge.  When  thou 
shalt  feel  that  all  thy  impurities  have  passed  out  of  thy  body, 
that  thy  perspiration  has  been  copious,  that  all  the  pores  of  thy 
body  have  secreted  thy  impurities,  that  thy  body  has  become 
light,  that  all  stiffness  of  limbs  has  abandoned  thee,  that  all 
rigidity  has  left  thee,  that  thou  hast  been  freed  from  pain  and  heavi¬ 
ness,  thou  shalt  then  leave  the  ridge  and  come  to  the  door.— Coming 
out  of  the  room,  the  patient  should,  for  protecting  his  eyes,  abstain 
from  entering  or  diving  into  cold  water.  ^yhen  thus  his  pains  and 
lassitude  shall  have  disappeared,  the  patient  should  bathe,  in  happi¬ 
ness,  in  the.  usual  manner,  in  warm  water.  Having  bathed  thus, 
he  should  then  eat.  This  is  called  Jentaka  Sweda,*41 

V  1  Gunavati  ’  is  explained  as  possessed  of  fertility  ;  a  piece  of  land,  that  is,  on 
which  the  trees  are  vigorous.  ‘  Madbura-mrittika  ’  implies  that  the  soil  should  be 
sweet  instead  of  being  saltish.  ‘  Supatirthe  ’  is  very  near  or  close  to  the  water. 
*  Aratni,’  though  rendered  cubit,  means  the  distance  from  the  elbow  to  the  end  of  the 
little  finger.  It  is  a  few  inches  less  than  an  ordinary  cubit.  ‘  Kutagaram  ’  is  explain’ 
ed  by  Chakrapanidatta  as  ‘  Vartulagaram '  or  a  round  chamber.  ‘Pindika’  is  an  ‘ali' 
or  ridge.  It  should  go  all  round  the  chamber,  only  the  space  near  the  entrance  should 
be  kept  as  usual.  \Kishku  ’  is  a  cubit.  ‘  Kandu-samsthanam  ’  is  ‘  Kandukarasya 
samsthanam,’  i.e.,  a  place  for  holding  fire  or  oven.  Angara-koshtha-stambha’  is  explain- 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


163 


Take  a  piece  of  entire  stone  of  the  measure  of  the  patient  who 
is  to  lie  on  it.  It  should  be  heated  by  setting  fire  to  a  quantity  of 
such  wood  as  has  the  virtue  of  destroying  the  wind.  After  the 
wood  has  been  reduced  to  smokeless  charcoal,-  these  should  be 
swept  off  and  the  stone  washed  with  warm  water,  and  then  over¬ 
laid  with  silken  cloth  or  woollen  blankets.  The  patient  should  be 
well-rubbed  with  oil  and  then  made  to  lie  down  on  the  stone.  By 
this  may  he  easily  be  subjected  to  the  process  of  Swedana.  He 
should,  however,  while  made  to  lie  down  on  the  heated  stone,  be 
properly  coverd  with  skins  and  blankets  and  silken  cloth.  This 
process  is  called  Afmaghana  sweda.  I  shall  now  speak  of  Karshu 
sweda.*46 

The  physician  conversant  with  the  qualities  of  soil  should 
cause  a  hole  to  be  dug  below' the  patient’s  bed.  The  hole  should 
be  of  the  form  of  a  Karshu  (that  is,  its  stomach  should  be  large  or 
spacious  but  mouth  or  aperture  narrow).  This  hole  should  then 
be  filled  with  burning. but  smokeless  charcoal.  The  patient  should 
then  be  made  to  lie  on  a  bedstead  placed  above  that  heated  hole. 
He  may  thus  be  easily  subjected  to  a  process  of  Swedana  (call¬ 
ed  Karshu).4® 

A  little  chamber  should  be  erected  neither  high  nor  spacious. 
It  should  be  circular  or  round,  and  should  have  no  windows  or 
holes.  The  walls  should  be  thick,  and  they  should  be  plastered 
over  with  Kushthaf  and  other  plants.  Within  the  chamber  thus 
constructed,  the  physician  should  cause  a  bed  to  be  made  of  warm 
cloth  or  blankets.  All  around  and  over  that  chamber  should  then 
be  placed  earthen  pots  containing  burning  but  smokeless  charcoal. 

ed  by  Chakrapanidatta  as  ‘  Angarartham  koshtah  avaka^ah  vidyate-yasmin,’  sa  eva 
stambhah  ;  i.e.,  within  the  oven'there  must  be  kept 'a  hollow  column-iike  space  for  holding 
the  burning -charcoals.  The  Commentator  explains  that  the  ‘  sah  ’  here  is'  equivalent  to 
‘Twam,  It  may  even  be  omitted,  for  ‘Janiyat’  alone  would  give  the  sense. 

>  Apranophcchwasat  ’  means  as  long  as  the  breath  of  life  continues.  Khadria  is  Acacia 
Catechu  j  syn.  Mimosa  Catechu.  Afwakarria  is  Shored  robusta.—T. 

*  “Raurava’  means  the  skin  of  the  Ruru  deer.  Generally,  it  stands  for  warm 
skins  used  either  as  bedsheets  or  quilts.  Some  texts  read  ‘  Kaurava.’  Chakrapanidatta 
adheres  to  this  reading.  It  means  cloth  made  of  cotton. —  T. 

f  Applotaxis  auricuiata ;  syn,  Saussurea  auriculata. 


i64 


CHRAKA-SAMHITA  . 


The  patient  should  be  rubbed  with  oil  and  then  made  to  lie  down 
on  .the  bed  thus  prepared  within  the  chamber.  He  may,  by  this 
process,  be  easily  subjected  to  the  process  of  Swedana  known  by 
the  name  of  Kuti-swedana.47 

The  procedure  that  has  been  laid  down  in  the  case  of  Agma- 
ghana-sweda  {vide  45)  is  the  same  for  what  is  called  Bhu-sweda. 
A  spacious  ground,  perfectly  level  and  unexposed  to  the  wind, 
should  be  selected  for  the  purpose.48 

Take  a  jar.  Fill  it  with  the  decoction  of  such  drugs  as  are  des¬ 
tructive  of  the  wind.  The  jar  should  then  be  implanted  into 
the  earth ‘to  half  or  three-fourths  of  its  height.  Upon  its  mouth  should 
a  bedstead  or  seat  be  placed.  The  bed  or  the  bedstead  or  the 
povering  of  such  seat  should  not  be  thick.  Into  the  jar  containing 
the  decoction  should  then  be  thrown  heated  balls,  of  iron  or  heated 
pieces  of  stone.  The  patient,  after  having  been  properly  rubbed 
with  such  oils  as  are  destructive  of  the  wind  and  covered  with 
warm  cloth,  should  be  made  to  lie  down  or  sit  upon  the  bed  or  seat 
placed  above  the  rpouth  of  the  jar.  In  this  way  may  he  easily  be 
subjected  to  the  process  of  Swedana  called  Kumbhi-swedana.40 

A  pit  or  hole  should  be  dug.  Its  length  should  be  of  the  measure 
of  an  ordinary  bed  ( about  5  feet).  Its  depth  should  be  twice 
jts  length.  The  spot  selected  for  the  pit  should  not  be  exposed  to 
the  air  and  should  be  sufficiently  wide.  The  sides  and  bottom  of 
fhe  pit  should  be  smooth  and  level.  The  pit  should  then  be  filled  up 
with  the  dried  dung  of  the  dlephant,  the  horse,  the  cow,  the  ass,  mule, 
and  the  camel.  .  The' contents  should  then  be  set  on  fire.  After 
the  contents  have  burnt  off  and  become  a  smokeless  fire,  a  bed¬ 
stead  should  be  placed  upon  the  pit.  A  good  bed  should  be 
placed  upon  the  stead.  The  patient  should,  as  usual,  be  rubbetl 
with  oil  and  then  properly  covered.  He  should  then  be  made  to 
lie  upon  the  bed  thus  made.  By  this  he  may  be  easily  subjected 
to  the  process  of  Swedana  called  Kupa-swedana.*50 

*'  1  Cayana-vistaram  ’  means  of  the  length  of  an  usual  bed.  *  Vedhatah  ’  is  by 
depth.  *  Avachcchahnah !  (  or,  as  some  texts  read,  ‘  Swavachcchannah  ’ )  means  well’ 
povered.  This  has  reference  to  the  body  of  the  patient.  ‘  Susamstirna  ’  means  ‘  proper¬ 
ty  laid  oyer  with  a  becl  ’ — T. 


CHA  RAKA -SA  M  HIT  A. 


165 

Make' a  circular  or  round  heap  of  the  dried  dung  of  the  animals 
spoken  of  above  ( z<zfe., fElephftnt,  Horse,  Cow,  Ass  or  Mule, ’and 
Camel).  Set  fire  to  the  heap.  When  the  heap  has  been  burnt  off 
and  reduced  to  a  smokeless  fire,  a  bed  of  proper  dimensions  should 
be  spread  upon  a  bed-stead  placed  upon  the  heated  heap  of  burnt 
off  dung.  The  patient  should  be  first  rubbed  well  with  such  oijs 
as  are  destructive  of  the  wind,  and  should  be  carefully  covered 
with  vyarm  cloth.  He  should  then  be  made  to  lie  down  on  the 
bed  so  made.  He  may  then  be  subjected  to  the  pleasant  process, 
of  Swedana  called  Holaka.  These  are  the  three  and  ten  kinds  of 
Sweda  spoken  of  by  the  Hishi,  all  depending  upon  the  virtue  of 
fire.^t 

Physical  exercise,  the  shelter  of  a  warm  chamber,  the  wearing 
of  thick  and  worm  clothing,  hunger,  copious  drinking,  Tear,  anger, 
plasters  Or  ungufents,  bottle  and  sunshine, — dhese  ten,  without  the 
action  of  fire,  serye  the  purposes  of  Swedana.83 

Thus  have  been  expounded  the  two  kinds  of  Swedana,  viz.y 
that  which  depends  upon  the  action  of  fire  and  that  which  does  not" 
depend  upon  it.  Sweda  that  is  to  be  applied  to  a  particular  part 
of  the  body  and  that  which  is  applied  to  the  whole  body  have  also 
been  indicated.  ,  Oily  and  dry  Sweda  have  also  been  described. 
On  the  subject  of  Sweda,  therefore,  these  three  couples,  or  pairs 
have  been  spoken  of,  Abstaining  from  Sweda  after  the  benefit 
expected  from  it  has  arisen,  one  should  ruh  oneself  with  oil  and 
then  seek  to  eat  the  proper  food.  One  who  has  been  subjected 
to  Sweda  should  abstain  for  that  day  from  every  kind  of  work 
requiring  physical  exertion.^53 

*  ‘  Dhitika  ’  is  explained  by  Chakrapanidatta  as  ‘  Gushka-gomayadi-kritah  Agnya- 
yfayah, '  i.e.,  a  platform  of  dried  dung.  —  T. 

t  That  Sweda  which  depends  upon  the  action  of  fire  is  of  three  and  ten  kinds  as 
indicated  above.  That,  again,  which  does  not  depend  upon  the  action  of  fire  is  of 
ten  kinds.  These  two  kinds  of  Sweda  may  again  be  spoken  of  as  of  two  kinds,  viz. , 
as  applied  to  a  particular  time  or  to  the  whole  body  of  the  former  kind  is  Sankara-sweda  j 
of  the  latter,  Prastarasweda  and  others.  Upanaha  is  of  the  first  kind,  viz.,'  local. 
Physical  exercise  is  of  the  latter  kind,  its  action  being  extended  to  the  whole  body. 
A  third  classification  into  two  kinds  arises  from  the  fact  pf  some  Sweda  being  oily  oif 
\yfttery,  and  $omp  being  dry. — T. 


GH  ARAKA-SAMHl  TA. 


Here  occur  some  Verses  containing  a  summary. 

What  benefits  may  be  expected  from  Sweda,  what  kind  Of 
Sweda  is  beneficial  to  whom,  the  kind  of  Sweda  that  is  needed  for' 
the  kind  of  spot  ( in  the  body  ),  those  parts  of  the  body  unto  which 
Sweda  should  never  be  applied,  the  indications'  of  one  in  whose1 
ease  Sweda  has  been  successful  and  of  one  unto  whom  it  has  been1 
applied  in  excess,  the  remedies  that  should  be  applied  irt  the  case' 
of  the  latter,  they  unto  whom  Sweda  should  never  be  applied,  and 
they  unto  whom  it  should  be  applied;  the  different  kinds  of  articles' 
with  which  Sweda  should  be  applied*  the  three  and  ten  kinds  of1 
Sweda  that  depend  upon  the  action  of  fire,,  and  the  ten  kinds 
that  do  not  depend  upon  the  action  of  fire,  and  lastly  six  kinds  of1 
Sweda,  have  all  been  indicated  in  this  Lesson  on  Sweda,  All  that 
should  be  said  in  the  matter  of  Sweda  has  been  said  by  the  great 
Rishi.  The  instructor  is  Punarvasu.  The  pupils  should  commit 
everything  to  heart.!-4 

Thus  ends  the  fourteenth  Lesson  on  Sweda  in  the  treatise  of 
Agnive^as  revised  by  Charaka, 


SECTION  XV; 

We  shall,  after  this,' expound  the  Lesson’ on  suclr  articles  as 
should  be  kept  ready  ( in  view  of  any  untoward  'consequences 
that  may  happen  of  the  administration  of- emetics  and  purgatives:) 
Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atrt1 

Verily,  the  physician,  who  wishes  to  administer  either  emetics' 
or  purgatives  to  a  king,  or  one  that  is  like  a  king,  or  one  that  is 
possessed  of  great  wealth,  every  one  of !  whom  is  fully  competent 
to  store  large  quantities  of  all  sorts  of  articles,  should,  before  ad¬ 
ministering  emetics  or  purgatives,  cause  certain-  articles  to  be 
brought  together.  If  the  medicines  administered  work  properly, 
the  articles  to  which  we  refer,  by  being  collected  together,  will1 
not  be  useless;  for  they  will,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  be  of  use  in  many ! 
ways.  If  the -medicines,  on  the  other  hand,  produce  evil  conse¬ 
quences,  v.  then,  the  nature  of  those  evil  consequences  should  be 
noted  :and  ascertained,  and  the  rartieles  stored  may  then  be  used 
as  remedies  for  neutralising  or  correcting  those  evil-consequences.- 


CHA  RA  K A-S AMU  /  TA, 


167 


If  the  consequences  to  which  we  refer  do  actually  arise,  then  the 
articles  to  which  we  -refer,  if  not  previously  kept  ready,  may  not 
be  immediately  obtained  notwithstanding  the  possession  of  wealth 
by  him  for  whom  they  are  wanted.3 

Unto  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  that  made  this  observation, 
Agnive^a  said,— 

It  seems  to  me,  0  illustrious  one,  that  a  physician  of  knowledge 
and  wisdom  should,  at  the  very  outset,  act  in  such  a  way  ( in  view 
of  the  disease  he  is  to  treat )  that  the  drugs  ( emetics  or  purgatives) 
he  is  to  administer  may,  in  consequence  of  his  action,  at  once  suc¬ 
ceed  in  producing  the  intended  results  without  leading  to  the  faults 
of  excess  of  correlation,  absence  of  correlation,  or  injudicious 
correlation.  With  respect  to  all  actions,  that  success  is  desirable 
which  results  from  a  judicious  application  of  means.  Distress  or 
evil  is  always  due  to  an  injudicious  application  of  means.  If  action 
commenced  judiciously  or  injudiciously  were  to  lead  to  success 
or  failure  in  quite  an  arbitrary  way,  knowledge  and  ignorance 
then  would  have  no  distinction.*3 

Unto  Agnive9a  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  replied  in  these 
words : — 

O  Agnivetja,  it  is  only  ourselves,  or  persons  like  ourselves, 
that  can  act  in  such  a  way  in  view  of  the  disease  to  be  treated  that 
the  drugs  to  be  administered  may  at  once  lead  to  success  in  pro¬ 
ducing  the  intended  results  without  the  appearance  of  the  faults 
of  excessive  correlation  or  absence  of  correlation  or  injudicious 
correlation.  There  is  no  one  competent  to  properly  teach  such 
felicity  in  the  matter  of  the  administration  of  drugs.  Nor  is  there 
any  one  that  is  competent  to  receive,  even  when  taught,  that 
felicity  of  which  we  speak.4 

Even  if  one  may  be  found  competent  to  receive  such  instruction, 

I  do  not  see  one  that  is  competent  to  comprehend  it,  or,  having 
comprehended  it,  to  apply  it  in  practice.  The  diverse  and  change- 

*  I  have  rendered  the  first  portion  of  Agniveija’s  observation  rather  freely.  The 
drift  of  the  observation  is  clear.  ‘Ekantena’  is  explained  as  ‘  without  the  faults  of 
Atiyoga,  Ayoga,  and  Mithyayoga.’  ‘  If  action  commenced  judiciously  or  injudiciously 
were  to  lead  to  success  or  failue’  means  ‘  if  action  commenced  judiciously  lead  to  success 
•or  failure,’  as  also  ‘  if  action  commenced  injudiciously  lead  to  success  or  failure’. — T, 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  MHITA . 


ful  conditions  and  properties  are  exceedingly  subtile  (and,  there¬ 
fore,  difficult  to  understand  )  of  the  triple  faults  ( viz.,  wind,  bile 
and  phlegm  ),  of  drugs,  of  the  place  which  forms  the  patient’s 
habitat  or  the  seat  of  his  disease,  of  the  season  in  which  the  disease 
has  appeared,  of  the.  constitution  of  the  patient,  of  his  diet,  of  the 
adaptability  of  the  patient,  or  the  medicaments  to  the  conditions 
of  existence  surrounding  the  patient;  of  the  strength,  disposition 
(both  physical  and  mental ),  and  age  or  years  of  the  patient.  The 
cbnditions  and  properties,  if  reflected  upon,  would  confuse  and 
fconfound  the  understanding  of  even  a  person  of  ample  and  clear 
intelligence.  What  need  then  be  said  of  one  that  is  endued  with 
little  understanding?*6 

Hence  it  is  necessary  that  we  should  give  instructions  in  res¬ 
pect  of  both  the  topics,  viz.,  the  proper  administration  of  dangerous 
drugs,  and  the  remedies  that  are  needed  (  if  the  -dangers  feared 
do  occur).  We  shall  also,  after’these,  discourse  upon  what  steps 
and  things  are  necessary  for  achieving. success.  In  this  Lesson, 
however,  we  shall  lay  down  in  brief  -those  diverse,  articles  that 
require  to.  be  kept  .ready  in  view  of  the  dangers  to  which  we 
allude.  They  are  as  follows  : — 

.  In  the  first  place  a  mansion  must  be  constructed  under  the 
supervision  of  an  engineer  well-conversant  with  the  science  of 
building  mansions  and  houses.  It  should  be  spacious  and  roomy^ 
The  element  of  strength  should  not  be  wanting  in  it.  Every  part 
of  it  should  not  be  exposed  to  strong  winds  or  breezes.  One 
portion  at  least  should  be  open  to  the  currents  of  wind.f 

'  *  The  diverse  conditions  and  properties  of  the  things  indicated  here  have  all  been 

referred  to  in  the  previous  Lessons.  They  are  thus  recapitulated  by  the  Commentator. 
The  conditions  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  refer  to  their  decrease,  increase,  and  equability 
or  normal  measure.  ‘  Deqa’  or  place  refers  to  both  habitat  and  seat  of  disease.  The 
fconditions  of  drugs  have  reference  to  their  newness,  freshness,  staleness,  and  dryness  or 
the  reverse  ;  in  case  of  drugs  derived  from  animals,  the  reference  is  to  the  kind  of  food 
upon  which  the  animals  have  subsisted  ;  the  character  of  the  soil  that  has  produced 
-  them ;  their  purity  or  impurity  owing  to  co-existence  with  other  objects  ;  then  again 
whether  the  deration  is  to  be  taken,  or  pills  or  the  other  forms  in  which  they  are  capable 
of  being  used  ;  their  measure  ;  &c. —  T. 

-j-  The  meaning  '.is  that  though  protected  against  the  breeze  or  strong  winds,  one 
portion  of.the  mansion  should  be  exposed  to  the  breeze.— T. 


CHARAKA-SA  MHiTA  . 


It  should  be  such  that  one  may  move  or  walk  through  it  with 
■ease.  It  should  not  be  exposed  to  smoke,  or  the  Sun,  or  dust,  or 
injurious  sound  and  touch  and  taste  and  form  and  scent.  It 
■should  be  furnished  with  staircases,  with  pestles  and  mortars, 
privies,  accomodation  for  belting,  and  cook-rooms.6 

After  this  should  be  secured  a  body  of  attendants  of  good 
behaviour,  distinguished  for  purity  or  cleanliness  of  habits,  attached 
to  the  person  for  whose  service  they  are  engaged,  possessed  of 
cleverness  and  skill,  endued  with  kindness,  skilled  in  every  kind 
of  service  that  a  patient  may  require,  endued  with  general  clever¬ 
ness,  competent  to  cook  food  and  curries,  clever  in  bathing  or 
washing  a  patient,  well-conversant  in  rubbing  or  pressing  the 
limbs,*  or  raising  the  patient  or  assisting  him  in  walking  or  mov¬ 
ing  about,  well-skilled  in  making  or  cleaning  beds,  competent  to 
pound  drugs,  or  ready,  patient  and  skilful  in  waiting  upon  one  that 
is  ailing,  and  never  unwilling  to  do  any  act  that  they  may  be 
commanded  (by  the  physician  or  the  patient)  to  do.  A  number  of 
men  should  also  be  secured  that  are  skilled  in  vocal  and  instru¬ 
mental  music,  in  hymning  encomiums  and  eulogies,  conversant 
with  and  skilled  in  reciting  verses  and  pleasant  discourses  and 
narratives  and  stories  and  legendary  histories,  clever  in  reading 
the  face  and  understanding  what  is  wanted  by  the  patient,  ap¬ 
proved  and  liked  by  him  upon  whom  they  are  to  wait,  fully 
conversant  with  all  the  requirements  of  time  and  place,  and  poss¬ 
essed  of  such  politeness  as  to  become  agreeable  companions. 
The  mansion  should  also  be  stored  with  an  adequate  supply  of 
Lava  (a),  Kapinjala  (b),  £a9a  (c),  Harina  (d),  Ena  (e),  Kalapuch- 
cchaka  (f),  Mrigamatrika  (g).  and  Urabhra  (h).7 


Samvahaka’  is  explained  by  the  Commentator  as  ‘Hastapadadi-sammarddaka.’ — T. 

a.  Perdix  Ckinensis. 

b.  The  francoline  Partridge. 

c.  The  hare. 

d.  The  common  variety  of  the  spotted  deer. 
t.  The  black  antelope. 

/.  The  black-tailed  deer. 

g.  A  large  species  of  deer  fatter  towards  the  abdominal  and  hinder  parts. 

h.  Sheep. 


22 


1Y0 


CHAR  A  KA -SA  HM/TA. 


A  cow  also  should  be  kept,  yielding  copious  milk,  of  arquie^ 
disposition,  healthy,  having  all  her  calves  living*  well  tended  with- 
food  and  drink,  and  kept  in  a  fold  that  is  properly  cleaned.  So 
also  should  be  kept  little  vessels  or  cups,  larger  vessels  for  washing 
the  hands  and  face,  water-vessels  or  jars,  small  jars  or  pitchers^ 
dishes,  metallic  or  earthen  jars,  cauldrons  or  pans,  larger  and 
smaller  jars,f  vessels  called  kundas,  hollow  vessels  for  covering, 
articles,  wooden  or  metallic  ladles,  mats,  covers  of  cloth  or  blankets, 
vessels  for  boiling  oils  and  ghee,  churning  rods,  deer-skins  and' 
sheepskins,  rags,  cloths  made  of  cotton  and  wool,  strings  and 
chords,  beds  and  seats,  vessels’ called  Bhringaras  full  of  water  and 
flatter  vessels  for  holding  spittle  and  evacuations,  all  placed  ready 
for  use,  good  Beds  placed  upon  bedsteads  and  overlaid  with  white 
sheets  J  and  containing  pillows,  for  use  when  sleep  is  needed,, 
beds  and  carpets  for  lying  down  or  sitting  upon,  articles  necessary 
for  the  operations  of  Sneha,  Sweda,  Avyanga,  plasters,  fomentation,, 
rubbing,  vomiting,  purging,  application  of  oily  or  other  kinds  of 
enemata,  errhines,  urination^  and  passing  of  stools,  well-washed 
mullers,  and  flat  stones  that  are  smooth  and  rough  and  neither 
smooth  nor  rough,  and  diverse  kinds  of  instruments,  domestic  and 
surgical.  Smoking  tubes,  enemas,  and  enemas  of  a  special  kind 
called  uttaravastikas,  brushes  and  brooms,  balances  and  weights, 
measuring  vessels  and  baskets,  Ghee,  oil,  fat,  marrow,  honey,  treacle, 
salt,  fuel,  water,  honey-wines,  sour  gruels  of  different  varieties, 
different  kinds  of  wines,  whey,  butter-milk,  sour  gruel  of  paddy  or 
rice,  and  the  different  varieties  of  animal  urine,  should  also  be 
kept  ready. 

So  also  £ali  ( a ),  Shashtika  (£),  MudgA  (c),  Masha  (d), 


*  If  a  cow  loses  a  calf,  that  is  taken  as  an  indication  of  ill-HealtH  or  of  some' 
disease. — T. 

+  These  are  all  vessels' of  smaller  or  larger  size  for  Holding  water,  'fhey  differ  also’ 
in  shapes. — T. 

(a) .  A-  variety  of  paddy. 

(b) .  Ditto.,  so  called  for  it  is  supposed  to1  ripen  in  60  days. 

(c) .  Phaseolus  Mungo. 

(id).  Phaseolus  Roxburgliti ;  syn.  Ph,  radiatus,  Roxb. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA . 


171 


;3esame,  Kulattha  (a),  Vadara($l,  Mridvika  (c),  Parushaka  (d), 
Abhaya  ( e ),  Amlaka  (/),  Vibhitaka  (g)  and  diverse  other  articles  fit 
for  the  extraction  of  Sneha  and  for  Svveda,  as  also  emetics  and  pur¬ 
gatives,  and  articles  that  are  both  emetics  and  purgatives,  those  that 
are  astringent,  that  increase  the  appetite,  promote  digestion,  cool  the 
system,  and  destroy  the  wind,  should  be  kept  ready.  Besides  these, 
such  other  articles  should  be  kept  ready  as  may  be  needed  in  view  of 
other  anticipated  evils.  Other  things,  again,  that  may  conduce  to 
the  ease,  comfort,  and  happiness  of  the  patient,  should  similarly  be 
kept  ready. ? 

Having  kept  these  articles  ready  for  use,  the  patient  should  be 
treated  with  either  Oils  or  Sweda  as  the  case  may  demand.  If 
.during  the  period  of  spch  treatment  any  mental  or  physical  disease 
of  a  violent  character  suddenly  afflicts  the  patient,  the  physician 
should  strive  to  suspend  the  administration  of  Oils  and  Sweda-9* 

Having  suspended  the  administration  of  Oils  and  Sweda,  the 
physician  should,  during  the  period  of  suspension,  adopt  towards 
the  patient  the  treatment  that  is  laid  down  for  that  mental  or 
physical  disease  whose  appearance  has  been  sudden.  After  such 
adventitious  disease  will  have  been  cured  by  this  means,  the  physi¬ 
cian  should  recommence  the  administration  of  Oils  and  Sweda. 
When  in  consequence  of  such  administration  the  patient  is  seen 
to  become  cheerful  and  restored  to  happiness,  and  regain  such 
appetite  as  to  properly  digest  what  has  been  taken  the  day  before 
(in  the  form  of  food  or  drink),  then  should  he  be  caused  to 
bathe  by  plunging  in  water  up  to  the  neck.f  to  smear  his  body 


(a) .  Dolichos  unijlorus  ;  $yn.  Dolichos  biflorus,  Roxh. 

(b) .  Zizyphus  Jujuba. 

(c) .  Dried  grapes,  called  Kiss-Miss.  Uvce  passes. 

( d) .  Grewia  Asiatica,  Linn. 

( e) .  Terminalia  Chebula. 

( f) .  Phyllanthus  Emblica ,  Linn. 

(g) .  Terminalia  Bellerica.  Roxb. 

*  The  Commentator  explains  that  -  asya  ’  in  the  last  line  means  ‘  Snehasya  ’  or 
Swedasya  va. — T. 

f  I.  e.,  the  head  should  not  be  permitted  to  be  plunged  into  the  water.  —T. 


Cfc  letups,  5,  boulevard  des  Italians 

_ _ f)u  16  Avril  au  15  Octo.  1901 _ 

222  M.  Charles  Joret,  professeur 

7425  59,  rue  Madame 


372 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


with  fragrant  unguents,  to  wear  garlands  of  flowers  and  clean  vest¬ 
ments,  and  worship  and  honor  the  deities  and  the  sancrificial  fire, 
the  Brahmanas,  preceptors  and  seniors,  and  the  physicians  waiting 
upon  him.  Then,  under  an  auspicious  constellatiou,  in  a  favourable 
lunar  day,  at  a  good  Karana  ( a >,  and  by  a  propitious  Muhurta  ( b ),. 
the  patient  should  be  caused  to  drink  an  astringent  decoction 
that  has  been  properly  blessed  by  aBrahmanawith  sacred  Mantras: 
(c),  and  prepared  from  honey  and  liquorice  and  rock-salt  and  liquid 
molasses  and  the  fruit  called  Madana  (d).10 

The  astringent  drink  that  should  be  given  to  the  patient  should,, 
of  course,  be  of  the  proper  measure.  What  measure  or  quantity 
should  be  prescribed  must  depend  upon  the  constitution  of  each- 
individual.  That  should  be  regarded  as  the  proper  measure  or 
quantity  for  an  individual  which  is  capable  of  removing  the  com¬ 
plaint.  Indeed,  that  which  is  productive  of  neither  excess  of  cor¬ 
relation  or  absence  of  correlation  should  be  taken  as  the  proper 
measure.11 

Having  caused  the  patient  to  drink  the  astringent,  the  physi¬ 
cian  should  wait  for  a  little  while.  When  it  is  understood,  from 
the  appearance  of  perspiration,  that  the  faults  (of  bile,,  wind,  and 
phlegm.)  in  the  patient  are  abating,  or  from  the  hair  of  the  patient 
standing  on  end  that  the  faults  have  changed  their  locale,  or  from 
the  noise  in  the  stomach  that  the  faults  have  passed  into  the 
stomach,  or  from  the  appearance  of  nausea  or  of  saliva  in  the  mouth 
that  the  faults  are  seeking  an  outward  course  for  escape  through  the 
mouth,  the  patient  should  then  be  given  a  bed  or  seat  as  high  as  the 
knee,  fraught  with  comfort,  spread  over  with  an  excellent  cover,, 
and  furnished  with  pillows.  This  seat  or  bed  should  be  as  well 
made  as  one  for  sleep.  A  pan  should  also  be  kept  for  holding  the 
saliva  and  other  matter  ejected  from  the  patient’s  stomach.  A 
number  of  men  should  be  kept  in  attendance  for  doing  such 


(a) .  An  astrological  dividon  of  time,  depending  upon  conjunctions  of  planetary 
bodies.  They  are  eleven  in  number. 

(b)  i  A  division  of  time,  less  than  an  hour. 

(c) .  Sacred  texts  from  the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures. 

(d) ,  Randia  dumetorum,  Roxb. 


CHARAKA-SAMhlTA,  173 

clinical  services  as  may  be  needed.  Only  such  friends  and 
well-wishers  should  be  employed  as  are  agreeable  and  at  whose 
sight  the  patient  does  not  shrink.  They  should  be  set  to  the  task  of 
holding  the  patient’s  forehead  and  sides  and  gently  pressing  and 
rubbing  the  navel  and  the  vertebral  regions.  The  patient  should 
then  be  instructed  in  these  words : — Disposing  the  mouth,  the 
palate  and  the  throat  in  a  proper  manner,  and  without  much  exer¬ 
tion,  throwing  out  the  matter  when  the  urging  to  throw  out  becomes 
pronounced,  bending  the  while  the  neck,  head  and  whole  body 
slightly  forward,  promoting  urgings  that  are  unpronounced,  with 
nailless  fingers  or  the  stalks  of  Utpala  (a),  of  Kumuda  (b),  and 
of  Saugandhika  (c),  so  inserted  as  only  to  touch  the  throat  without 
penetrating  it,  do  thou  conduct  thyself  for  a  little  while.*12'18 

The  patient  should  conduct  himself  according  to  this  way. 
The  physician  should,  with  close  attention,  observe  the  ejected 
matter  in  the  pans.  From  observation  of  the  characteristics  of  the 
ejected  matter,  the  skilled  physician  will  be  able  to  understand 
whether  there  has  been  excess  or  absence  of  correlation  or  judi¬ 
cious  correlation  in  the  matter  of  the  administration  of  emetics. 
The  physician  who  observes  with  attention  the  ejected  matter,  will, 
again,  succeed  in  doing  what  is  proper  for  counteracting  the  faults, 
guided  by  the  indications  noticed. 

Hence,  the  physician  should  always  observe  with  close  atten¬ 
tion  the  ejected  matter.14 

As  regards  this,  the  following  are  the  indications  from  which 
are  to  be  inferred  the  excess  and  absence  of  correlation,  and  judi¬ 
cious  correlation,  ( in  respect  of  the  administration  of  emetics. )t 


(a) .  Nymphcca  stellata. 

(b) .  Nymphtz  Lotus,  Linn. 

(c) .  Otherwise  called  Kalhara.  A  variety  of  Lotus. 

*  The  two  fingers  generally  inserted  are  the  second  and  the  third.  Regarding 
those  that  are  to  attend  upon  the  patient,  the  physician  should  always  select  such  persons 
as  are  agreeable  to  the  patient. — T. 

f  /.  e.,  over-administration,  insufficient  administration,  or  proper  administration  of 
the  drug.  Henceforth,  when  the  terms  Atiyoga,  Ayoga,  and  Yoga  occur,  I  shall 
render  them  as  over-administration,  insufficient  administration,  and  proper  or  judicious 
administration. — T. 


1-7  4* 


CHRA  KA-SA  MH  IT  A . 


A  disinclination  to  vomit  arising  from  whatever  cause,  a  throw¬ 
ing  out  of  the  medicine  unaccompanied  by  the  faults  or  impurities 
,whose  ejection  is  desired,  the  entire  absence  of  ejection  of  either 
the  medicine  or  the  faults  or  both,  are  symptoms  indicative  of  an 
insufficient  administration  of  emetics. 

An  inclination  to  vomit,  arising  at  the  proper  time  (i.  e., 
neither  too  soon  after  the  administration  of  the  medicine  nor  too 
long  after  i.t),  the  existence  of  mild  pains  when  the  urging  to  vomit 
{becomes  pronounced,  the  throwing  out  of  the  anticipated  impurities 
in  due  order  ( i.e.,  at  first  phlegm,  then  bile,  and  lastly  wind),  and 
.disappearance  of  the  action  of  the  medicine  of  itself  (i.e.,  without 
the  necessity  of  administration  of  antidotes),  are  symptoms  of  a 
judicious  or  proper  administration  of  emetics. 

When  the  administration  has  been  proper  or  judicious,  the 
physician  should,  by  observing  the  quantity  of  the  matter  ejected, 
ascertain  whether  the  vomiting  has  been  violent,  or  middling,  or 
mild. 

When  there  has  been  an  over-administration  of  emetics,  the 
.ejected  matter  becomes  frothy  and  mixed  with  blood,  and  its  hue 
becomes  as  variegated  as  that  of  the  peacock’s  plumes.  These  are 
the  indications  of  over-administration.16 

The  disorders  or  afflictions  brought  about  by  over  dose  and 
insufficient  dose  are  flatulence  in  the  stomach,  cutting  pains  in  the 
anal  canal  or  lower  duct,  secretions  from  both  the  mouth  and  the 
anal  duct,?  and  a  sensation  of  pressure  against  the  heart ;  pains  in 
the  body,  discharge  of  living  blood,  stiffness  or  rigidity  of  the  body, 
and  a  sense  of  weariness  or  fatigue.16 

When  by  a  judicious  administration  of  emetics  the  patient  is 
seen  to  have  vomited  copiously,  the  physician  should  cause  his 
hands,  feet,  and  mouth  to  be  washed,  and  should  give  him  rest  for  a 
short  space  of  time  (comforting  him  the  while  with  words  of  assu¬ 
rance).  He  should  next  cause  the  patient  to  drink  (inhale),  accord¬ 
ing  tq  the  extent  he  can,  the  smoke  of  any  of  these  three  kinds,  viz., 


*  In  the  case  of  emetics,  the  secretion  issues  from  the  mouth  ;  while  in  that  of 
purgatives,  it  issues  out  of  the  anus, — T, 


CHA  RA  KA  -SAM  HIT  A. 


175 


smoke  that  serves  the  purpose  of  oilifying  the  body,  or  smoke  that 
acts  as  a  purgative,  or  smoke  that  has  the  virtue  of  destroying-  the 
faults  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm.  After  this,  the  patient  should 
once  more  undergo  the  operation  of  washing  his  hands,  feet,  and 
mouth.  When  he  has  undergone  this  operation,  he  should  then' 
be  introduced  into  a  chamber  that  is  not  exposed  to  the  Wind. 
Thither  he  should  be  made  to  occupy  a  bed  and  lie  down  at  his' 
ease.  The  physician  should  then  give  him  the  following  instruc¬ 
tions  :■ — 

Thou  shouldst  refrain  fiom  sneaking  in  a  loud  voice.  Thou 
must  abstain  from  eating  too  much.  Thou  must  not  sit  idly  for  a 
long  time.  Thou  must  abstain  from  excessive  walking.  ThoU  must 
not  give  way  to  wrath  and  grief,  and  thou  must  not  expose  thyself  to 
cold  and  heat  and  the  night  dew,  and  thou  must  avoid  such'  plates 
as  are  exposed  to  the  wind.  Thou  must  avoid  riding  animals  and 
vehicles  as  also  sexual  congress,  night-keeping,  and  sleep  during  day 
time.  Thou-  must  avoid  eating  such  food  as  is  prepared  with  ingre¬ 
dients  that  do  not  agree  with  one  another,  or  food  that  is  not  easily 
digestible,  or  food  that  does  not  agree  with  thy  constitution,  or 
unseasonable  food,  or  excessive  food,  or  food  that  is  not  nutritive, 
or  food  that  is  heavy,  or  food  that  is  irregular  iii  respect  of  quan¬ 
tity.  Thou  must  not  seek  to  suppress  urgings  that  have  become' 
pronounced,  or  excite  urgings  by  pressing  the  diaphragm.  Thou 
shouldst  not  indulge  in  any  of  these  in  even  thy  mind.  As 
regards  thy  diet,  there  need  not  be  any  restriction  (in  respect  of 
kind  or  quantity,  besides  those  hereinbefore  indicated.) — The' 
patient  should  follow  all  these  injunctions  strictly.*17 

*  ‘  Muhurtama'fwasya ’  is  explained  by  the  Commentator  as  ‘giving  him  rest  for 
Some  time  and  comforting  him  the  while  with  soothing  speeches.’  Smoke,  as  has  been 
indicated  in  the  Lesson  on  Smoking,  is  of  diverse  kinds.  Some  oilify  the  body, 
some  act  as  purgatives  ;  and  some  correct  the  disorders  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm.  Any 
Of  these  three  may  be  taken  by  the  patient.  ‘  Samarthyatah  ’  is  ‘  according  to  the  extent 
Of  his  power’,  i.e.,  of  smoke  the  patient  should  take  as  much  as  he  can.  ‘  Avapyaya’ 
is  night-dew.  ‘  Gramya-dharmam ’, — the  vulgarity  of  the  act  cannot  be  better  indicated 
than  by  this  word.  The  decency  of  the  Sanskrit  language  knows  no  bounds.  An  instance 
of  food  whose  ingredients  do  not  agree  would  be  ghee  or  milk  and  fish  ;  unseasonable 
food  implies  food  that  is  taken  unseasonably  or  at  irregular  intervals.  ‘These  should  not 
fee  indulged  even  mentally.’  The  Hindu  physicians  understood  the _ action  of  the  mind 
Upon  the  body.  —  T. 


176 


CHA  RA  KA  -SA  MHITA . 


The  patient  should  then,  in  the  evening  of  that  day,  or  on  the 
next  day,  be  caused  to  bathe  in  lukewarm  water.  Take  then  a 
little  quantity  of  red  Cali  rice,  boil  it  in  water  and  make  a  manda 
of  it.  The  Liquid  portion  that  is  to  be  obtained  after  the  manda 
has  settled  down  is  the  gruel  that  should  be  administered,  while  still 
agreeably  warm,  to  the  patient.  Marking  the  strength  of  his 
appetite,  similar  food  should  be  administered  to  him  when  the  time 
comes  for  his  second  as  also  his  thrid  act  of  eating.  When  the 
time  comes  for  the  fourth  act  ofeating,  similar  kind  of  £ali  rice 
should  be  taken  and  boiling  it  well  into  a  jelly-like  substance, 
mixing  it  with  warm  water,  and  without  using  any  ghee  or  salt,  or 
using  a  very  little  of  either,  it  should  be  administered  to  him.  The 
physician  should  do  the  same  when  the  time  comes  for  the  fifth  and 
sixth  acts  of  eating.  When  the  time  comes  for  the  seventh  act 
of  eating,  take  of  the  same  kind  of  rice  a  quantity  measured  by  two 
Prasritas*  Boil  it  well  till  it  becomes  very  soft.  Mix  it  then 
with  warm  warter  and  make  it  very  thin,  and  use  a  very  little  quan¬ 
tity  of  ghee  and  salt,  and  mix  it  then  with  the  gruel  of  Mudga.  Even 
this  is  the  food  that  is  to  be  administered  to  the  patient.  The  same 
kind  of  food  is  prescribed  for  the  eighth  and  the  ninth  acts  of 
eating.  When  the  time  comes  for  the  tenth  act  of  eating, 
take  any  of  these,  viz.,  Lava,  Kapinjala,  and  the  others. 
Boiled  rice,  served  with  the  decoction  of  such  meat,  with  a  little 
salt,  will  constitute  a  nutritive  food  that  should  be  given  to  the 
patient.  After  taking  such  food,  the  water  that  is  to  be  drunk 
should  be  warm-  The  same  rule  should  be  observed  when  the  time 
comes  for  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  acts  of  eating.  After  that, 
the  same  kind  of  diet  should  be  continued  for  a  week  in  succession. 
On  the  expiry  of  a  week,  however,  the  patient  may  betake  himself 
to  his  usual  regimen.18 

In  this  state  the  patient  should  once  more  be  subjected  to  the 
processes  of  Oiling  and  Sweda.  When  he  is  seen  to  become 
cheerful  and  happy,  digesting  his  food  easily,  and  performing 
his  daily  Homa  and  offering  the  usual  articles  to  the  deities  and 
going  through  the  usual  auspicious  rites  and  doing  his  silent 

*  A  prasrita  is  a  handful.  To  this  day,  little  quantifies  of  rice  are  measured  by 
prasritas  for  domestic  purposes. — T. 


CHA RA  RA -SA  MHITA . 


17? 


Recitations,  and  when  he  goes  through  the  prescribed  rites  of  expia¬ 
tion,  he  should  be  advised  to  obtain  the  benedictions  of  Brahmanas 
at  an  auspicious  lunation,  under  a  sacred  constitution,  in  a  proper 
conjunction,  and  at  a  fit  hour.  He  should  next  be  made  to  take  of 
the  measure  of  an  Aksha ,  the  paste  of  Trivrit  corrected  by  the  pro¬ 
per  ingredients  being  mixed  with  it.*19 

After  this,  the  physician,  observing  the  differences  of  condition 
of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  of  the  drugs  to  be  administered,  the 
place  inhabited  by  the  patient  or  the  seat  of  the  disease,  the 
season  in  which  the  disease  has  happened,  of  his  strength,  of  the 
state  of  his  body,  of  the  nature  and  quantity  of  his  food,  of  its 
suitability  or  assimilation,  of  the  nature  of  the  mind,  of  the  disposi¬ 
tion  the  patient  has,  and  of  his  age,  and  noting  also  all  other  dis¬ 
orders  under  which  the  patient  may  be  suffering,  should  then  treat 
the  patient,  that  has  been  sufficiently  purged,  with  such  processes 
as  have  been  laid  down  in  that  portion  of  this  work  which  treats 
of  vomiting,  leaving  out  all  methods  that  depend  on  smoking. 
Verily,  he  should  pursue  this  treatment  till  the  natural  strength, 
complexion,  and  disposition  of  the  patient  returns.t*0 

*  The  Homo,  is  the  rite  of  pouring  libations  of  clarified  butter  on  the  sacred  fire. 
It  should  be  performed  daily  by  every  good  man  of  the  three  higher  orders,  viz., 
Brahmanas,  Kshatriyas,  and  Vaicyas.  By  ‘  Vali  ’  is  meant  everything  offered  or  dedicat¬ 
ed  with  mantras  to  the  deities.  It  may  consist  of  both  vegetables  and  flowers  or  animals. 
In  the  case  of  the  latter,  they  are,  of  course,  slaughtered.  The  Hindu  scriptures,  how¬ 
ever,  always  discourage  the  offer  of  animals  to  the  deities.  ‘Japa’  means  the  silent 
recitation  of  sacred  mantras,  notably  the  Gayatri  which  is  regarded  as  the  holiest 
mantra  of  the  Vedas.  All  disease  is  regarded  as  the  result  of  sin.  When  a  Hindu  falls 
sick,  he  performs  the  ceremony  of  expiation,  either  during  the  continuance  of  the  illness 
or  after  becoming  convalescent.  An  Aksha  represents  the  weight  of  about  a  Rupee. 
‘Kalkya’  is  prepared  by  grinding  dry  or  fresh  vegetable  substances  on  a  stone  with  a 
muller,  and  then  making  a  thin  paste,  with  the  addition  of  water  when  necessary. — T. 

t  These  observations  apply  to  the  patient  that  has  been  sufficiently  purged  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  injunctions  laid  down  in  respect  of  purging.  The  treatment  to  be  followed 
should  be  according  to  what  has  been  laid  down  in  respect  of  vomiting  or  the  adminis¬ 
tration  of  emetics,  and  should  be  continued  or  persisted  in  till  restoration  to  perfect 
health.  In  pursuing  such  treatment,  however,  the  physician  is  required  to  observe  the 
various  particulars  mentioned.  Patients  differ  from  one  another  in  respect  of  these,  and 
drugs  also,  although  of  the  same  kind,  have  differences  depending,  as  said  already,  on 
freshness  or  staleness,  ®r  manner  of  use,  or  quantity,  &c. — T. 


23 


178 


CHA  HA  KA -SA  MHITA. 


When  at  last  the  physician  sees  that  the  patient  regains  his 
natural  strength  and  complexion  and  that  his  mind  has  become 
cheerful  and  that  he  is  living  in  happiness,  indeed,  when  it  is  seen 
that  he  is  digesting  easily  the  food  that  he  takes,  when  he  washes 
his  head,  and  smears  his  person  with  sandal  paste  and  other 
fragrant  unguents,  wears  garlands  of  flowers  and  clean  and  good 
vestments,  and  decks  himself  with  ornaments,  the  physician  should 
then  show  him  unto  his  friends  and  relatives  and  allow  him  to  con¬ 
duct  himself  in  any  way  he  likes.*21 

Here  are  certain  verses. 

It  is  only  a  king,  or  a  person  that  is  like  a  king,  or  one 
that  is  enormously  wealthy,  that  can  afford  to  be  treated  in 
the  above  way  for  the  correction  of  his  faults  or  disorders.!22 
If  a  poor  man  finds  himself  in  similar  affliction,  he  should  take  such 
purgatives  as  may  be  suited  to  the  condition  of  his  affliction, 
without  storing  previously  such  costly  and  rare  articles  as  have  been 
mentioned  before.23  All  men  cannot  be  expected  to  have  or  com¬ 
mand  all  kinds  of  articles.  It  is,  again,  not  true  that  the  fiercest 
diseases  do  not  come  upon  and  afflict  the  poor.2*1  Whatever,  there¬ 
fore,  a  person,  however  indigent  his  means,  is  able  to  accomplish, 
when  overcome  by  afflictions,  in  the  matter  of  medicines,  he  should, 
to  the  utmost  extent  of  his  power,  accomplish  in  the  matter  of  taking 
emetics  and  such  diet  as  may  be  prescribed  for  him  by  the 
physician.28 

By  taking  these  corrective  medicines  judiciously,  which  are 
cleansers  of  all  impurities,  which  check  and  cure  disorders,  and  which 
improve  the  strength  and  complexion,  one  becomes  possessed  of 
longevity.28 

*  ‘Cirasnatah’  means,  literally,  *  with  head  washed.  ’  The  sense,  however,  is  that 
of  washing  the  whole  person.  A  sick  person  may  wash  his  body  only  with  a  wet  towel, 
but  in  India  no  one  is  permitted  to  wash  the  head,  i.e.,  the  whole  body  with  the  head, 
unless  he  is  perfectly  hale. —  T. 

t  The  treatment  that  has  been  described  above  is  called  ‘Sam^odhanam  ’  or  correc¬ 
tion.  The  chief  end  kept  in  view,  while  administering  Emetics  and  Purgatives,  is  the 
correction  of  the  faults  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm.  Graver  disorders,  or  those  due  to 
specific  causes,  have  laid  down  for  them  other  kinds  of  treatment. — T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MH1TA. 


179 


Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary .. 

The  manner  in  which  Emetics  and  Purgatives  are  to  be  adminis¬ 
tered  unto  great  men  possessed  of  vast  wealth,  the  articles  that 
should  be  stored  and  the  object  for  which  they  should  be  stored, 
and  being  stored  should  be  applied  or  administered,  the  measure  in 
which  Emetics  and  Purgatives  (and  other  articles)  should  be  applied 
and  the  manner  of  their  administration,  what  the  indications  are  of 
injudicious  administration,  of  judicious  administration,  and  of  exces¬ 
sive  administration,  wdiat  the  faults  are  and  what  the  evil  con¬ 
sequences  are  that  may  follow,  what  articles  should  not  be  used 
( for  purging  and  vomiting  )  by  persons  that  are  regarded  as  pure, 
and  what  the  order  is  in  which  the  corrective  medicines  should 
be  administered, — all  these  have  been  expounded  by  Punarvasu 
in  this  Lesson  called  Upakalpaniyam. 

Thus  ends  the  fifteenth  Lesson  called  Upakalpaniyam  in  the 
treatise  of  Agnive9a  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


SECTION  XVI. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  subject  of  the  skilful 
Physician.  Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.*1 

That  man  unto  whom  are  administered  purgatives  by  a  physi¬ 
cian  that  is  skilled  in  treatment,  that  is  possessed  of  learning, 
conversant  with  the  scriptures,  and  ready  for  action,  enjoys  the 
happiness  of  a  restoration  to  health  in  consequence  of  the  ad¬ 
ministration  being  always  judicious.2  That  man,  however,  unto 
whom  purgatives  are  administered  by  a  person  that  pretends  to  be 
a  physician  and  is  destitute  of  learning,  suffers  much  misery  through 
either  injudicious  or  excessive  administration.3 

Weakness,  lightness  of  the  limbs,  abatement  of  pain  and  the 
disease,  liking  for  food,  proper  action  of  the  heart,  improvement 
of  the  complexion,  the  appearance  of  hunger  and  thirst  and  of  the 


*  ‘  Prabhritiyam  ’  comes  from  ‘  Prabhriti  ’  which  means  ‘  prabharanam.  ’  Hence, 
by  ‘  Chikitsa  ’-prabhitih  ’  is  implied  a  skilful  physician.  This  Lesson  gives  certain  mis¬ 
cellaneous  matters  connected  with  the  skilful  physician.— 7’. 


180 


CHRAKA-SA  MHITA, 


urgings  in  respect  of  both  faeces  and  urine  in  proper  time,  the 
unobstructed  action  of  the  understanding,  the  senses,  and  the  mind, 
natural  or  normal  action  of  the  wind  (within  the  body),  and 
enhancement  of  the  digestive  fire, — these  are  the  symptoms  of  one 
that  has  been  properly  purged.*4'5 

The  indications  of  those  that  have  not  been  sufficiently  purged 
are  constant  secretions  from  the  salivary  glands,  heaviness  of  the 
heart  or  the  breast,  throwing  up  of  phlegm  and  bile,  flatulence, 
disgust  for  food,  nausea  and  vomiting,  the  absence  of  weakness, 
heaviness  or  the  limbs  of  the  whole  body,  lassitude  of  the  calf  and 
the  thighf  sleepiness,  and  sensation  of  chill  pervading  the  entire 
body,  accession  of  catarrh,  J  and  abnormal  course  of  the  wind." 

The  indications  of  an  excessive  or  over  administration  of 
purgatives  are  evacuation,  in  the  first  instance,  of  stools,  bile, 
phlegm,  and  wind  in  due  order,  and  then  the  discharge  of  blood 
that  looks  like  liquified  fat  or  broth  of  meat,  and  after  this,  the  dis-- 
charge  of  pure  water  without  any  phlegm  or  bile  being  mixed  with 
it,  and  then  blood  of  a  dark  blue.  The  other  symptoms  are  thirst 
and  pain  in  consequence  of  the  obstruction  of  wind.7 

The  symptoms  of  an  over-administration  of  emetics  also  are 
the  same.  The  additional  indications  are  afflictions  of  the  wind 
and  suspension  or  loss  of  voice.8 

Hence,,  in  the  matter  of  the  administration  of  purgatives  and 
emetics  for  purifying  or  correcting  the  constitution  of  its  faults,  an 
intelligent  man  should  seek  a  learned  and  skilful  physician  for  his 
help,  one,  that  is,  who  will  bestow  upon  him  both  long  life  and 
happiness.® 

*  The  weakness  here  indicated  is  not  the  weakness  of  disease  but  that  which  naturally 
follows  copious  purging.  By  ‘  anulomanam  ’  of  the  wind  is  meant  the  downward  motion 
of  the  wind.  This  is  its  natural  or  normal  course.  It  is  only  when  it  rises  up  that  it 
becomes  the  source  of  diverse  kinds  of  disease,  ‘  Kayagni  ’  is  the  fire  that  resides  in  the. 
body,  or  the  digestive  fire. — T. 

t  ‘  Jangha  ’  is  literally  that  part  of  the  leg  which  is  between  the  knee  and  the 
■sole.  ‘  Uru  ’  is  the  upper  part,  i.e. ,  from  the  knee  to  the  hip-joint. — T. 

J  ‘  Pinasa  ’ is  inflammation  of  the  Schneiderian  membrane.  Generally,  it  stands  for 
all  kinds  of  catarrh. —  T, 


CHA  RAKA-  SA  MH I TA . 


181 


Indigestion,  disgust  for  food,  obesity,  paleness,  heaviness  of  the 
limbs,  langour  or  sense  of  weariness,  black  eruptions  on  the  skin, 
urticaria  evanida,  eruptions  of  diverse  kinds  on  the  skin,  disconted- 
ness,  lassitude,  fatigue  after  slight  exertion,  a  foetid  smell  of  the  body, 
cheerlessness,  constant  throwing  up  of  phlegm  and  bile,  sleepless¬ 
ness,  excessive  sleep,  loss  of  virility,  drowsiness,  loss  of  understand¬ 
ing,  wild  dreams,  loss  of  strength  and  complexion,  are  the  symp¬ 
toms  of  a  man  in  whom  faults  have  accumulated.  These  are  also 
the  symptoms  of  one  that  has  been  regaled  with  medicines  that 
promote  nutrition  and  obesity.  For  one  labouring  under  such 
symptoms  are  the  processes  of  purification  or  correction  beneficial. 
Correction,  which  is  of  two  kinds,  viz,  Urddhya  and  Anulomya,  to 
be  beneficial,  should  be  administered  according  to  the  nature  or 
strength  of  the  faults  enumerated  above  and  according  to  the 
strength  or  weakness  of  the  patient.*10'13 

The  symptoms  of  one  whose  stomach  has  been  corrected  or 
purified  are  the  increase  of  the  digestive  fire ;  alleviation  of  all 
diseases,  the  normal  action  of  all  organs ;  a  happy  state  of  the 
senses,  the  mind,  and  the  understanding;  a  healthy  complexion, 
strength,  growth,  children  and  virility.  Decrepitude  comes  over 
such  a  man  after  a  long  time.  Longevity  becomes  his,  and  that 
Jong  life  is  passed  in  freedom  from  disease.  Hence  it  is  clear  that 
one  should,  at  the  proper  time,  drink  the  purifying  or  corrective 
medicines  suited  to  him  and  agreeably  to  sound  or  judicious 
advice.14'10 

The  faults  of  the  system,  if  subjugated  by  fasts  and  Pachanas, 
may  reappear.  If  subjugated  by  correctives,  they  cannot 
reappear.f 1 7 

*  ‘  Sancodhanam,’  i.e  ,  the  processes  of  purification  or  correction  described  in  the 

previous  portion  of  the  work,  is  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  Urddhyam  and  Anulomyam.  The 
first  means  that  Sancodhanam  which  tends  to  make  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  act  in 
directions  opposite  to  their  normal  functions.  The  second  means  that  which  makes  these 
net  in  directions  consistent  with  their  normal  functions.— T. 

f  ‘  Pachanas  ’  are  medicines  compounded  of  vegetable  substances.  They  are 
administered  for  aiding  the  digestion  of  undigested  food.  In  some  cases,  they  act  as 
appetizers. — T, 


182 


CM  A  RA  KA-SA  H  MIT  A . 


If  the  roots  be  not  exterminated  of  faults  and  trees,  and  of  such 
diseases  as  have  the  tendency  to  appear  and  spread,  then,  even  if  they 
temporarily  disappear,  they  are  sure  to  make  their  reappearance.1 

For  those  in  whose  case  there  has  been  an  over-administra¬ 
tion  (of  emetics  or  purgatives),  the  drinking  of  Ghee  is  applauded, 
or  Oil  that  is  boiled  with  the  ten  ingredients  having  Madhuraka 
for  their  first,  or  the  use  of  oily  enemata.*21 

That  man  in  whose  case  the  administration  (of  emetics  or 
purgatives)  has  been  insufficient,  should  first  have  Oils  administer¬ 
ed  unto  him  and  then  should  he  once  again  be  subjected  to  the  cor¬ 
rective  treatment.  Indeed,  in  administering  to  him  such  corrective 
treatment  again,  the  physician,  who  must  be  competent  in  matters 
connected  with  dose  and  time  and  strength  of  the  patient,  should 
be  guided  by  his  remembrance  of  what  has  happened  before,  viz., 
the  recollection  of  the  former  dose,  the  time  when  it  was  formerly 
administered,  &c.).2Z 

The  treatment  that  is  to  be  adopted  in  all  diseases  that  are 
generated  by  the  improper  administration  of  Oils,  of  Sweda,  of  cor¬ 
rectives,  and  the  improper  use  of  food  and  drink,  will  be  described 
especially  in  that  portion  of  this  work  which  is  called  Siddhi  (  or 
success).23 

The  constituent  elements  of  the  body  become  inharmonious 
in  consequence  of  the  presence  of  causes  opposite  or  antagonistic 
to  them.  When,  however,  causes  favorable  or  not  adverse  are 
present,  those  constituents  grow  harmonious.  It  is  always  the 
nature,  again,  of  those  constituents  to  suffer  diminution  and 
decay. 

For  the  generation  or  appearance  of  all  existent  objects  there 
is  adequate  cause.  For  their  destruction,  however,  there  is  no  cause. 
Some  philosophers,  in  this  matter,  hold  that  the  cessation  of  the 


*  ‘  Madhuraka  ’  here  implies  the  ‘Jivaniya  Gana,’  i.e.,  the  aggregate  of  eight, 

numbering  Jivaka,  Rishabhaka,  Meda,  Mahameda,  Riddhi,  Vriddhi,  Kakoli,  and  Khira- 
kakoli.  Some  of  these  are  not  obtainable  or  identifiable.  With  two  more  viz.,  Jivanti  and 
Madhuka,  they  form  the  Jivaniya  Gana.  Jivanti  is  Calogyne  ovalis,  and  Madhuka  is 
Liquorice.  —  T. 


CHAIiAKA-SAMHJTA,  183 

cause  (that  upholds  existent  objects)  is  the  cause  of  their  des¬ 
truction.25 

Unto  the  preceptor  that  had  said  so,  Agnive9a  put  the  follow¬ 
ing  question,  viz.,  If  destruction  proceeds  from  the  very  nature 
of  all  objects,  what  then  is  the  function  of  skilful  treatment?2® 
What  are  those  constituent’elements  then  that  the  physician  brings 
back  into  harmony  with  the  aid  of  his  medicines  ?  What  also, 
O  illustrious  one,  is  treatment  (of  disease)  ?  Indeed,  for  what 
end  is  medical  treatment  resorted  to?27 

Hearing  these  words  of  his  pupil,  Punarvasu  said, — Hear,  O 
blessed  and  amiable  one,  what  the  reasons  are  that  are  shown 
or  advanced  by  the  great  Rishis.28 

It  is  said  that  for  the  destruction  of  existent  objects  there  is 
no  cause,  since  the  cause  which  brings  about  destruction  cannot 
be  ascertained,  like  the  cause  of  the  lapse  of  Time  that  goes  on 
ceaselessly.29  As  Time,  quickly  passing  away,  becomes  what  is 
called  Past,  even  so  an  existent  object  passes  away.  There  is  no 
cause  to  be  ascertained  for  its  destruction.  For  all  that,  medical 
treatment  cannot  be  inoperative.30 

Those  acts  by  which  the  constituent  elements  of  the  body 
become  harmonious  are  said  to  constitute  what  is  called  (medical) 
treatment  of  disorders  or  disease.  Those  acts  constitute  the  duty 
of  men  called  physicians.31 

Treatment  is  adopted  with  the  view  of  preventing  the  consti¬ 
tuent  elements  of  the  body  from  becoming  inharmonious.  Verily,  it 
is  adopted  for  the  purpose  of  purpetuating  the  harmony  of  those 
elements.32 

By  avoiding  all  causes  that  lead  to  disorder  or  the  absence  of 
harmony  and  by  having  recourse  to  those  that  lead  to  order  or 
harmony,  the  constituent  elements  of  the  body  become  harmonious, 
their  disorder  or  absence  of  harmony  being  corrected  or  checked.33 

Since  the  physician,  that  is  skilled  in  treatment,  restores,  with 
the  aid  of  favorable  causes,  the  constituent  elements  of  the  body 
into  harmony,  therefore  is  he  regarded  as  the  giver  of  happiness 


184 


C  HA  RA  KA-SA  M  HI  TA . 


with  respect  to  the  body  as  also  of  longlife.34  Verily,  the  physician, 
in  consequence  of  such  happiness  of  the  body  and  long  life,  becomes 
the  giver  of  righteousness  and  wealth  and  pleasure  both  in 
this  world  of  men  and  hereafter  in  heaven.*33 

Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary. 

The  merits  of  a  physician  that  is  skilled  in  treatment,  the 
faults  that  attach  to  one  of  a  different  stamp,  the  indications  of  a 
judicious,  insufficient,  or  over  dose  in  respect  of  the  administration 
of  correctives,  {viz.,  emetics  and  purgatives),  the  character  of  the 
diverse  disorders  (that  require  the  administration  of  correctives  ), 
the  benefits  of  the  administration  of  correctives,  the  chief  aphorisms 
with  respect  to  treatment,  the  methods  of  alleviating  the  faults 
resulting  from  an  insufficient  and  over  administration  of  correctives 
the  reasons  that  exist  for  treatment,  and  the  object  the  physician 
keeps  in  view,  have  all  been  declared  by  the  sage  (Punarvasu)  in 
this  Lesson  on  skilful  physicians.1'3 

So  ends  the  discourse  on  the  four  principal  divisions  of  this 
Lesson.  Thus  ends  the  sixteenth  Lesson,  called  ‘That  about  the 
skilful  Physician,’  in  Agniveca’s  treatise  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  XVII. 

We  shall,  after  this,  expound  the  Lesson  called  ‘  Some  diseases 
of  the  Head.’  Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.1 

Agnivetja  said, — Of  embodied  creatures,  what  are  those  dis¬ 
orders  which  have  been  said  to  affect  the  head  ?  And  what  are 
those  which  affect  the  heart?  What  are  those  disorders,  again,  of 
wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  (and  diverse  other  constituents  of  the  body), 
born  of  variations  in  respect  of  their  measure  ?+a  How  many 
kinds  are  there  of  deterioration  or  loss  (as  regards  the  elements  of 
the  body )  ?  How  many  kinds  are  there,  O  sinless  one,  of  those 

*  All  that  concerns  man  is  classified  under  four  heads,  viz..  Religion  or  Righteous¬ 
ness,  Wealth  or  earthly  possessions,  pleasure  or  enjoyments,  and  Salvation. — T. 

t  *  Mana-vikalpajah  ’  means  ‘  born  of  variations  in  respect  of  quantity’.  The 
sense  is  that  diverse  disease  are  generated  by  inequalities  in  respect  of  wind,  bile  and 
phlegm,  and  of  the  other  constituent  elements  of  the  body.  —  T, 


NOTICE. 


The  English  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  will 
be  issued  in  successive  fascicules  of  4  forms,  Royal 
octavo,  each  ;  12  fascicules  will  be  issued  every  year. 
Under  favorable  circumstances,  the  number  of  fasci¬ 
cules  or  the  number  of  forms  in  each  fascicule  may  be 
increased.  For  subscribers  in  India  paying  in  advance 
the  charge  is  Rs.  32  for  the  whole  work.  For  sub¬ 
scribers  in  Europe  and  America,  the  charge  is  £3  in 
advance  post  free.  The  price  for  each  part  is 
one  Rupee.  The  arrear  rate  is  Rs.  40  (in  India)  pay¬ 
able  (if  subscribers  wish)  in  instalments  of  Rs.  10  each. 
Remittances  to  be  made  to  the  Publisher,  200  Corn¬ 
wallis  Street,  Calcutta,  by  drafts  on  Indian  Banks  or 
Postal  money-orders. 


The  following  publications  relating  to  Hindu  Medical 
Science  may  be  had  at  No.  200,  Cornwallis  Street , 
Calcutta,  India . 


1.  Charaka-Samhita  in  original,  with  Chakrapanidat 
ta’s  Commentary  ;  edited  by  Pandit  Avinasb 
Chandra  Kaviratna  (published  in  Devanagara 
character  in  successive  fascicules}  Price  Rs.  20 
in  advance. 

2.  Susruta-Samhita  (in  original)  with  Dallanacharya’s 
Commentary,  edited  by  Pundit  Avinash  Chandra 
Kaviratna  (published  in  Devanagara  character  in 
successive  fascicules).  Price  Rs.  19  in  advance. 

3.  Bengali  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  with  the 
original  text  (complete)  in  the  Bengali  character. 
Price  Rs.  12. 

4.  Hindi  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive 
fascicules).  Price  Rs.  16  in  advance, 

5.  Bengali  translation  of  Susruta-Samhita  (published 
in  successive  fascicules).  Price  Rs.  10  in  advance. 

6.  Hindi  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive 
fascicules).  Price  Rs.  15  in  advance. 

7.  Chikitsa  Sammilani,  (a  monthly  medical  journal 
in  Bengali).  Subscription  in  advance  for  one  year 
Rs.  3-6  ;  for  the  poorer  classes,  Rs.  2-6.  (Back 
volumes  for  seven  years  maybe  had  for  Rs.  21,  or 
Rs.  3  for  each  volume  embracing  12  numbers.) 


PART  VII. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


PUBLISHKD  BY 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Caharaka  Samhita  and  of  Susruta  Samhita 

(in  original  )  ,  WITH  COMMENTARIES;  BENGALI  AND 

Hindi  translator  of  Charaka  Samhita  and 
of  Susruta  Samhita  ;  editor  of  Chikitsa- 
Sammilani  (  Medical  Journal  in 
Bengali) ;  Practitioner  of 
the  Hindu  System 
of  Medicine, 

&c.,  &c.,  &c. 

Calcutta ; 

Printed  by  D.  C.  Dass  &  Co., 

“Corinthian  Press,”  33,  New  China  Bazar 

AND 

Published  at 
200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


.(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved. ) 


(  45  ) 


[From  Dr.  M.  M.  Whblpley,  Ph.  d.,  m.  d.,  f  r.  m.  a., 
Editor  op  Meyer  Brothers’  Druggist .] 

Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 

Dear  Sir, 

We  are  again  under  obligation  to  you  for 
another  fasciculus  of  your  Charaka.  We  thought  the 
last  part  was  exceptionally  interesting,  but  each  succeed¬ 
ing  number  seems  to  increase  in  fascination.  The 
medical  profession  of  the  entire  English-readiag  world 
is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter 
at  their  disposal.  The  work  is  certainly  highly  scientific 
and  as  well  as  of  general  interest.  - 

Your  truly, 

(Sd.)  M.  M.  Whelpley,  m.  d.  . 


[From  Dr.  Geo.  H.  Clark  m.  a.,  m.  d.,  of  Philadelphia.] 
W.  Walnut  Lane,  German  Town, 
Philadelphia,  The  2ph  June,  1893. 

Dear  Sir, 

I  am  in  receipt  of  your  favour  of  May,  and 
also  of  Part  V.  of  “  Charaka-Samhita.”  I  am  much 
interested,,  in  your  work,  and  look  forward  to  its  com¬ 
pletion. 

The  wisdom  of  the  ancients  will  certainly  compare 
favourably  with  what  we  look  upon  as  modern.  '  Certainly 
the  ancient  ones  were  far  ahead  in  many  things.  I  have 
lately  had  as  a  guest  a  near  neighbour  of  yours,  Dr.  P.  C. 
Mozumdar,  and  I  enjoyed  his  visit  very  much. 

I  pointed  out  to  him  in  some  parts  of  “Charaka” 
points  which  bear  strongly  on  the  truths  of  modern 
Medicine. 

5 


(  £>0  ) 

I  shall  anticipate  with  pleasure  the  coming  of  the 
other  parts  of  the  work. 

Permit  me  to  commend  you  for  your  vast  under¬ 
taking. 

Very  truly  yours, 

(Sd.)  Geo.  H.  Clark,  m.  a.,  m.  d. 

[From  Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  m.  d.] 
Brynkynall,  Bangor,  North  Wales, 

Great  Britain,  25 th  June,  1893. 

Dear  Sir, 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  part  V.  of  the 
Charaka-Samhita  *  *  *  *  *  The  book  is  exceed¬ 

ingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond 
of  tracing  the  origin,  growth,  and  development  of 
Medical  Science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  social 
customs  in  India. 

I  am  rather  surprised  to  find  the  following  recom¬ 
mendation  in  a  Hindu  book. 

Page  141,  second  paragraph,  “one  should  drink 
warm  water,  after  having  taken  ghee  and  •  broth  of  flesh 
after  having  taken  oil,  &c.,”  See  also  page  149,  para  4. 

I  understand  the  peacock  is  now  a  sacred  bird.  Ducks, 
geese,  fowl  and  pork  also  are  all  unclean  abominations 
to  Hindus,  who  think,  besides  that  it  is  a  sin  to  eat  beef 
or  even  to  touch  it.  Your  Rishis  had  no  such  scruples. 

There  are  a  few  of  the  lower  castes  who  now  eat  the 
flesh  of  goat,  sheep  and  fish. 

When  was  this  book  first  written  ?  Again  thanking  you, 

I  remain,  yours  truly, 

(Sd.)  G.  Evans,  m.  d. 


[From  Rai  Bahadur  Dr.  A.  Hitter,  Chief  Medical 
Officer,  Cashmere.] 

Cashmere, 

7 th  April, ,  1893. 

Sir, — I  have  received  five  numbers  of  your  English 
translation  of  Charaka.  I  am  greatly  interested  in  the 
work.  I  have  already  carefully  read  your  Bengali  tran¬ 
slation  of  the  same  work.  No  medical  man’s  library 
should  be  without  Charaka,  for  his  education  cannot  be 
complete  unless  he  has  studied  this  great  work  of  practi¬ 
cal  and  philosophical  medicine.  Charaka  is  full  of 
elegant  aphorisms.  I  should  not  be'surprised  if  this 
translation  of  Charaka  brings  about  important  changes 
in  our  ever-changing  but  always  progressive  system  of 
treating  diseases.  The  happy  wedlock  of  the  ancient  philo¬ 
sophical  medicine  of  the  East  and  of  the  modern  ra¬ 
tional  medicine  of  the  West  may  produce  a  new  off  spring. 
Every  page  of  Charaka  presents  examples  of  drugs,  well- 
known  in  modern  Materia  Medica,  and  suggests  their 
new  applications.  You  are,  therefore,  doing  a  public 
service  by  translating  this  work  in  English,  which,  as  far 
as  I  have  seen,  is  done  in  a  splendid  manner. 

I  am,  yours  faithfully, 

(Sd. )  A.  Mitter, 

Chief  Medical  Officer. 


[From  Mayor  Brothers’  Druggists,  St.  Louis, 
United  States,  America.] 

As  the  work  advances,  the  facts  become  more  and 
more  interesting,  and  we  are  surprised  to  find  that  much 
we  now  consider  new  was  well  known  to  the  physicians 
who  administered  to  the  ancient  citizens  of  India. 


(  52  ) 


[From  Babu  Ra-jnarain  Bose.] 


My  Dear  Sir, 


Baidyanath-,  Deoghur, 

November,  1892. 


Fascicule  4  is  very  interesting.  What  I 
admire  most  in  Charaka  is  his  recognizing  the  intimate 
relation  between  health  on  the  one  hand  and  religion  and 
morality  on  the  other.  This  relation  is  a  deep  truth 
recognized  by  only  the  Hindu  sages.  Health  very  much 
depends  on  the  practice  of  religion'  and  morality  which 
again  depend  very  much  on  good  health.  No  religion 
recognizes  this  truth  so  much  as  Hinduism.  I  remarked 
to  a  friend  the  other  day  that  Hinduism  is  a  huge  system 
of  sanitation  and  that,  hence,  it  is  a  very  good  health- 
officer. 


There  are  very  good  hygienic  rules  in  Charaka. 

Sincerely  yours, 

(Sd.)  Rajnarain  Bose. 


[From  D.  Basu,  m.  d.  Opfg.  Civil  Surgeon, 

24,  Pergunnahs.] 

28,  Bally  Gunge,  Circular  Road, 

29  th  September,  1892. 


Dear  Sir, 


I  thank  you  very  much  for  sending  me  the 
3rd  fasciculus  of  the  English  translation  of  Charaka. 
I  am  delighted  with  the  clear  exposition  of  the  text 
and  the  valuable  notes  given  at  the  bottom.  I  wish  it 
every  success  and  should  be  most  glad  to  see  it  completed 


(  53  ) 


I  should  be  obliged  to  get  a  copy  of  your  Bengali 
translation  of  the  Sushruta-Samhita. 

I  need  hardly  say  that  I  should  be  very  glad  to  serve 
you  in  any  way  it  may  be  possible  for  me  to  do. 

Your  truily, 

(Sd.)  D.  Basu,  m.  d. 

[From  Dr.  Joseph  P.  Rannington,  Ph.  d.,  p.  c.  s., 

,op  Philadelphia.] 

Philadelphia, 

The  27 th  April ,  1893. 

My  dear  Sir, 

I  thank  you  very  much  for  sending  me  the 
fascicule  of  “  Charaka’’,  and  I  have  been  greatly  inter¬ 
ested  in  the  work.  It  has  given  me  much  pleasure  to 
call  the  attention  of  those  who,  I  thought,  would  be  inter¬ 
ested  in  it,  to  the  many  curious  and  valuable  facts  that  are 
here  set  forth.  Truly,  the  wise  man  has  said,  “there  is 
nothing  new  under  the  sun.”  Wishing  you  much  success, 
Yours  very  truly, 

(Sd.)  Joseph  P.  Rannington. 


[From  Dr.  R.  C.  Eccles,  m.  d.,  of  Brooklyn 
College,  u.  s.  a.] 

Brooklyn,  N.  W.,  U.  S.  A., 

The  6th  July,  1893, 

Dear  Sir, 

Part  s  of  “  Charaka-Samhita,”  is  just  at  hand  along 
with  your  card.  It  is  becoming  more  and  more  interesting 
the  farther  you  advance.  To  attempt  to  put  oneself, 


(  84  ) 


mentally,  into  the  place  of  those  ancients,  and  endea¬ 
vour  to  follow  the  thread  of  their  thoughts  in  its  conti¬ 
nuity,  is  exceedingly  entertaining,  though  quite  difficult. 
In  fact,  sometimes  I  find  it  impossible.  Unless  one  does 
this,  much  of  it  becomes  mere  jargon.  What  this  last 
fasciculus,  for  instance,  has  to  say  of  “  Wind,  ”  is  perfectly 
ridiculous  unless  one  put  another  meaning  into  that  word 
than  that  it  ordinarily  bears.  If  we  attach  the  idea  of 
“Force”  or  “Power”  to  it,  the  whole  becomes 
comprehensible. 

I  would  not,  with  Dr.  Rusby,  yet  be  willing  to  say 
that  ancient  medical  knowledge  was  empirical.  That  is 
prejudging.  I  will  await  further  developments,  and  see. 
Very  likely  their  discoveries  are  co-ordinated  by  some 
sort  of  a  theory  or  principle.  In  fact,  it  looks  that  way 
from  what  you  have  already  given  us. 

Very  truly  yours, 

(Sd.)  R.  C.  Eccles,  m.  d. 

P.  S. — Accept  my  thanks  for  Charaka. 


(The  Indian  Mirror >  8th  August,  1893J 
Referring  evidently  to  Pundit  Abinash  Chander 
Kaviratna’s  journal  Chikitsa  Sammilani,  the  Civil  and 
Military  Gazette  writes: — “An  impossibility  has  been 
achieved  in  Calcutta.  A  number  of  Native  physicians 
of  three  such  antagonistic  systems  of  medicine  as 
Allopathy,  Homoeopathy  and  Kabiraji,  who  combined  to 
start  a  medical  magazine,  divided  into  three  sections,  one 
apportioned  to  each  school,  have  succeeded  in  bringing 
the  periodical  to  its  ninth  volume,  without  creating  a 
breach  among  the  editors”. 


(  55  ) 

[From  Db.  F.  A  Hassler,  m.  a.,  m  d.,  Ph.  d.] 
Santa  Axa, 

April  <jth  1893. 

Dear  Sir, 

Your  kind  letter  and  the  fasciculus  of 
“  Charaka-Samhita  ”  have  reached  me  safely.  I  thank 
you  very  much,  indeed,  and  will  try  to  study  the  work 
so  as  to  write  something  worthy  of  the  suhject.  I  have 
had  but  time  to  glance  at  it,  but  even  this  hasty  view 
shows  what  I  may  call  a  condensed  world  of  wisdom. 

The  Mahabharata  is  my  daily  companion.  I  have 
never  given  so  much  study  to  any  other  work.  The 
doctrine  of  the  Supreme  Soul  and  of  the  Soul  of  man 
taught  in  it  is  simply  grand.  The  key-note  which  seems 
to  run  through  the  whole  of  the  noble  poem  is, — 
Righteousness,  Truth  =  Victory 
Rajas,  Tamas  =  Defeat. 

Next  to  the  inspired  Rishis,  whose  words  are  thus 
given  to  us,  I  honour  and  reverence  those  who  have  srfven 
the  world  this  work  in  a  language  which  so  many  millions 
of  the  human  race  can  understand.  I  wish  that  more 
of  my  fellow-countrymen  could  study  its  wisdom  by 
alphabetically  arranged  notes  from  their  volumes,  which 
number  about  six  thousand  and  I  daily  add  to  them. 

When  younger  I  spent  ten  years  in  the  active  prac¬ 
tice  of  medicine  and  know  how  arduous  early  practice 
is,  but  you  have  undertaken  much  literary  work  in  addi¬ 
tion  to  the  care  of  the  afflicted.  May  He  who  is  the  stay 
and  support  of  all  give  you  strength  to  accomplish  your 
wish  is  the  prayer  of  your  obliged  friend, 

(Sd.)  F.  A.  HASSLER. 


(  56  ) 


[From  Babu  Kedar  Nath  Chatterjee,  b.  a.,  Principal, 
Durbar  School,  Nepal.] 

Khatmandu,  Nepaul, 

The  26 th  August,  1893. 

Dear  Sir, 

My  best  thanks  are  due  to  you  for  the  fifth  and 
sixth  fascicules  of  your  English  translation  of  “  Charaka- 
Samhlta”  that  you  have  so  kindly  sent  to  my  address. 
You  are  doing  an  invaluable  service  to  the  people  of  India, 
nay  to  the  people  of  all  parts  of  the  civilised  world  where 
the  English  language  is  read  or  spoken,  by  exposing  to 
their  view  the  hidden  treasures  to  be  found  in  very  page 
of  “Charaka.”  No  one  can  read  your  translation,  which 
is  made  in  a  chaste  and  lucid  style,  without  being  struck, 
with  the  profound  wisdom  and  learning  of  the  ancient 
Rishis. 

I  remain,  dear  Sir,  yours  very  sincerely, 

(Sd.)  Kedar  Nath  Chatterji. 


[From  Sir  Alfred  Croft,  m.  a.,  0.  1.  e.,  Director  of 
Public  Instuotion,  Bengal.] 

45  Pall  Mall,  South-West  London, 

\  St h  June,  1893. 

My  dear  Sir, 


I  am  greatly  obliged  to  you  for  sending  me 
Parts  I.  to  V.  of  “Charaka-Samhita/’  As  acontribution  to 
the  history  of  Medicine,  the  work  has  undoubted  value 
and  I  am  not  surprised  at  the  welcome  which  the  trans¬ 
lation  has  received  in  India  and  in  Europe.  Regarding 
the  value  of  the  work  as  a  contribution  to  Medical  Science, 


(  w  ) 

as  a  layman,  I  can,  of  course,  say  nothing.  “  Who  shall' 
decide  when  doctors  disagree  ?  ”  But  1  have  been  greatly 
entertained  as  edified  by  the  examination  in  part  IV  of 
all  the  things  which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can 
understand  the  precepts,  and  such  a  guide  to  life  cannot 
be  other  than  valuable. 

With  sincere  commendations  for  the  enterprise  you 
have  shown  and  with  good  wishes  for  the  success  of  your 
undertaking,  I  am, 

Very  faithfully  yours, 
(Sd.)  A.  CROFT. 


[  From  the  Rev.  Professor  J.  N.  Fradekborgh,  Ph.  d., 
d.  d.,  l,  l.  d.,  of  Union  City,  Penn.,  u.  s.  a.] 
Union  City,  Pennsylvania,  U.  S.  A. 

My  dear  Sir, 

Yours  of  some  time  ago  reached  me  here,  having 
been  forwarded  from  my  address,  as  also  the  parts  of  the 
English  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita.  I  have  read  these 
parts  with  great  enjoyment.  Deeply  interested  as  I  am 
in  all  that  pertains  to  India,  I  am  especially  grateful  that 
this  important  medical  work  is  to  be  put  into  an 
English  dress.  It  cannot  but  increase  the  high  value 
which  the  scholar  already  sets  upon  the  literature  of  your 
wonderful  land.  I  shall  look  for  the  reception  of  the 
remaining  parts  of  the  work  with  great  interest,  and  shall 
not  fail  to  call  the  attention  of  my  friends  to  it. 

I  am  very  sincerely, 

(Sd.)  J.  N.  Fradek  BURGH. 


(  53  ) 

[From  Du.  G.  C.  Oastleman,  of  Kansas  Crrt,  Missouri.] 
i  17,  West  13th  Sreet, 
Kansas  City ,  Missouri ,  U.  S.  A. 

Gear  SIR, 

This  you  may  he- more  fully  prepared  to  understand 
and  believe  when  I  tell  you  that  I  am  myself  a  physician 
of  the  broadest  gauge,  and  most  progressive  kind,  and 
just  as  broad  and  progressive  in  my  philosophic  and 
theologic  studies  and  principles*  In  fact,  I  feel  no  aversion 
to  the  acceptance  of  any  fact,  facts,  theory  or  theories, 
but  freely  and  gladly  accept,  whatever  is  proven  to  me  by 
sufficient  evidence. 

Ignorance  (the  mother  of  prejudice)  is  the  greatest 
enemy  that  the  human  race  has  to  contend  with.  Christian¬ 
ity  has  controlled  Europe  and  America  till  within  the 
last  one  hundred  and  fifty  years.  Since  then  the  light 
has  been  breaking  through  its  fortifications,  until  now  its 
most  advanced  thinkers  are  breaking  away  or  have  broken 
away  from  its  tyranny,  and  are  rejoicing  in  a  more  or  less 
perfect  mental,  moral,  spiritual  and  political  liberty,  and 
this  results  in  what  is  to  them  new,  great  and  grand  dis¬ 
coveries,  and  not  the  least  of  these  to  me  is  the  discovery 
that  they  have  been  and  are  re-thinking  the  thoughts  and 
re-discovering  the  discoveries  of  their  forefathers  in 
Hindustan,  made  by  them  hundreds,  if  not  thousands  of 
years,  before  even  settlements  were  made  in  Egypt,  Greece 
and  Rome;  and  now  I  see  that  the  advanced  thinkers  of 
your  own  ancient,  great,  grand,  and  glorious  nation,  Arya, 
— the  prolific  mother  of  nations, — have  broken  through 
the  shackels  of  the  past,  and  are  willing  to  tell  their 
Western  brethren  what  has  been  preserved  for  them  in 
the  hidden  archives  of  Hindustan. 


(  59  ) 


Our  Western  thinkers  seem  to  pursue  a  shorter,  more 
direct  and  positive  method  of  thinking  and  teaching  in 
everything  except  the  Yoga.  In  this,  both  are  identical ; 
except  this,  the  Hindu  method  is  the  most  full. 

Now,  when  these,  things  are  fully  realized  by  the 
thinkers  and  scholars  of  the  East  and  the  West,  I  think, 
there  will  b ;  nothing  that  can  prevent  them  from  entering 
into  one  long,  lasting  and  loving  embrace,  as  members  of 
a  long-separated  family,  as  brethren  of  the  grand  old  Aryan 
race.  Then,  again,  will  we,  indeed,  have  the  “Kritaage” 
on  Earth  (the  millennium  of  the  Christians). 

This  very  limited  expression  of  my  thoughts  will 
enable  you  to  understand  to  some  extent  how  I  appre¬ 
ciate  the  favour  you  conferred  on  me  when  you  sent  me 
the  four  parts  of  the  “Charaka-Samhita.  ” 

In  addition  to  this,  I  wis.h  to  say  that  I  was  notcnly 
greatly  pleased,  but  greatly  astonished,  to  find  that  the 
ancient  Hindu  physicians  and  authors  were  well  acquain¬ 
ted  with  facts,  scientific  facts,  medicines  and  theories,  that 
we  in  the  West  have  only  just,  within  the  last  fifty,  forty 
thirty,  twenty  or  even  ten  years,  discovered,  and  though 
were  new.  Now,  the  fact  that  they  were  previously  dis¬ 
covered  in  the  East,  does  not  make  them  any  the  less  real 
discoveries,  or  the  less  valuable.  On  the  contrary,  the  two 
independent  discoveries  mutually  strengthen  each  other, 
and  of  necessity  confer  an  equally  mutual,  intellectual  joy 
on  those  that  take  cognizance  of  these  things.  The  fact  is 
that  my  pleasure  in  such  things  is  so  great  that  nothing 
but  the  lack  of  means  prevented  me  from  making  my 
home  in  India,  and  wandering  over  the  whole  field  of 


(  eo  ) 

ancient  Sanskrit  and  Indian  science,  art,  religion  and 
literature: 

I  remain  yours  truly, 
(Sd.)  G.  C.  Castleman. 

[EnoM-  Roy  Jotendra  Nath  Chowdry,  m.  a.,  b.  l., 
Zamindar,  T,akee.] 

My  Dear  Ajunash, 

I. have, recieved  the  five  parts  of  “Charaka- 
Samhita”  .published- into  English.  Your  labours  in  the 
field  of  reviving'  the  medical  literature  of  the  ancient 
Hindus,,  by. way ;of  bringing  out  both  original  texts  and 
translations  rinto  English  and  Bengali,  of  the  most  im¬ 
portant  Hindu  medical  works,  surely  deserve  every 
encouragement -from  all  Indians.  As  a  layman  I  do  not 
wish,  to  hazard  any -opinion  as  to  the  relative  merits  of 
the  Hindu- system  of  medicine  and  other  systems.  But  I 
think  this  much  I  can  say  without  any  diffidence  that 
considering  mens  sdna  in  corpore  sana  to  be  the  object  of 
bur  highest  aspiration  here,  I  .think,  nowhere  except  in 
the  ancient  medical  books  of  the  Hindus,  is  to  be  found 
in  earnest  a  systematic .  attempt  made  to  attend  to  the 
same.  ,  Though  ,  in  this  unfortunate  country  it  may  be 
apprehended  that  your  labours  will  not  be  appreciated, 
yet  let  us  hope  that  my  countrymen  have  by  this  learnt 
to  brush  off  the  slur,  and  that  they  will  come  forward  to 
encourage  you  in  a  manner  worthy  of  your  labours. 
For  me  especially,  it  is  needless  to  add,  it  will  give  me 
much  .pleasure  to  see  you  more  and  more  useful  in  the 
walk  of  life  .you  have  adopted  for  yourself;  wishing  every 
success  to.  your  enterprise, 

Yours  very  truly, 

(Sd.)  Roy  Joteendra  Nath  Chowdhuri. 


ABSTRACT 

OF 

THE  CONTENTS  OF  THE  SEVENTH  FASCICULUS. 


In  this  fasciculus  occurs  the  Lesson  (XVII)  on  some  of  the  diseases  of 
the  Head.  The  diverse  causes  that  induce  such  diseases  have  been  indi¬ 
cated  almost  fully  and  are  such  that  while  reading,  one  fancies  one  is 
reading  a  modern  European  work  on  the  subject. 

Certain  thoracic  diseases  also  have  been  mentioned.  The  knowledge 
■of.anatomy  was  not  so  defective  at  the  age  of  Charaka  as  one  might  imagine 
from  a  grouping  together  of  diseases  under  such  a  general  name.  The 
fact  is,  without  seeking  for  a  more  scientific  basis  for  classification,  the 
•obvious  consideration  of  the  seat  of  the  diseases  was  seized  for  grouping 
them  together.  Real  scientific  classification  occurs  later  on. 

Disorders  of  the  faults,  or  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  have  been  particularly 
Indicated  as  causes  of  certain  diseases.  Remembering  that  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm  do  not  indicate  what  those  words  obviously  mean,  but  represent 
certain  states  of  the  constitution,  the  analyses  are  not  fanciful.  Wind  does 
not  mean  the  wind  that  moves  within  the  body  bile  does  not  mean  the 
secretions  from  the  liver  ;  phlegm  does  not  mean  the  secretions  from  the 
mouth,  the  nose,  and  other  organs,  caused  by  catarrh  or  attacks  of  cold. 
They  simply  stand  for  certain  conditions  of  the  constitution, — conditions 
as  dependant  on  observable  symptoms.  If  such  and  such  symptoms  appear,, 
one  is  said  to  have  one’s  wind  excited,  and  so  on. 

The  Eighteenth  Lesson  treats  of  Swellings  or  Inflammations.  It  is 
impossible  to  set  forth  all  the  varieties  of  Swelling.  The  chief  varieties, 
however,  have  been  indicated  very  clearly.  The  subj  ect  has  been  treated 
more  elaborately  later  on. 

The  Nineteenth  Lesson  is  mere  an  abridgment  than  anything  else.  The 
diseases  mentioned  here  have  been  described  very  elaborately  in  later 
Lessons.  The  fact  should  be  mentioned  that  the  portion  of  the  work  with 
which  we  are  used  concerned  is  called  “  Sutra-sthana,”  i.  e.,  the  place  of 
aphorisms.  The  contents  of  the  treatise  are  here  indicated  very  briefly. 
The  contents  of  the  “  Sutra-sthana,”  taken  by  themselves,  do  not  furnish 
a  basis  for  judging  of  the  fulness  or  otherwise  of  the  work.  The  portion 
called  “Nidana-sthana  ”  (causes  &c.,  of  diseases),  and  “  chikitsa-sthana” 
(treatment  &c.  of  diseases),  are  very  full. 


V  CBARAKA-SAMHITA.  185 

eruptions  on  the  ski n'^wKich  are  known  by  the  name  of  Pidaka? 
And,  O  dispeller  of  all  kinds  of  faults  (that  may  assail  the  body), 
how  many  kinds  of  courses  or  tracks  are  there  of  what  are  called 
faults  (of  the  body)?3 

Hearing  these  words  of  Agniveija,  the  preceptor  said, — 0 
amiable  one,  hear  in  detail  about  what  thou  hast  asked  me  !4 

It_  has  been  seen  that  there  are  altogether  five  diseases  of  the 
head.  The  diseases  of  the  thorax  also  are  five  in  number ;  of 
diseases,  again,  that  are  generated  by  inequalities  in  respect  of 
the  measure  or  quantity  of  wind,  bile,  phlegm,  and  the  other  consti¬ 
tuent  elements  of  the  body,  the  number  is  two  and  sixty.5  The 
kinds  of  deterioration  or  loss  are  eight  and  ten  in  number.  There 
are  altogether  seven  kinds  of  eruptions  and  abscesses  due  to  diabetic 
affections.  Of  what  are  called  faults,  the  courses  or  tracks  are 
three  in  number;  of  these,  I  shall  speak  in  detail.8 

From  suppression  of  the  urgings  of  nature,  sleep  during  the 
day-time,  night-keeping,  intoxication,  loud  talking,  exposure  to  the 
night  dew,  exposure  to  east  winds  or  to  winds  blowing  strongly, 
excess  of  sexual  congress,  inhalation  of  putrid  or  other  kinds  of 
disagreeable  scents,  exposure  to  dust,  smoke,  wind,  and  the  heat 
of  the  sun,  eating  heavy  food  or  acids  or  potherbs  and  other  vege¬ 
tables  of  that  kind,  exposure  to  water  that  is  very  cold,  exposure 
of  the  head  to  the  heat  of  the  sun,  inability  to  digest  the  food 
that  has  been  taken,  crying  (in  grief),  suppression  of  tears,  a 
cloudy  atmosphere,  grief  and  irregularities  in  respect  of  time  and 
place,  wind  and  the  other  constituent  elements  of  the  body  become 
excited  and  afflict  the  blood  that  is  in  the  head.  From  this  cause 
spring  diseases  of  divers  symptoms  in  the  head.7'10 

That  part  of  the  body  in  which  the  life-breaths  are  said  to  in¬ 
here,  to  which  all  the  senses  are  said  to  belong,  and  which  is  said 
to  be  the  most  important  of  alb  the  limbs  of  the  body,  is  called  by 
the  name  of  Head.11 

Hemicrania,  or  headaches  affecting  the  whole  head,  catarrah, 
diseases  of  the  mouth,  the  nose,  and  the  eye,  swimming  of 
the  head,12  facial  paralysis,  tremors  of  the  head,  inflammation  of 
the  throat,  wry-neck,  dislocation  of  the  cheek  bone,  and  numerous 

24 


186 


CEAIi A  K  A-S AMBIT. 


other  diseases,  born  of  disorders  of  the  wind  and  worms  in  the 
stomach,  affect  the  head  (and  are  included  among  diseases  of  the 
head).13 

Listen  now  to  me  as  I  enumerate  the  five  diseases  of  the  head 
with  their  causes  and  symptoms,  that  have  been  separately 
mentioned  by  the  great  Rishis  in  the  abstract  or  abridgment  of 
diseases.14 

From  loud  talking  and  excessive  talking,  powerful  scents, 
night-keeping,  exposure  to  cold,  physical  exercise,  suppression  of 
the  urgings  of  nature,15  fasting,  violence  done  to  the  body,  purging 
and  vomiting  in  excess,  from  tears  and  grief  and  fear  and  alarm, 
from  carrying  of  heavy  loads,  and  walking  of  long  distances,16  the 
wind  that  is  in  the  head  increases  and  entering  the  veins  of  the 
head  becomes  excited,  From  the  wind  ( thus  excited )  one  gets  a 
severe  headache.17  The  two  temples  begin  to  throb  with  a  pier¬ 
cing  pain  ;  the  nape  or  back  of  the  neck  feels  a  tearing  pain  ;  the 
space  between  the  two  eye-brows,  as  also  the  entire  forehead,  burns 
with  heat  and  pain.18  The  two  ears  also  throb  with  noise  and 
pain.  The  sensation  in  the  two  eyes  is  as  if  they  are  being  torn  out. 
The  whole  head  swims,  AH  the  joints  (in  the  head  )  seem  to  be 
torn  asunder.19  All  the  nerves  and  veins  also  throb  incessantly. 
The  neck  becomes  stiff.  The  rejnedy  in  affections  of  the  head  due 
to  disorders  of  the  wind  is  the  use  of  things  cooling  and  warm.*20 

In  consequence  of  the  use  of  things  that  are  pungent  or  sour 
or  saltish  or  saline,  through  anger,  exposure  to  heat,  or  to  strong 
winds,  the  bile  in  the  head  becomes  disordered  and  produces  dis¬ 
orders  in  the  head.21  In  consequence  thereof,  the  head  becomes 
the  seat  of  burning  and  tearing  pains.  A  wish  arises  for  cooling 
things.  The  eyes  also  burn.  Thirst  arises.  The  head  swims. 
The  whole  body  perspires.23 

From  constant  enjoyment  of  luxurious  seats,  from  constant 
indulgence  in  luxurious  sleep,  from  excessive  eating  of  heavy  and 
cooling  food,  the  phlegm  in  the  head  becomes  disordered  and 
produces  disorders  in  the  head.23  In  consequence  thereof,  mild 


*  In  Verse  15,  1  tikshnaghranat  ’  and  not  ‘  tikshnapanat  ’  is  the  correct  reading. 
In  16,  ‘Vamanadati’  and  not  ‘  Vamanaditi,’  This  ,ati,  qualifies  all  the  previous 
words.  ‘  Cankhau  ’  are  the  two  temples.  '  Ghata’  is  the  nape  of  the  neck.  In  Verse 
20,  ‘  Stabhyate  and  not  ‘  tudyate’  is  the  correct  reading.— T. 


CHAR  A  KA -SA  MHITA. 


187 


pains  appear  in  the  head.  The  sensation  of  touch  in  the  head 
becomes  weakened.  A  sensation  of  dulness  or  drenching  too 
appears.  The  head  becomes  heavy.  The  langour  of  sleepiness, 
general  weakness,  and  disgust  for  food  are  the  other  symptoms.24 

In  disorders  of  the  head  caused  by  the  excitement  of  the  wind, 
the  pronounced  symptoms  are  excess  of  pain,  swimming  of  the 
head,  and  a  tremor  also.  In  disorders  caused  by  the  excitement 
of  the  bile,  the  symptoms  are  a  sensation  of  burning,  of  intoxica¬ 
tion,  and  thirst.  In  disorders  caused  by  the  excitement  of  the 
phlegm,  the  symptoms  are  heaviness  and  the  langour  of  sleep.  In 
disorders  of  the  head  due  to  the  excitement  of  all  the  three  faults, 
all  these  symptoms  appear.*25 

In  consequence  of  eating  sesame,  milk,  molasses,  undigestible 
things,  rotten  fish  or  meat  or  vegetables,  and  such  food  as  is  made 
of  inconsistent  ingredients  (  as  milk  and  fish,  or  milk  and  meat), 
a  person  whose  wind,  bile  or  phlegm  is  disordered,  gets  impurities 
in  his  blood,  phlegm,  and  flesh.26  From  those  impurities,  worms- 
take  birth  in  the  stomach  of  the  man  of  vicious  habits. 

These,  in  their  turn,  cause  in  the  person’s  head,  head-disease 
with  terrible  symptoms.27  Such,  indeed,  are  the  effects  produced 
by  those  worms  that  the  person  afflicted  by  them  feels  piercing  and 
cutting  pains,  a  sensation  of  itching,  intumescense,  and  a  foetid 
odor  in  the  body.28 

In  consequence  of  grief,  fasting,  physical  exercise,  food  that  is 
unoily,  dry  food,  and  insufficient  food,  wind  penetrating  the  thorax, 
produces  excessive  pain.t22  When  the  thorax  becomes  afflicted  with 
wind,  the  symptoms  that  manifest  themselves  are  as  follows : — • 
tremor  of  the  whole  body,  a  sensation  of  pressure  on  the  chest 
and  the  abdomen  as  if  tightly  wrapped  round  with  a  broad  piece 
of  skin,  stiffness  of  the  whole  body,  a  sensation  of  giddiness  or 
intoxication  producing  delusions,  a  sensation  of  emptiness  in  the 
chest  and  heart,  and  of  booming  sounds  about  the  heart.  When 


*  ‘  Bhramah  ’  or  swimming  has  previously  been  said  to  be  the  symptom  of  head- 
disease  when  caused  by  excitement  of  the  bile.  Here,  however,  it  is  set  down  as  a 
symptom  of  that  disease  which  is  induced  by  disorder  of  the  wind.  Kaviraja  Gangadhara 
explains  that  *  Vatat  ’  here  implies  such  wind  as  exists  with  bile. — T. 

t  Some  texts  read  ‘  Amlabhojanaih  ’  for  ‘  Alpabhojanaih.  ’  The  meaning  would 
then  be  'food  that  is  sour’  instead  of  ‘insufficient  food.’—  T. 


188  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

the  food  filling  the  stomach  has  been  digested,  the  pains  become 
excessive.*80 

In  consequence  of  taking  food  that  is  hot  or  sour  or  saline  or 
bitter  or  indigestible,  as  also  of  alchoholic  drinks,  indulgence  in 
anger,  and  exposure  to  the  rays  of  the  sun,  the  bile  in  the  thorax 
becomes  excited.81  The  symptoms  of  thoracic  diseases  caus¬ 
ed  by  excitement  of  the  bile  are  a  sensation  of  burning  in  the 
region  about  the  heart,  a  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  bitter  and 
sour  eructations,  a  sensation  of  langour  and  exhaustion,  thirst, 
loss  of  consciousness  or  swoons,  delusions,  and  perspiration.t82 

Excessive  food,  or  food  that  is  heavy,  or  food  that  is  oily, 
or  the  total  absence  of  mental  and  physical  labour,  or  excessive 
indulgence  in  the  pleasures  of  sleep,  are  causes  of  thoracic  dis¬ 
eases  due  to  excitement  of  the  phlegm.88  The  symptoms  that 
then  manifest  themselves  are  numbness  of  the  heart  ( so  that  the 
region  about  the  heart  loses  the  sensation  of  touch),  a  sensation 
■of  the  region  about  the  heart  being  wrapped  round  with  a  piece  of 
wet  and  heavy  cloth,  sleepiness,  and  disgust  for  food.  Such  a 
man  has  also  the  sensation  of  his  heart  being  pressed  down  by  a 
heavy  mass  of  stones,  t8  4 

When  the  causes  and  the  symptoms  (  as  hereinbefore  indica¬ 
ted  of  the  different  tkinds  of  thoracic  disease )  exist  together, 
such  diseases  are  then  called  Sannipatika.  The  wretch  who, 
while  suffering  under  a  thoracic  disease  that  is  due  to  disorders  of 
all  the  three  ingredients,  viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  takes  sesame, 
milk,  molasses,  and  other  articles  of  the  kind,  brings  on  the  afflic¬ 
tion  called  Granthi.  Impurities  and  foetid  humours  are  then 
generated  in  his  vital  parts.  In  consequence  of  those  impurities, 
again,  diverse  kinds  of  worms  are  generated  in  the  body  of  the 


*  In  the  first  line,  for  ‘  funyatadravah  ’  some  texts  read  ‘  cunyatabhramah.  ’  The 
last  reading  does  not  seem  to  be  correct,  for  the  mention  of  ‘  bhramah  ’  after  1  pramohah’ 
would  be  superfluous. — T. 

f  In  the  second  line,  some  texts  read  ‘  dahah  ’  for  ‘swedah.’  After  the  mention 
of  ‘hriddahah’  in  -the  first  line,  it  is  not  probable  that  ‘daha’  should  be  repeated, 
though  ‘daha,’  standing  by  itself,  would  mean  a  burning  sensation  throughout  the 
body. — T. 

J  ‘  Stimitabharikam  ’  is  one  word,  the  meaning  being  *  a  sensation  of  the  heart 
being  wrapped  round  with  a  piece  of  wet  cloth  producing  a  feeling  of  heaviness  or 
pressure.’ — T. 


CH  A  RA  KA -SA  M  HIT  A .  189 

afflicted  wretch.  Born  in  his  vital  parts,  those  worms  move  about 
and  wander  through  every  part  of  his  body  and  devour  his  flesh, 
blood,  and  other  vital  ingredients.  He  then  feels  piercing  pains 
in  his  heart  like  to  what  would  happen  if  somebody  were  to  repeat¬ 
edly  pierce  his  heart  with  a  needle.  Sometimes  he  feels  as  if  he 
were  receiving  cuts  from  a  sharp  weapon.  An  itching  sensation 
also  follows,  as  also  an  intolerable  agony.  Judging  from  these 
symptoms  that  the  affliction  under  which  the  patient  is  suffering  is  a 
thoracic  disease,  in  an  aggravated  form,  due  to  the  generation  of 
worms,  the  physician  possessed  of  learning  should  lose  no  time  in 
conquering  it,  for  fatal  consequences,  if  the  disease  is  not  checked, 
are  sure  to  be  brought  on  very  soon.*35.39 

The  seriousness  or  gravity  of  thoracic-disease  is  altogether  of 
thirteen  kinds.  Six  of  these  are  due  to  the  aggravation  of  the 
the  faults  affecting  two  of  them  at  a  time  or  only  one  of  them  at  a 
time.  Six  other  kinds  are  due  to  the  attenuation  of  the  one,  the 
middling  state  of  the  second,  and  the  aggravation  of  the  third  ; 
while  from  an  equal  measure  of  excitement  of  each  of  the  three 
faults,  only  one  kind  is  derived.-]-40 

Through  union  of  the  faults  (taken  two  at  a  time ),  the  variety 
will  come  up  to  nine.  Of  this,  when  one  only  of  the  faults  is 
aggravated,  six  varieties  result ;  while,  only  one  ( of  the  two  )  be¬ 
coming  aggravated,  the  variety  comes  up  to  three.  Each  of  the 
three  faults  again  becoming  aggravated  separately,  the  variety 
would  come  up  to  three.  (With  the  thirteen  mentioned  in  the  pre- 


*  ‘Granthi  ’  has  been  described  to  be  of  various  kinds.  Its  English  equivalent  seems 
to  be  cystic  tumours.  ‘  Sanldeda  ’  is  impurity  of  every  description.  The  kind  of  ‘  rasa  ’ 
here  referred  to  is,  of  course,  foetid  humours.  From  these  are  generated  worms  of 
various  kinds. — T. 

t  This  verse  is  characterised  by  great  terseness  and  brevity.  The  combinations 
which  produce  the  thirteen  kinds  of  ‘  Sannipatika’  are  thus  explained  :  (i)  when  wind 
and  bile  are  both  excited  ;  (2)  when  wind  and  phlegm  are  both  excited  ;  (3)  when  bile 
and  phlegm  are  both  excited  ;  (4)  when  wind  is  excited  ;  (5)  when  bile  is  excited,  and 
(6)  when  phlegm  is  excited.  The  six  other  kinds  are  (r)  wind  excited,  bile  more 
excited,  and  phlegm  most  excited ;  (2)  wind  excited,  phlegm  more  excited,  and  bile 
most  excited ;  (3)  bile  excited,  phlegm  more  excited,  wind  most  excited ;  (4)  bil 
excited,  wind  more  excited,  and  phlegm  most  excited  ;  (5)  phlegm  excited,  bile  more 
excited,  and  wind  most  excited  ;  (6)  phlegm  excited,  wind  more  exited,  and  bile  most 
excited.  When  all  the  three  are  excited  in  an  equal  measure,  only  one  kind  is  derived 
Thus  the  total  of  13  is  made  up  of  6-1-6+ 1. — 1\ 


190  CHA RAKA-SA  mhita. 

vious  verse)  these  nine  and  three  would  make  a  total  of  five  and 
twenty  in  all.41 

The  variety  of  thoracic  disease  due  to  attenuation  of  the  faults 
( taken  one,  two,  and  three  at  a  time  )  comes  up  to  five  and  twenty, 
like  to  what  is  arrived  at  in  the  case,,  as  explained  above-,,  of  aggra¬ 
vation..  The  mode  of  treatment  in  cases  of  aggravation  are,  of 
course,  different  from  those  laid  down  for  eases  of  attenuation.. 
That  topic  shall  now  be  treated.42 

The  aggravation  of  one,  the  unchanged  or  normal  state- of  the- 
other,  and  the  attenuation  of  the  third,  produce  a  variety  of  six.. 
So  the  aggravation  of  two  and  attenuation  of  one,  and  the  aggra¬ 
vation  of  one  and  attenuation  of  two,  produce  a  variety  of  six.43 

When  upon  attenuation  of  the  phlegm,  the  wind  moves  from  its 
natural  position  and  forces  the  bile  existing  in  its  normal  condition, 
to  wander  with  itself  through  different  parts  of  the-  body,  then  in 
those  particular  parts  of  the  physical  frame  where  the  wind  accom¬ 
panied  by  bile  may  be  for  the  time  being,  the  sensations  would 
arise  of  pain  and  burning  and  langour  and  weakness.  Such  pain 
&e,  does  not  become  permanent, 'for  they  disappear  as  soon  the 
wind  accompanied  by  bile  leaves  the  spot.44'43 

When  upon  the  attenuation  of  the  bile;  the*  wind1'  gaining 
strength,  forcibly  drags  or  draw's  up  the  phlegm  existing  in- its  normal 
condition,  it  then  generates  acute  pains,  a  sensation  of  cold  or  chill, 
dulness  of  the  body,  and  heaviness  of  the  limbs. 46 

When  upon  the  attenuation  of  the  phlegm,  the  bile  restrains 
the  wind  existing  in  its  normal  condition,  then.1  a  sensation  of 
burning  and  accute  pain  is  produced;.47 

When  upon  the  attenuation  of  the  wind",  the  bile  restrains  the- 
phlegm  existing  in  its  normal  condition,  it  then  produces  fever  with 
heaviness  of  the  body  and  sleepiness.4 ®‘ 

When  upon  the  attenuation  of  the  bile,  the  phlegm  restrains- 
the  wind  existing  in  its  normal  condition,  it  then  produces  fever 
with  heaviness  of  the  body  and  a  sensation  of  chill.49’ 

If  upon  the  attenuation  of  the  wind,  the  phlegm- restrains  the- 
bile  existing  in  Its  normal  condition,  it  then-  produces  loss  of 
appetite,  headache,  sleep,  sleepiness,  delirium,  heart-disease;  heavi¬ 
ness  of  the  body,  yellowness  of  the  nails-  and  other  parts  of  the 
body,  and  constant  expectorations  of  phlegm  and  bile.50'51 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MH1 TA 


191 

The  plilegm  of  a  person  whose  wind  has  been  attenuated, 
moving  in  the  body  with  the  bile  in  its  company,  produces  a  disgust 
for  food,  indigestion,  lassitude  of  the  whole  body,  heaviness-  of  the 
limbs,  nausea  and  hiccough,  expectorations  (of  saliva  and  water  from 
the  mouth),  chlorosis  and  anaemia,  pain,  giddiness  like  that  of  intoxi¬ 
cation,  disorders  of  purging  (that  is,  either  excess  of  purging  or  con¬ 
stipation  ),  and  disorders  of  the  digestive  fire  ( that  is,-  either  excess- 
of  appetite  or  loss-  of  appetite  ),52" 5  8 

The  phlegm  of  a'  person  whose  bile  has  been  attenuated,  unit-- 
ed  with  the  wind,  generates  temporary  stiffness  of  the  body,  chill, 
and  pain,  as  also  heaviness  of  the  body,  loss-  of  appetite,  disgust 
for  food,  tremors-,,  whiteness  of  the  nails  and  other  parts,  and 
Foughness  of  the  skin.5'4'5,5 

When  the  phlegm  becomes  attenuated  and  both  the  wind  and 
the  bile  become  excited1,  listen  to  the  symptoms  which  these 
generate.58  They  are  delusion's,  a  sensation'  of  the  whole  body 
being  wrapped  round  with  a  heavy  cloth  or  skin,  pain,  a  sensation 
of  burning,  a  sensation-  like  that  of  the  body  being  constantly 
pierced  with  pains,  tremors,,  lassitude  of  the  body,  a  driness  of  the 
chest,,  and  smoke-like  exhalations  from-  the  mouth-  and  the  nose.5  7 

When  both  the  wind  and  bile  become  attenuated,  the  phlegm, 
strongly  affecting,  all  the  ducts  of  the  body,  brings  about  the  loss  of 
all  exertion  ( i,e.f  general  langour ),  loss  of  consciousness,  and 
suppression  of  the  voice  or  speech.58. 

When  both  the  wind  and  the  phlegm  become  attenuated,  the 
bile,  affecting  the  element  known  by  the  name  of  Ojas,  produces  a 
general  lassitude  of  the  body,  a  general  weakness  of  all  the 
senses,  thirst,  loss  of  consciousness-,  and  inability  to  do  any  act.5® 

Upon  the  attenuation  of  both  bile  and  phlegm,  the  wind  afflict 
ing  all  the  vital  parts  of  the  body,  destroys  consciousness  and 
causes  tremors.®0 

The  three  faults  of  the  system  ( viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm), 
when  excited  and  strengthened,  put  forth  their  respective  indica¬ 
tions  according  to  the  measure  of  their  respective  strength  or  force. 
When,  on  the  other  hand,  they  become  attenuated,  a  disappear¬ 
ance  takes  place  of  their  respective  indications,  commensurate 
with  the  degree  of  their  attenuation.  When  all  of  them  exist 


192 


CHAR  A  KA  -SA  MHITA . 


in  their  normal  state,  each  of  them  puts  forth  its  own  indications 
equally  with  the  other  two.61 

Attenuation  is  in  respect  of  the  wind  and  the  others ;  of  the 
(seven)  elements  beginning  with  Rasa  or  humour  and  the  others; 
of  the  impurities  evacuated  by  the  system ;  and  of  the  element 
called  Ojas.  Amongst  these  several  kinds  of  attenuation,  the 
indications  have  already  been  laid  down  of  wind  and  the  others.*63 

When  the  element  called  Rasa  (liquid  humour)  becomes 
attenuated,  the  heart  becomes  subject  to  a  sensation  of  strong 
agitation ;  it  becomes  incapable  of  hearing  any  kind  of  loud 
noise ;  palpitation  overtakes  it ;  it  becomes  the  seat  also  of  an 
acute  pain  ;  it  also  becomes  subject  to  a  dull  pain  without  any 
intermission ;  and  the  person  feels  such  a  sensation  of  langor 
that  the  slightest  exertion  fatigues  him.63 

When  the  element  of  blood  becomes  attenuated,  a  roughness 
overspreads  the  .whole  body  ;  portions  of  it  are  seen  to  burst  open  ; 
a  loss  of  splendour  also  overtakes  the  patient;  and  the  skin 
becomes  dry.64 

If  the  flesh  becomes  attenuated,  the  symptoms  that  manifest 
themselves  are  those  enumerated  above  (  as  the  consequences  of 
the  loss  of  blood )  and  the  following  in  particular,  viz.,  emaciation 
pf  the  waist,  of  the  neck,  and  of  the  belly.65 

If  the  element  of  fat  becomes  attenuated,  the  symptoms  that 
/appear  are  a  sensation  like  that  of  the  bursting  of  the  joints, 
a  painful  or  burning  sensation  in  the  eyes,  fatigue  upon  the  slight¬ 
est  exertion,  and  an  emaciation  of  the  belly.66 

Upon  the  attenuation  of  bones,  the  symptoms  that  appear 
are  the  falling  away  of  the  hair  on  the  head  and  the  body,  of  nails, 
of  the  beard,  and  of  the  teeth ;  a  sensation  of  fatigue  upon  the 
slightest  exertion,  and  utter  weakness  of  all  joints.67 

If  the  marrow  becomes  attenuated,  the  symptoms  that  should 


*  There  are  altogether  eighteen  kinds  of  attenuation  or  decrease.  Three  appertain 
to  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  ;  seven  to  the  seven  elements  beginning  with  Rasa  ;  two  to 
the  impurities  evacuated,  viz.,  stools  and  urine;  five  to  the  impurities  evacuated  by  the 
five  senses  ;  and  one  to  the  element  called  Ojas.  Of  these,  the  indications  have  been 
explained  of  the  attenuation  that  appertains  to  the  three  elements  of  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm.  The  rest  are  to  be  discoursed  upon  in  answer  to  the  disciple’s  question, _ T, 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


193 


be  ascribed  to  that  cause  are  a  sensation  of,  as  it  were,  the  bursting 
of  all  the  bones,  excessive  weakness  of  the  bones,  and  their  loss  of 
weight.  All  kinds  of  diseases,  again,  due  to  disorders  of  the  wind, 
also  appear.68 

The  symptoms  of  a  person  whose  vital  seed  has  been  attenua¬ 
ted  are  general  weakness,  a  dryness  of  the  mouth,  paleness  of 
complexion,  languor  of  the  body,  fatigue  upon  the  slightest  exertion, 
loss  of  virility,  and  emission  of  the  semen.*8* 

When  the  stools  decrease  below  the  quantity  that  is  normal,  the 
wind  in  the  constitution  of  the  patient  who  has  become  dry,  becomes 
provoked  or  aggravated  and  afflicting  his  entrails  forcesthem  upwards 
and  penetrates  the  abdomen  in  transverse  and  upward  directions.-]*701 

When  the  urine  decreases  below  the  normal  quantity,  the 
symptoms  that  appear  are  strangury,  and  loss  of  color  of  the 
urine  itself.  Besides  this,  the  patient  suffers  from  thirst,  and  his 
mouth  becomes  dry.71 

As  regards  the  other  organs  or  outlets  of  the  body,  when  their 
secretions  decrease  below  the  normal  measure,  all  of  them  seem  to 
be  empty,  light,  and  dry.72 

When  the  element  called  Ojas  becomes  attenuated,  the  patient 
yields  to  causeless  fears,  becomes  Weak,  indulges  in  anxious  thoughts 
ceaselessly,  and  feels  pain  in  all  his  senses.  His  body  again  loses 
its  splendour  ;  he  becomes  cheerless  ;  a  dryness  pervades  the  whole 
system  ;  and  a  languor  comes  over  him  so  that  he  feels  fatigue  upon 
the  slightest  exertion.72 

There  resides  in  the  heart  a  quantity  of  pure  blood,  which  is 
slightly  yellowish.  This  blood  in  the  body  is  called  Ojas.  Through 
attenuation  of  this,  blood  or  its  loss,  even  death  may  overtake 
the  man.}74 

«  At  the  end  of  the  first  line,  some  texts  read  ‘bhramah  ’  for  ‘  klamah.’  If  the 
former  reading  be  adhered  to,  the  meaning  would  be  *  swimming  of  the  head.— T-. 

I  <  Praviddhah  san’  should  be  supplied  after  ‘marutah.’  Some  texts  read 
•  unnamayet  ’  for  ‘  unnamayan.’—  T. 

+  ja  Some  texts  there  is  a  Verse  of  two  lines  on  the  subject  of  Ojas.  It  is  as 
follows  :  “  That  which  is  called  Ojas  at  first  appears  in  the  bodies  of  embodied  creatures, 
endued  with  the  color  of  clarified  butter.  In  taste  it  resembles  honey.  Its  scent  resem- 

25 


1:94 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHI TA. 


The  following  are  the  causes  of  the  attenuation,  or  loss  of  the 
constituent  elements  of  the  body,  viz.,  excessive  physical  exercise, 
fasting,  anxiety,  taking  food  that  is  dry  and  insufficient,  or  food  in 
excess,  exposure  to  wind  or  the  sun,  circumstances  creating  fear, 
grief,  drinking  liquids  whose  properties  are  dry,  night-keeping, 
the  excessive  emission  of  phlegm,  blood,  and  semen  (through 
disease),  or  expectorations  and  emissions  of  the  same  through  other 
causes,  phthisis,  and  afflictions  caused  by  evil  spirits  or  forces  of 
nature.*74-75 

Of  persons  who  eat  heavy,  oily,  sour,  saltish  food  or  food  in 
excessive  quantities,  or  who  take  new  rice  or  new  water  or  drinks 
that  are  newly  manufactured,  or  who  enjoy  in  excess  the  pleasures 
of  sleep  and  of  soft  beds  and  seats,  or  who  give  up  every  kind  of 
physical  exercise  and  mental  exertion,  or  who  abstain  from  having 
recourse  to  corrective  treatment  when  such  treatment  has  become 
necessary,  the  phlegm,  bile,  fat,  and  flesh  increase  and  stop  the 
free  course  of  the  wind.  The  wind  of  such  people,  having  its 
free  vent  thus  obstructed,  seizes  the  Ojas  and  proceeds  to  the 
anal  canal.  When  such  becomes  the  case,  a  painful  form  of 
Diabetes  appears. 7  5-TI 

The  disease  Diabetes  repeatedly  shows  the  symptoms  of  in¬ 
creased  or  excited  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm.  Those  symptoms 
(during  the  continuance  of  the  disease)  having  shown  themselves 
again  undergo  attenuation  and  then  disappear.7^ 

If  this  disease,  upon  its  first  appearance,  be  not  attended  to, 
seven  painful  diseases,  all  belonging  to  the  class  called  Pidaka, 
appear  in  those  parts  of  the  body  that  are  fleshy,  in  the  vital 
organs,  and  in  the  joints  also.  Those  seven  diseases  are  (jlaravika, 
Kachcchapika,  jalini,  Sarshapi,  Alaji,  Vinata,  and  Vidradhi.f79-80 


bles  that  of  fried  puddy.  As  honey  is  gathered  by  bees  from  diverse  kinds  of  flowers  and 
fruits,  even  so  is  the  Ojas  of  men  gathered  by  the  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  from  the  several 
elements  mentioned  above.  ” —  T. 

*  ‘  Ativartana  mokshanam’ is  explained  as ‘A tivartanam  vahirnihsaranam  vyadhya- 
ditah  ;  mokshanam  vamanadibhiratipravartanam.’ — T. 

t  All  these  diseases  have  been  described  in  the  following  verses.  Their  English 
names,  so.  far  as  they  are  identifiable,  have  been  given  under  the  respective  verses  treat¬ 
ing  of  them,  Pidakas  are  either  eruptions  or  abscesses. — T. 


CHAR  AKA  -SA  IK  HIT  A. 


195 


When  the  nature  of  the  eruption  is  sueh  that  its  form  is  like 
that  of  the  circular  cup  called  £arava,  the  boundary  line  raised 
above  the  level  of  the  skin;  the  middle  portion  is  depressed, 
blood  and  secretions  flow  from  it  without  pus,  and  when  it  is 
attended  with  pain*  the  eruption  is  then  called  (^aravika.81 

When  the  eruption  is  such  that  the  pain  it  generates  is  deep- 
seated  and  afflicts  the  patient  very  much,  and  when  it  covers  a 
large  area,  presents  a  smooth  appearance,  and  resembles  this 
back  Of  a  tortoise,  it  is  called  by  the  name  of  Kachcchapi  *82 

When  the  eruption  is  such  that  it  neither  abates  nor  grows, 
when  its  surface  seems  to  consist  of  fleshy  chords  or  strings  laid 
in  the  form  of  warp  and  woof,  when  it  emits  oily  secretions  and 
covers  a  large  area,  when  it  is  attended  with  pain  as  if 
innumerable  needles  are  piercing  the  part,  and  when  its  surface 
is  perforated  with  numerous  minute  holes,  it  comes  to  be  called  by 
the  name  of  Jalirii.f  83 

That  eruption  or  abscess,  which  is  not  very  large  in  circum¬ 
ference,  which  ripens  very  quickly,  which  is  attended  with  consider¬ 
able  pain,  and  whose  surface  is  covered  with  innumerable  pimples 
each  resembling  a  mustard  seed,  is  called  Sarsapi.84 

That  eruption  or  abscess  which  produces  a  burning  sensation  on 
the  skin  when  it  begins  to  appear,  which  is  accompanied  by  thirst, 
loss  of  consciousness,  and  fever,  which  incessantly  changes  its 
place  (going  from  one  part  of  the  body  to  another),  and  which 
burns,  causing  excessive  pain,  like  fire,  is  called  Alaji.f85 

That  eruption  which,  whether  it  appears  on  the  back  or  on 
the  belly,  is  attended  with  deep-seated  pain,  which  is  large  in 
circumference,  lower  than  the  general  level  of  the  skin,  and  blue 
in  color,  is  called  VinatS.88 

Vidradhi  has  been  said  to  be  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  external  or 
superficial,  and  deep-seated.  External  or  superficial  Vidradhi  is 
that  which  appears  on  the  skin,  the  nerves,  or  the  flesh,  it  is 

Enlarged  scrofulous  glands.  The  name  is  sometimes  applied  to  a  wart  or  blotch 
or  a  large  pimple.— T. 

t  ‘  Jalini  ’  seems  to  be  a  Carbuncular  eruption  on  abscess. — T. 

X  *  Alaji  ’  is  taken  for  all  painful  and  quickly  ripening  abscesses.— T. 


196  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

attended  with  great  pain  and  puts  forth  many  raised  or  elevated 
arcs.87 

From  eating  food  that  is  very  cold,  or  food  that  is  very  hot 
and  burning,  or  food  that  is  totally  destitute  of  oil  or  very  dry, 
or  food  that  is  excessive  in  quantity,  or  food  that  is  combined  of 
articles  having  opposite  virtues  (such  as  milk  and  meat),  or  food 
that  is  indigestible,  or  food  that  is  rotten,  or  from  taking  food  at 
unseasonable  or  irregular  hours,  or  food  that  is  not  adapted  to  or 
capable  of  being  assimilated  by  the  system,  or  food  that  is  stained  by 
some  fault  or  other,  or  from  drinking  alcoholic  spirits  in  excess  or 
from  suppressing  the  urgings  of  nature  (in  respect  of  stools,  urine, 
semen,  tears,  &c.),  or  from  excessive  toil,  or  from  undue  indulgence 
of  physical  exercise,  or  from  improper  methods  of  lying  down  (for 
rest  or  sleep),  or  from  bearing  excessively  heavy  loads  or  walking 
excessively  long  distances  or  excessive  indulgence  in  sexual  con¬ 
gress,  wind,  bile  and  phlegm  penetrate  the  flesh  and  blood  that  are 
within  the  body.  When  this  happens,  the  disease  called  Granthi, 
affecting  the  deep  parts  of  the  body  and  of  great  virulence,  be¬ 
comes  generated.*88'9? 

Accompanied  with  great  pain,  this  disease  appears  within  the 
thorax,  the  part  that  joins  the  throat  with  the  thorax, f  on  the  liver 
or  the  spleen,  the  abdominal  cavity,  below  the  thorax  or  by  its 
sides,  within  the  navel,  the  groins,  and  the  anal  canal,91 

In  consequence  of  the  excess  of  impure  blood,  the  Granthi 
very  soon  becomes  ripe.  And  because  it  ripens  soon,  therefore 
is  it  called  Vidradhi.  J 9  3 

When  the  Granthi  has  been  due  to  excitement  of  the  wind, 
the  symptoms  it  manifests  are  piercing  pains,  cutting  pains,  gidr 
diness;  epistasis  or  suppression  of  the  urine,  noise  in  the  ears, 
sudden  throbbings  of  the  body,  and  a  sensation  of  something 
creeping  through  the  limbs.  When  due  to  excitement  of  the  bile, 
the  symptoms  are  thirst,  a  sensation  of  burning,  loss  of  conscious¬ 
ness,  a  sensation  of  intoxication,  and  fever,  The  Granthi  is  to 


*  ‘  Granthi !  seems  to  be  a  general  name  for  deep-seated  abscesses.  —  T. 

f  ‘  Kloman  ’  sometimes  indicates  the  bladder. — T, 

|  !  Yidahi^t  Vidradhi,  f, 


CHA  RA  KA-SA MHITA . 


197 


be  regarded  as  due  to  the  excitement  of  the  phlegm  when  the 
symptoms  that  appear  are  yawning,  nausea,  disgust  for  food 
of  every  kind,  stiffness  of  the  whole  body,  and  a  sensation  of  cold. 
In  all  these  kinds  of  Vidradhi  the  pain  that  is  generated  is  very 
great.*3'94 

The  patient  feels  as  if  some  cutting  or  piercing  weapon  is 
afflicting  him  in  the  particular  part,  or  that  some  burning  brand  is 
applied  to  the  part  for  scorching  it  incessantly.  When  the 
Vidradhi  becomes  ripe,  the  patient  feels  as  if  dozens  of  scorpions 
are  biting  him.95 

When  the  Vidradhi  is  occasioned  by  excitement  of  the  wind, 
the  secretion  emanating  from  it  is  thin,  dry,  reddish,  and  frothy. 
When  due  to  excitement  of  the  bile,  the  secretion  resembles  the 
solution  of  paste  of  sesame,  Phaseolus  Roxburghii,  and  Dolichos 
biflorus ;  when  due  to  excitement  of  the  phlegm,  the  secretion  is 
white,  oily,  thick,  and  copious.  When  caused  by  excitement  of  all 
the  three  together,  the  secretion  presents  all  the  attributes  men¬ 
tioned  above.96*7 

For  enabling  you  to  understand  which  Vidradhi  is  curable  and 
which  not,  we  shall  instruct  you  about  their  especial  symptoms 
as  depending  upon  the  particular  part  of  the  body  in  which  they 
may  appear.  Amongst  the  several  kinds  of  this  disease  as  depend¬ 
ing  upon  the  locality,  when  the  Vidradhi  appears  in  the  thoracic 
region,  the  especial  symptoms  are  excessive  pain  in  the  region 
about  the  heart,  that  form  of  asthma  called  Tamaka,  fainting  or 
loss  of  consciousness,  and  consumption.  In  those  cases  of 
Vidradhi  which  appear  in  the  region  joining  the  throat  and  the 
chest,  the  especial  symptoms  are  thirst,  dryness  of  the  mouth  (as  if  it 
were  parched),  and  a  choking  sensation  of  the  throat,  accompanied 
with  pain.  When  the  disease  appears  in  the  liver,  the  especial 
symptom  is  asthma.  When  it  appears  in  the  spleen,  the  especial 
symptom  is  suffocation  or  difficulty  of  breathing.  When  it  appears 
in  the  abdominal  cavity,  the  special  symptoms  are  excessive  pain 
in  the  flanks,  the  back,  and  the  waist.  When  it  appears  in  the 
navel,  the  especial  symptom  is  hiccup.  When  it  appears  in  the 
groins,  the  especial  symptom  is  stiffness  or  paralysis  of  the 


108  CHA  RA  KA  -  SA  MH I  Tl 

thighs.  When  it  appears  in  the  anal  canal,  the  especial  Symptoms 
are  difficulty  of  micturition,  and  very  foetid  stools.88 

When  the  Vidradhi  that  appears  in  the  upper  regions  of  the 
body  ripens  and  bursts,  the  secretion  emanating  from  it  comes  out 
through  the  mouth.  When  that  which  appears  in  the  lower  parts 
of  the  body  ripens  and  brusts,  the  secretion  emanating  from  it 
comes  out  through  the  anus.  When  it  appears  in  the  havel  and 
ripens  and  bursts,  its  secretion  escapes  through  both  the  outlets, 
viz.,  the  mouth  and  the  anus.88 

Amongst  the  different  kinds  of  Vidradhi,  when  those  that  appear 
in  the  thoracic  region,  the  navel,  and  the  anal  canal,  ripen,  they 
lead  to. death.  Those  also  that  are  caused  by  disorders  in  all  the 
three  elements  (of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm),  lead  to  the  same  result. 
The  rest,  if  treated  by  a  skilful  physician  competent  to  give  relief 
without  delay,  abate  and  admit  of  cure.  Hence,  as  soon  as  the 
Vidradhi  is  generated  that  afflicts  the  patient  like  a  sharp  weapon 
or  a  snake  or  the  lightning-fire,  it  should  be  treated  with  Oils, 
Sweda,  and  Purgatives.  All  cases  of  Vidradhi  should  be  treated  in 
the  same  way  as  glandular  enlargements  in  the  abdomen.100 

Here  occur  some  Verses. 

All  these  diseases,  included  under  the  common  name  of 
Pidaka,  may  be  generated  in  even  the  absence  of  Diabetes  in  the 
patient.  They  may  be  due  to  a  diseased  state  of  the  fat.  They 
are,  again,  not  noticed  till  they  actually  localise  themselves  by 
occupying  some  part  of  the  body.101 

Of  one  who  is  possessed  of  copious  fat  or  phlegm,  the  diseases 
£aravika,  Kachcchapika,  and  Jalini,  when  they  appear,  become  very 
painful.  Indeed,  they  assume  a  virulent  type  in  such  persons.102 

That  Sarshapi,  and  Alaji,  and  Vinata,  and  Vidradhi,  which  are 
due  to  the  inordinate  excitement  of  the  bile  and  to  which  persons 
without  much  fat  are  liable,  are  all  capable  of  being  Cured  with 
ease.105 

.  That  person,  suffering  under  diabetes,  who  gets  the  diseases 
called  Pidaka  in  his  vital  parts,  or  the  shoulders,  or  the  anus,  or 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA.  199 

in  the  tips  of  the  ears,  or  in  the  breasts,  or  in  the  hip-joints  or 
knee-joints  or  ankle-joints,  meets  with  death.104 

There  are  other  kinds  of  Pidaka  some  of  which  are  yellow,  or 
blood-red,  or  dark,  or  reddish,  or  yellowish  white,  or  whitish,  or 
brown  as  ashes,  or  dark-blue.  Some  are  mild  and  some  virulent ; 
some  are  large,  some  minute ;  some  appear  slowly  and  some 
rapidly ;  some  are  attended  with  little  pain,  and  some  with  much 
pain.  Ascertaining  their  nature,  from  observation  of  the  causes 
and  indications  of  wind  or  bile  or  phlegm  (to  which  they  may  be 
ascribable),  one  should  explain  ( what  they  are  to  the  patient), 
guided  by  observation  of  the  supervening  afflictions.106'108 

The  supervening  afflictions  of  the  diseases  called  Pidaka  are 
thirst,  short  or  asthmatic  breath,  sloughing  of  the  flesh,  diabetes, 
hiccough,  sensation  of  intoxication,  fever,  erysipelas,  and  sense  of 
heavy  pressure  upon  the  heart  and  other  vital  parts.108 

The  faults  of  the  system,  viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  have  three 
kinds  of  courses :  first,  they  may  be  attenuated,  or  remain  in 
normal  measure,  or  be  increased  or  excited ;  second,  they  may 
range  upwards,  or  downwards,  or  in  transverse  directions ;  and 
thirdly,  they  may  travel  into  the  stomach,  the  branches,  or  sub¬ 
sidiary  ducts,  or  all  vital  parts  and  bone-joints.  These  are  the 
three  courses,  in  respect  of  kind,  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm.10*-110 

The  growth,  aggravation,  and  attenuation  of  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm,  in  their  due  order,  happen  one  after  another,  in  the  six 
seasons  beginning  with  the  season  of  the  clouds.*111  Such  growth, 
aggravati°n,  and  attenuation  constitute  a  fourth  kind  of  course 
( in  respect  of  the  faults)  called  the  course  dependant  upon  season 
or  time.  This  course,  again,  is  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  normal  and 
abnormal.112 

The  digestion  of  men  arises  from  the  heat  of  the  bile.  The 
bile,  when  excited,  produces  diverse  kinds  of  disorders.113 

The  phlegm  that  is  normal  is  called  strength  of  the  body. 

*  They  are  Varsha,  Carat,  Hemanta,  Cita,  Vasanta,  and  Grishma.  Vide  note 
p.  66  ante.  —  T. 


200 


CHAR  AK  A  -SA  MHITA . 


When  the  phlegm  changes  its  normal  condition,  it  becomes  those 
impurities  that  are  evacuated  by  the  system.  It  is  the  phlegm 
that  is  also  called  the  Ojas  in  the  system.  When  its  normal 
condition  becomes  altered,  it  becomes  a  source  of  evil.114 

All  acts  and  functions  are  due  to  wind  as  their  cause;  The 
wrind  has  been  called  the  Life  of  living  creatures.  It  is  through 
the  wind  that  all  diseases  are  generated.  It  is  through  the  wind 
also  that  all  creatures  meet  with  destruction.110 

The  enemy  (disease)  is  always  in  one’s  immediate  proximity. 
One  endued  with  wisdom  should,  therefore,  always  observe  one¬ 
self  and  conduct  oneself  with  concentrated  attention,  desiring  ta 
have  a  long  life.116 

(Here  is  a  summary  containing  a  couple  of  Verses). 

In  this  Lesson,  called  Kiyantah  ^irasiya,  diseases  of  the  head, 
with  the  diseases  of  the  thorax  and  all  diseases  that  are  generated 
by  the  varying  measures  of  what  are  called  the  faults,  ( viz.,  wind, 
bile,  and  phlegm),  and  attenuation,  and  all  those  diseases  which  are 
called  Pidakas,  and  the  diverse  kinds  of  the  courses  which  the 
faults  have,  have  been  spoken  of  by  the  truth-seeing  Rishi,  that 
benefactor  of  all  creatures,  for  the  instruction  of  physicians.1"2 

Thus  ends  the  Lesson  called  “  Kiyantah  £irasiya,”  in  the 
treatise  of  Agnive9a  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  XVIII. 

We  shall  next  expound  the  Lesson  called  Tr^othiya  (the 
triple  Inflammation). 

Even  this  was  said  by  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri,1 

Three  kinds  of  Inflammations  appear.  They  are  due  to  wind, 
bile,  and  phlegm. 

Inflammations,  again,  may  be  divided  into  two  classes,  viz  , 
Constitutional  and  Accidental. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  M  HIT A . 


Those  called  Accidental  are  caused  by  cuts,  piercing  wounds, 
fractures,  dislocations,  pressure  caused  by  heavy  weights  or  pound¬ 
ing  any  part  of  the  body  (as  if  in  a  mortar),  or  the  violence 
caused  by  something  coiled  or  twined  round  with  great  force,  or 
beating,  or  severe  belabouring,  of  binding  with  chords,  or  griping, 
or  other  kinds  of  pain  caused  by  external  bodies. 

Inflammations  also  set  in,  due  to  contact  of  the  body  with  the 
flower  or  fruit  of  secretion  of  Bhallataka  (a) ;  the  bristles  of 
Atmagupta  (3),  the  bristles  of  the  worm  called  £uka;  leaves, 
creepers,  and  plants  that  are  poisonous  to  the  touch ;  or  the  sweat 
or  limbs  or  the  urine  of  poisonous  animals.* 

Inflammation  may  also  set  in  through  wounds  in  the  body 
caused  by  the  .  teeth,  the  horns,  and  the  nails  or  claws  of  animals 
whether  poisonous  or  otherwise.!  Inflammations  are  also  caused 
by  sea-water,  poisonous  winds,  exposure  to  excessive  cold  and 
burns.2 

Accidental  Inflammations,  again,  differ  from  Constitutional  ones 
in  this  respect,  viz.,  the  symptoms  of  the  latter  with  respect  to 
wind  and  the  others  manifest  themselves  before,  whilst  the  symp¬ 
toms  of  the  former  springing  from  their  respective  causes, — the 
symptoms,  that  is,  with  respect  to  wind  and  the  others,-* -manifest 
themselves  in  a  different  way,  that  is,  afterwards. %3 

Treated  with  bandages,  Mantras,  plasters  made  of  drugs  that 


а.  Semecarpus  Anacardium. 

б.  Called  also  Kapikachchhu ;  in  Bengali,  Allcusi;  Mucuna  pruriens ;  syn. 
Carpopogon  pruriens,  Roxb. 

*  ‘  Parisarpana  ’  is  moving  over.  If  a  person  treads  upon  any  such  animal,  or  any 
such  animal  moves  over  his  body,  inflammation  sets  in. — T. 

t  The  claws  or  teeth  of  the  tiger,  for  example,  cause  inflammation  that  brings 
about  death.  The  nails  and  teeth  of  teven  human  beings  can  cause  inflammation. 

Cannine  bites  can  cause  inflammation,  even  when  the  dog  has  no  rabies. _ T. 

t  This  aphorism  is  exceedingly  terse.  I,  therefore,  expand  it  for  making  it  intelli¬ 
gible.  The  sense  is  this  :  in  Constitutional  Inflammations,  disorders  first  arise  in  respect 
of  wind  and  the  others  ;  those  disorders  then  bring  about  the  Inflammations  ;  in  Acciden¬ 
tal  inflammations,  the  reverse  of  this  is  seen,  for  the  Inflammations,  with  their  respective 
symptoms  as  due  to  their  respective  causes,  first  set  in  and  then  the  disorders  in  respect 
of  wind  and  the  others  take  place. — T, 


202 


CHAR  A  KA  -SA  M  HI  TA. 


are  destructive  of  poison,  and  emollients  possessed  of  soothing  or 
cooling  virtues,  and  other  means  of  the  kind,  Accidental  Inflamma¬ 
tions  are  relieved.4 

Constitutional  Inflamations  arise  from  injudicious  administra¬ 
tion  of  oils,  of  Swedana,  of  emetics,  of  purgatives,  of  dry 
enemata,  of  oily  enemata  and  of  errhines,  as  also-  from  the  in¬ 
sufficient  administration  of  proper  diet  after  corrective  and  other 
modes  of  treatme  nt  have  been  gone  through.*5 

Constitutional  Inflammations  also  arise  from  attacks  of  nausea 
or  vomiting,  tympanites,  violent  diarrhoea  or  cholera,  asthma, 
coughs,  diarrhoea,  consumption,  anaemia  or  jaundice,  stomachic 
and  abdominal  diseases,  maenorrhagia,  fistula-in-ano,  and  Haemor¬ 
rhoids,  when  the  patient  is  exceedingly  afflicted  by  any  of 
these  diseases.6 

Constitutional  Inflammations  may  also  arise  from  some  of  the 
varieties  of  Leprosy,  Itches,  and  Pidakas,  or  from  suppression  of 
the  urgings  of  nausea  or  vomiting,  of  sneezing,  of  eructations,  of 
semen,  of  wind,  urine,  and  stools.  They  may  also  arise  from  the 
various  kinds  of  skin  diseases  and  in  a  person  who  has  been  very 
much  afflicted  and  emaciated  by  hunger  or  fast.7 

Constitutional  Inflammations  may  also  be  due  to  suddenly 
eating  food  that  is  very  heavy  or  very  sour  or  very  saltish,  or 
pounded  or  sodden  food,  or  fruits,  or  potherbs,  or  unripe  mangoes 
dressed  with  sugar  and  oil,  curds,  vegetables,  wines  and  alcoholic 
spirits,  all  kinds  of  bad  food,  paddy  that  has  put  forth  sprouts  or  is 
very  new,  paddy  of  the  variety  called  £uka  and  also  of  the  variety 
called  £ami,  and  meat  of  animals  living  in  marshy  regions  and  also 
of  aquatic  animals.  Such  Inflammations  may  also  arise  from 
one’s  eating  (burnt)  earth  or  clay  or  dry  clods  of  earth  or  anything 
that  is  exceedingly  saline.  They  are  also  due  to  injuries  to  the 
uterus,  or  very  ■  premature  abortions,  or  improper  administration 
of  diet  and  defective  observance  of  prescribed  rules  of  conduct 


*  *;  Samsarjana’  means  the  use  of  proper  or  prescribed  diet  after  the  administration 

of  oils  and  Swedana,  emetics  and  purgatives, 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHITA . 


203 


soon  after  delivery,  or  aggravation  or  excitement  of  wind,,  bile, 
and  phlegm,  through  causes  already  enumerated.* 

These,  however,  are  all  general  causes  of  Constitutional  In¬ 
flammations.8 

In  this  connection,  the  following  are  the  particular  causes. 
In  consequence  of  one’s  having  taken  food  that  is  cold  or  unoily 
or  light  or  poisonous,  or  of  one’s  having  been  exceedingly 
afflicted  and  emaciated  by  toil  and  hunger  or  fast,  or  of  one’s 
having  undergone  an  administration  of  correctives  without  attend¬ 
ing  to  prescribed  rules,  the  wind  being  excited  prevails  over  the 
skin,  the  flesh,  and  the  blood,  and  brings  about  Inflammation. f 

Such  Inflammations  appear  quickly  and  disappear  as  quickly. 

Inflammation  generated  by  excitement  of  the  wind  presents 
a  brown  or  a  red  color  or  the  same  color  as  that  of  the  skin  itself. 
It  appears  on  the  same  part  of  the  body  and  does  not  change  its 
locality.  It  is  attended  with  a  throbbing  pain.  It  presents  a 
stiff  and  hard  surface,  and  is  dry.  The  skin  is  seen  to  burst.  With 
respect  to  the  hair  growing  on  the  spot,  one  feels  as  if  these  are 
being  torn  out  or  extracted  by  the  roots.  Sometimes  the  part 
seems  to  be  wounded  with  some  cutting  weapon.  Sometimes  the 
pain  seems  to  resemble  that  of  violent  strokes  or  cuts  of  a  cane  or 
a  supple  stick. 

Sometimes  the  patient  feels  as  if  he  were  being  constantly 
pricked  with  needles. 

Sometimes  the  patient  feels  that  ants  are  moving  up  and  down 
within  the  inflamed  part.  Sometimes  the  sensation  is  like  to  what  is 
produced  by  the  application  of  a  mustard  plaster.  The  inflamed 

*  ‘Raga,’  the  Commentator  explains,  is  used  for  ‘  Ragashadava,’  which  is  a  pre¬ 
paration  of  unripe  mangoes  with  sugar  and  oil.  It  is  used  chiefly  as  a  sauce. 

Burnt  earth,  clay,  and  dry  clods  of  earth,  in  consequence  of  being  a  little  saltish,  are 
very  much  liked  by  particular  men  and  women.  Hindu  women,  when  quick  with  child, 
and  when  the  usual  nausea  sets  in,  every  day  eat  large  quantities  of  burnt  and  dry  earth. 
As  to  clay,  I  have  never  seen  or  heard  any  one  eating  it. — T. 

‘Nava9uka  &c.,’  seems  to  be  the  correct  reading,  and  not  ‘  Yavacuka  &c/' — T. 

t  Instead  of  ‘  framopavasati  &c.,’  some  texts  read  ‘  dhumopavasati  &c.’ 

‘  Kshapana’  is  explained  by  the  Commentator  as  ‘  Vamanadibhirdoshakshapanam.’ — T. 


204 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHI TA. 


part  may  sometimes  be  seen  to  contract  and  shrivel  up,  and  some!- 
times  its  extends  and  covers  a  larger  area. 

Even  this  is  what  happens  in  the  case  of  Inflammations  caused 
by  excitement  of  the  wind.9 

In  consequence  of  eating  food  that  is  hot,  pungent,  bitter, 
alkaline,  and  saltish,  or  food  that  is  undigestible,  or  of  exposure 
to  the  heat  of  fire  or  the  sun,  the  bile,  becoming  excited,  prevails 
over  the  skin,  the  flesh,  and  blood,  and  brings  about  Inflammation. 

Such  Inflammation  appears  quickly  and  disappears  as  quickly. 

Its  color  becomes  dark,  or  yellow»  or  blue,  or  coppery.  It 
becomes  hot  to  the  touch  and  soft  also.  The  hair  that  grows  on  the 
inflamed  part  becomes  tawny  or  coppery  in  hue. 

The  part  seems  to  burn,  or  become  the  seat  of  afflicting  pains. 
Vapours  seem  to  rise  from  it.  It  becomes  also  very  hot,  and  cover¬ 
ed  with  sweat.  Secretions  sometimes  issue  out  of  it.  It  cannot 
bear  any  kind  of  warmth  or  heat. 

Even  this  is  the  nature  of  Inflammations  caused  by  excitement 
of  bile.1® 

In  consequence  of  taking  (in  excess)  food  that  is  heavy,  or 
sweet,  or  cold,  or  oily,  or  of  excessive  sleep  or  physical  exercise, 
and  the  like  causes,  the  phlegm  becomes  excited  and,  prevailing 
over  the  skin,  the  flesh  and  the  blood,  brings  about  Inflammations. 

Such  Inflammation  appears  slowly  and  disappears  as  slowly. 

Its  hue  becomes  whitish  or  white.  It  becomes  oily  and  smooth, 
A  sensation  of  heaviness  is  felt  in  the  part,  ft  does  not  change 
its  locality.  It  looks  as  if  wet  or  drenched  with  water.  The  hair 
that  grows  on  the  part  presents  a  white  color  at  the  end.  It  is 
capable  of  bearing  the  application  of  warmth  or  heat.11 

Inflammations  are  altogether  of  seven  kinds.  When  the 
causes  (in  respect  of  the  excitement  of  the  wind,  the  bile,  and  the 
phlegm)  and  the  symptoms  are  unmixed,  the  varieties  are  three 
in  number,  When  in  respect  of  their  causes  and  indications,  they 


CHA  RAKA -SA  MHITA . 


209 


are  mixed  two  at  a  time,  the  varieties  are  three  in  number. 
When  all  the  causes  and  symptoms  are  combined,  there  is  but  .one 
variety,  called  Sannipatika.*19 

Inflammation,  classified  according  to  these  several  natures, 
is  of  two  kinds,  three  kinds,  four  kinds,  and  seven  kinds.  They 
are,  again,  of  one  kind,  judged  by  the  swelling-! 1 9 

liere  occur  some  Verses, 

When  in  consequence  of  an  Inflammation,  the  limbs  of  a 
patient  become  afflicted  with  pain  or  benumbed  and  destitute  of 
sensibility,  or  when  such  pain  becomes  very  acute,  and  when  the 
Inflammation,  if  pressed  down,  swells  up  quickly,  such  Inflamma¬ 
tion  should  be  set  down  as  due  to  the  action  of  the  wind.14  That 
Inflammation,  again,  which  is  of  a  reddish  splendour,  whose  pains 
abate  during  the  night,  and  which  disappears  upon  being  rubbed 
with  oil  or  ghee  and  warm  substances,  should  also  be  known  to  be 
due  to  the  action  of  the  wind,16 

That  Inflammation  which  appears  in  a  person  afflicted  with 
thirst  and  fever,  which  is  attended  with  pain,  and  which  burns, 
which  is  covered  with  sweat,  which  secretes  juicy  liquids  and  which 
is  endued  with  a  bad  odor,  should  be  known  as  an  intumescence 
due  to  the  action  of  the  bile.16  That  Inflammation  which  causes 
the  face,  the  eyes,  and  the  skin  to  become  yellow,  and  which  is 
first  generated  from  the  middle  part  of  the  body  (although  it  may 
subsequently  change  its  place),  which  is  such  that  the  skin  on  the 
affected  part  becomes  very  thin,  and  which  brings  about  an  attack 
of  diarrhoea,  is  said  to  be  due  to  the  action  of  the  bile.1 7 


*  I  have  expanded  the  passage  a  little.  The  fact  is  the  seven  varieties  are  these.; 
(l)  due  to  excitement  of  the  wind,  (2)  to  excitement  of  the  bile,  (3)  to  excitement  of  the 
phlegm,  (4)  to  excitement  of  both  wind  and  bile,  (5)  to  excitement  of  both  wind  and 
phlegm,  and  (6)  to  excitement  of  both  bile  and  phlegm,  and  (7)  to  excitement  of  wind, 
bile,  and  phlegm.  The  symptoms  in  each  case  must  correspond  with  the  cause.— T.  , 
f  Two  kinds,  such  as  Constitutional  and  Accidental.  Three  kinds,,  such  as  due  to 
excitement  of  the  wind,  of  the  bile,  or  of  the  phlegm :  Four  kinds  such  as  due  to 
wind  and  bile,  phlegm  and  bile,  wind  and  phlegm,  and  all  three  united  together, 
Seven  kinds,  as  explained  in  the  note  above. — T, 


206 


charaka-samhitA. 


That  Inflammation  which  is  cool,  which  is  generated  slowly, 
which  is  attended  with  itching,  whose  color  is  whitish,  and  which 
if  pressed  down  does  not  swell  up  soon,  is  said  to  be  an  intumes¬ 
cence  due  to  the  action  of  phlegm.18 

That  Inflammation  must  be  ascribed  to  the  action  of  phlegm 
from  which,  if  opened  by  a  lancet  or  a  blade  of  Ku^a  grass,  no 
blood  is  seen  to  flow  but,  instead,  only  an  oily  secretion  of  scanty 
measure.19 

When  the  causes  with  their  indications  combine  (two  at  a  time) 
the  Inflammation  is  said  to  be  due  to  two  combined  faults.  When 
all  the  causes  with  their  indications  combine,  the  Inflammation 
presents  the  features  observed  separately  in  separate  varieties 
thereof,  and  the  symptoms  are  necessarily  of  a  mixed  kind.20 

That  Inflammation  which,  in  the  case  of  a  male  person,  setting 
in  from  the  feet  gradually  extends  over  the  whole  body  upwards,  or 
which,  in  the  case  of  a  female,  setting  in  from  the  mouth,  gradually 
extends  over  the  whole  body  downwards,  is  regarded  as  not  easy 
of  cure.21 

That  Inflammation  which,  in  the  case  of  both  sexes,  is  genera¬ 
ted  in  the  anus,  is  regarded  as  very  difficult  of  cure.  That  also 
in  which  there  are  supervening  consequences  of  a  painful  nature, 
is  of  the  same  kind.22 

The  supervening  symptoms  of  Inflammation  are,  in  brief, 
seven  in  number,  viz.,  vomiting,  difficulty  of  breath,  disgust  for  food, 
thirst,  fever,  diarrhoea,  and  weakness.23 

When  the  phlegm  of  a  person  becoming  aggravated  or  exci¬ 
ted,  stays  at  the  root  of  his  tongue,  such  phlegm  very  soon 
generates  an  Inflammation.  From  such  Inflammation  proceeds 
the  disease  called  Upajihvika*2  4 

When  the  phlegm  of  a  person  becoming  excited  stays  at  the 
root  of  the"  palate,  it  very  soon  causes  an  Inflammation  from  which 
proceeds  the  disease  called  Galasundi.f25 


*  Ranula. 
f  Enlarged  tonsil, 


CHA  RA  RA-SA  MHITA. 


207 


When  the  phlegm  of  a  person,  becoming  excited,  stays  on  the 
exterior  surface  of  the  neck,  it  slowly  causes  an  Inflammation  from 
which  proceeds  the  disease  called  Galaganda.*26 

When  the  phlegm  of  a  person,  becoming  excited,  stays  in  the 
interior  of  the  neck,  it  very  soon  produces  an  Inflammation  from 
which  proceeds  the  disease  called  Galagraha.f27 

When  the  bile  of  a  person,  becoming  excited  along  with  the 
blood,  moves  over  the  skin,  it  generates  an  Inflammation  which 
presents  a  red  color,  from  which  proceeds  the  disease  called 
Visarpa.J28 

When  the  bile  of  a  person,  becoming  excited,  stays  in  the 
blood,  it  generates  an  Inflammation  in  the  skin  which  presents 
a  red  color.  From  this  proceeds  a  disease  called  Pidaka.29 

When  the  bile  of  a  person  becomes  exited  and  mixed  with 
the  blood,  and  as  a  consequence  the  blood  becomes  dry,  the  dis¬ 
eases  that  appear  are  Tilaka,  Piplava,  Vyanga,  and  Nilika.§30 

When  the  bile  of  a  person,  becoming  excited,  stays  in  the 
region  of  the  forehead  or  the  temples,  the  Inflammation  that  sets 
in  is  called  (Jankhaka.  It  is  attended  with  violent  symptoms.31 

When  the  bile  of  a  person,  becoming  excited,  stays  at  the 
root  of  the  ears,  such  person  gets  an  Inflammation  upon  the  sub¬ 
sidence  of  fever.  Such  Inflammation  becomes  unconquerable  and 
terminates  in  death.32 

When  the  wind  of  a  person,  becoming  excited,  stays  in  the 
body  after  causing  the  spleen  to  swell,  such  wind,  slowly  afflicting 
the  flank,  causes  an  enlargement  of  the  spleen.33 

When  the  wind  of  a  person,  becoming  excited,  stays  in  that 

*  Bronchocele. 

t  This  leads  to  difficulty  of  deglutition  and  suppression  of  the  voice. — T. 

J  Erysipelas. 

§  Tilaka  is  identifiable  with  Pigmentary  naevi  or  moles. 

Piplava  indicates  small  pimples  on  the  body. 

Vyanga  consists  of  brown  spots  on  the  face.  Nilika  consists  of  dark  spots  on  the 
face.  —  T. 


208 


CI1A  RA  RASA  MU  IT  A. 


part  of  the  abdomen  which  is  called  the  seat  of  Gulma,  it  generates 
An  Inflammation  with  an  acute  pain  called  £ula.  From  this,  the 
person  gets  the  disease  called  Gulma.*34 

When  the  wind  of  a  person  becomes  excited  and  causing  an 
Inflammation  with  the  acute  pain  called  £ula,  moves  from  the 
groins  to  the  testes,  the  person  gets  the  disease  called  Vradhna;36 

When  the  wind,  becoming  excited,  goes  into  the  space  be¬ 
tween  the  blood  and  the  skin,  it  then  generates  an  Inflammation 
in  the  abdomen  and  the  man  gets  the  disease  called  Udara.f30 

When  the  wind,  becoming  excited,  stays  in  the  abdomen  and 
does  not  go  either  downwards  and  upwards  for  escaping  out,  the 
man  is  said  to  get  the  disease  called  Anaha.*37 

In  consequence  of  their  similarity  with  Inflammation  in  respect 
of  a-  swelling  appearance,  fleshy  excresences  and  tumours,  distin¬ 
guished  by  names  and  symptoms,  should  be  included  in  this 
enumeration  of  Inflammations.38 

When  the  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  of  any  person  all  become 
excited  together  and  stay  at  the  root  of  a  person’s  tongue,  and 
cause  him  burning  pain  by  reaching  the  acme  of  aggravation  or 
excitement,  they  then  generate  a  violent  Inflammation,  with  pains 
of  diverse  kind.  This  disease,  which  rapidly  reaches  a  crisis, 
should  be  included  in  the  class  called  Rohinika.  Such  a  person 
can  expect  to  live  for  three  days  only  at  the  most.  If  treated, 
however,  by  a  skilful  physician,  he  very  soon  becomes  cured.39-44 

There  are  diverse  diseases  (falling  under  Inflammation)  which 
though  regarded  as  virulent,  are  still  curable  (if  treated  by  a  skilful 
physician).  These,  however,  if  not  treated  by  a  skilful  physician, 
6r  treated  upon  false  principles,  cause  the  death  of  the  patient.42 

There  are  others  (falling  under  Inflammation)  which 
are  regarded  mild  and  which  are  certainly  curable.  Whether  the 
patient  takes  care  of  them  or  not,  whatever  is  done  with  respect 
to  them  brings  about  their  cure.43 
.l.'  *  A  Gulma  is  a  windy  tumour  in  the  abdomen. — T. 

This  name  stands  for  many  abdominal  affections. — T. 

*  «  Anaha,’  is  epistasis  or  suppression  of  urine.— T. 


CHa  ra  ica-sa  m  hit a  . 


209 


There  are  others  (of  this  class)  which  are  regarded  incurable. 
Some,  again,  ( though  incurable  )  are  capable  of  being  suppressed. 
In  diseases  of  this  latter  kind,  well-applied  treatment  assists  the 
patient  to  live  on.*44 

There  are  others  that  are  truly  incurable.  In  them  no  treat¬ 
ment  produces  success.  Only  fools  strive  to  treat  them.  The 
learned  physician  never  sets. his  hand  upon  them.45 

Diseases  are  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  Curable  and  Incurable.  Dis¬ 
tributing  them  according  to  the  considerations  of  mildness  and 
violence,  they  become  of  four  kinds.t45 

The  diseases  which  fall  under  the  general  heading  of  Inflam¬ 
mation  are  innumerable  when  distinguished  by  considerations  of 
pain,  color,  manner  of  appearance  or  element  affected,  area  or  part  of 
the  body  occupied,  and  name.J 4  7  The  treatment,  however,  in  all 
cases  should  be  according  to  what  is  laid  down  in  this  brief 
enumeration  mentioning  general  points.  In  all  their  modifications, 
the  same  general  feature  is  said  to  be  present.48 

The  physician  who  may  not  know  the  separate  name  of  each 
particular  modification  should  not  hesitate  to  undertake  its 
treatment.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  of  all  the  modifications  the  names 
do  not  certainly  occur  in  the  Medical  scriptures.49 

A  particular  fault  which  has  been  excited  (and  from  which  an 
Inflammation  proceeds)  may,  in  consequence  of  the  particular  cause 
that  has  excited  it,  change  its  locality,  and  thus  generate  diverse 


*  Incurable  diseases  are  of  two  kinds.  Some  of  them  are  capable  of  being  sup¬ 
pressed  though  not  cured.  Others  are  incapable  of  even  suppression.  In  diseases  called 
Suppressible  or  Yapya,  well-applied  treatment  prolongs  life.  ‘Susadhu  api  karma’ 
is  the  correct  reading,  divested  of  ‘Sandhi.’  ‘  Yatrakaram  ’  is  ‘competent  to  make  the 
patient  live  on.’ — 71 

f  Four  kinds,  such  as  (i)  Mild  and  Curable,  (2)  Violent  and  Curable,  (3)  Mild 
and  Incurable,  and  (4)  Violent  and  Incurable.  Among  these,  Mild  and  Incurable  would 
mean  Yapya  or  suppressible. — 71 

t  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  Inflammation  is  a  general  name  applied  to  a  very 
large  number  of  diseases  whose  common  characteristic  is  swelling.  If  differentiated 
from  one  another  by  considering  the  pains  they-  cause,  the  colors  they  present,  the 
manner  in  which  they  appear  (*.*.,  swiftly  or  slowly  or  as  due  to  this  or  that  cause),  Ac., 
the  variety  will  seem  to  be  great.  — 71 

27 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


2§Q? 

kinds  of  or  varieties  of  the  disease.'0  The  physician,  therefore, 
that  undertakes  the  treatment,  should  commence  his  operations 
after  first  ascertaining  what  the  disease  is, .what  is  its  nature  (in 
respect  of  the  particular  fault  that  has  caused  it  and  the  particular 
element  of  the  body  that  has  been  affected),  and  the  distinctions 
in  respect  of  the  part  of  the  body  that  is  afflicted.51 

That  physician  who  commences  his  treatment  after  ascertaining 
these  three  (viz.,  the  name  of  the  disease,  its  nature  in  respect  of 
cause  and  the  element  affected,  and  the  part  of  the  body  afflicted), 
and  conducts  himself  with  the  aid  of  knowledge  and  conformably 
with  principles,  is  never  stupefied.52 

In  the  bodies  of  creatures  endued  with  life-breaths,  the  faults, 
viz.,  wfind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  are  always  to  be  found.  Whether 
these  are  in  their  normal  or  abnormal  state,  the  man  of  learning 
should  seek  to  ascertain,53 

The  following  are  the  acts  of  the  Wind  when  in  its  normal 
state,  vie.,  energy  in  respect  of  action  or  movements,  inhalation 
and  exhalation  of  the  breath,  the  proper  functions  of  the  physical 
organs  (such  as  speech,  thought,  &c.,)  the  equable  course  of  the 
several  elements  of  the  body,  and  the  equable  or  proper  discharge 
of  excreta  and  urine  and  such  other  impurities  as  escape  or  are 
secreted  out  of  the  body.54. 

Vision,  digestion,  the  heat  that  is  natural  to  the  body,  hunger, 
thirst,  softness,  pf  the  body,  splendour  of  complexion,  cheerful¬ 
ness,  of  mind,  and  intelligence,  are  due  to  the  action  of -the  Bile 
in  its,  nomal  state'* 

All  oily  matter  in  the  body,  tightness  of  joints,  general  tight¬ 
ness  of  the  body,  weight  of  body,  sexual  power,  strength,  capacity 
to  bear  or  endure,  patience,  and  absence  or  renunciation  of  cupidity, 
ere  due  to  the  action  of  the  Phlegm  in  its  normal  state.58 

When  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  become  attenuated,the  indications 
of  such  attenuation  are  the  absence  of  those  acts  and  operations  that 
'  are  due  to  their  normal  state.  When  these  (i.e.,  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm),  become  aggravated  and,  therefore,  exist  in  an  inharmo- 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  M  HIT A . 


211 


nious  state,,  some  of  the  acts  or  operations  described  above  become 
abnormally  vigorous.57 

If  the  indications  of  any  of  the  faults  present  themselves  in  an 
.excessive  form  such  excess  is  always  said  to  be  a  symptom  of 
aggravation. 

The  normal  condition,  attenuation,  and  aggravation  of  faults 
are  to  be  ascertained  by  remembering  these  points.58 

Here  occur  some  Verses  containing  a  summary. 

The  kinds  in  respect  of  number,  the  causes,  the  forms,  and 
the  curability  of  inflammations,  the  incurability  of  the  different 
modifications  thereof,  those  Inflammations  that  are  the  precursors 
of  other  diseases,  the  varieties,  three  in  number,  of  the  diseases 
that  fall  under  Inflammation,  as  stated  in  the  Verse  giving  an 
abstract  of  what  should  be  noted  with  a  view  to  treatment,  the 
normal  functions  of  the  faults,  and  the  indications  of  their  attenua¬ 
tion  and  aggravation,  have  all  been  explained,  in  this  Lesson  on 
diseases  that  is  called  Tri^othiya,  by  Punarvasu  who  was  divested 
of  error  and  the  fault  of  darkness  and  cupidity  and  pride  attd 
arrogance  and  attachment  to  worldly  objects.*1-8 

Thus  ends  the  Eighteenth  Lesson,  called  Tritjothiya,  in  the 
treatise  of  Agniveija  as  revised  by  Charaka.*f* 


LESSON  IXX. 

We  shall  next  expound  the  Lesson  called  Ashtodariyam. 

Even  this  was  said  by  the  illutrious  son  of  Atri.1 

*  ‘  Sankhya  ’  implies  number.  The  different  kinds  in  respect  of  number,  are 

implied.  The  words  ‘  na  cha  ’  are  connected  with  the  second  line.  HettCe,  the  meaning 
is,  ‘the  incurability  of  the  different  modifications  of  Inflammation.’  The  ‘  purvajan 
fothan  ’  are  those  referred  to  in  Verse  24  and  the  others  immediately  following.  The’ 
words  *  Vidhi-bhedam,’  ‘trividham.’  and  ‘  Vadhya-sangraham’  have  reference  to 
Verse 

t  Following  U.  C,  Dutt  (  vide  his  Nidana.)  the  word  Cotha  has  been  rendered  in 
the  Eighteenth  Lesson  as  ‘  Inflammation.  ’  Cotha  is  a  general  name  for  a  swelling  or 


212  CHA  RA  I<  A-S AM  HIT  A. 

In  this  Lesson  shall  occur  the  following  :  Eight  varieties  of 
diseases  called  Udara  (stomachic  and  abdominal  afflictions) ;  Reten¬ 
tion.  of  urine  which  is  of  eight  kinds ;  the  faults  of  the  milk  (in 
the  breast)  which  are  of  eight  kinds ;  the  faults  of  the  semen,  of 
eight  kinds;  the  disease  called  Kushtha  (Leprosy),  of  seven 
kinds;  the  disease  called  Pidaka,  of  seven  kinds;  Visarpa 
(Erysipelas),  of  seven  varieties;  Diarrhoea,  of  six  varieties ;  the 
disease  called  Udavarta,  of  six  kinds;*  Gulma  (abdominal-  tum¬ 
ours  ),  of  five  varieties ;  the  disorders  of  the  spleen,  of  five  varieties  ; 
Consumption,  of  five  varieties  ;  five  varieties  of  Asthma  ;  Hiccup, 
pf  four  kinds ;  Vomiting,  pf  five  kinds ;  Disgust  for  food,  of  five 
varieties ;  Diseases  of  the  head,  of  five  varieties  ;  the  diseases  called 
Anaemia,  of  five  varieties.;  Lunacy  or  madness,  of  five  kinds ; 
Apasmara  or  Epilepsy  (in  which  the  patient  believes  that  he  is 
pursued  by  a  black  or  red  complexioned  creature  and  becomes 
insensible  as  soon  as  the  creature  touches  him),  of  four  varieties  ; 
the  diseases  of  the  Eye,  of  four  kinds ;  the  four  varieties  of  the 
diseases  of  the  Ear ;  Catarrh  of  the  nose  ( in  consequence  of  which 
putrid  discharges  constantly  flow  from  that  organ),  of  four  kinds  ;  the 
diseases  of  the  mouth,  of  four  kinds;  the  diseases  of  the 
Grahani,  of  four  kinds ;f  Mada  (Delirium  Tremens),  of  four 
varieties ;  Swoons,  of  four  varieties  ;  Phthisis,  of  four  varieties ; 
Loss  of  virility  or  impotence,  of  four  kinds ;  Inflammations,  of 
three  varieties ;  the  diseases  called  Kilasa  (white  leprous  spots), 
of  three  varieties;  Hemorrhage,  of  three  kinds;  Fevers,  of  two 
varieties ;  Abscesses,  of  two  kinds ;  Sciatica,  of  two  varieties  ; 
Kamala  ( aggravated  Jaundice  ),  of  two  kinds  ;  Constipation  ( in 
which  hard  and  unhealthy  stools  are  passed),  of  two  varieties ; 
Vata-rakta  ( Rheumatism),  of  two  kinds ;  Fistula-in-ano,  of  two 
varieties  ;  Paralysis  of  the  thigh,  of  one  kind  ;  Sanyasa  or  Apoplexy, 


intumescence  of  any  kind.  It  may  or  may  not  be  attended  with  pain.  Inflammation, 
as  ordinarily  understood,  is  a  swelling  with  heat  and  pain.  With  this  explanation,  Cotha 
may  be  taken  for  Inflammation  as  rendered  above.—  T. 

*  Udavarta  is  a  general  name  for  such  diseases  as  are  generated  by  the  suppressed 
wind. — T. 

-j-  The  duct  that  seizes  the  food  and  is  the  seat  of  the  digestive  fire. — T. 


CBARAKA-SAMHITA. 


of  one  kind  ;*  Mahagada,  in  which  the  patient  affects  all  kinds  of 
ugly  behaviour,  of  one  kind  ;  Worms,  which  are  of  twenty  varieties  ; 
the  twenty  varieties  of  Prameha  or  Diabetes ;  and  twenty  varie¬ 
ties  of  the  disorders  that  affect  the  sexual  organs  of  women. 

These  eight  and  forty  diseases  have  been  indicated  in  this 
abstract. 

We  shall  explain  the  nature  of  the  diseases  that  have  been  so 
indicated. ? 

There  are  eight  varieties  of  stomachic  or  abdominal  diseases. 
They  are  i.  that  born  of  wind,  2.  that  born  of  bile,  3.  that  born  of 
phlegm,  4.  that  born  of  wind,  bile  and  phlegm,  5.  enlargement  the  of 
spleen,  6.  Vaddhodara,  7.  Chhidrodara,  and  8.  abdominal  dropsy.3 

The  eight  varieties  of  Mutraghata  or  suppression  of  urine  are 

1.  that  born  of  wind,  2.  that  born  of  bile,  3.  that  born  of  phlegm, 
4.  that  born  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  5.  Afmari,  i.e.,  stone  or 
calculus,  6.  £arkara  or  gravel,  7.  diseases  bom  of  the,  vital  seed, 
and  8.  diseases  born  of  the  blood,4 

The  eight  varieties  of  the  diseases  of  the  milk  in  women’s 
breasts  are  x,  discolored  milk,  2.  milk  with  bad  ordor,  3.  milk  with 
had  taste,  4.  oiliness  in  the  milk,  5.  frothy  milk,  6.  dry  milk,  7.  heavy 
milk,  and  8.  very  oily  milk.5 

The  faults  or  disorders  of  the  Semen  are  eight  in  number. 
They  are  1.  thinness,  2.  dryness,  3.  frothiness,  4.  absence  of  white¬ 
ness,  5.  fcetidness  of  smell,  6,  oibness,  7,  mixture  with  other  elements 
(like  blood),  and  8.  such  heaviness  as  to  be  drowned  in  water,6 

The  seven  varieties  of  Kushtha  or  Leprosy  are  1.  Kapala, 

2,  Udumvara,  3.  Mandala,  4.  Rishyajihva,  j.Pundarika,  6.  Sidhma, 
and  7.  Kakana.f 7 


*  Sanyasa  is  a  diseases  of  both  body  and  fnind,  the  chief  feature  of  which  is  a 
total  loss  of  cosciousness,  and  which  is  caused  by  aggravation  or  disorders  of  all  the 
three  faulrs  together.  It  is  identifiable  with  Apoplexy. — T. 

f  Udumvara  is  marked  by  coppery  spots ;  Mandala  by  circular  spots  or  arcs ; 
Rishyajihva  is  characterised  by  spots  or  blotches  resembling  the  deer’s  tongue ;  Pundarika 
has  spots  that  look  like  lotus  petals ;  Sidhma  has  blotches  or  scabs  that  are  raised  ; 
Kakana  is  characterised  by  black  and  red  spots.— T. 


214 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Of  Pidakas  there  are  seven  varieties.  They  are  i.  £aravik5, 
2.  Kachchhapika,  3.  Jalini,  4.  Sarshapi,  5.  Alaji,  6.  Vinata,  and  7. 
Vidradhi.8* 

Visarpa  (Erysipelas)  is  of  seven  kinds;  viz.,  1.  that  born  of 
wind,  2.  that  born  of  bile,  3.  that  born  of  phlegm,  4.  that  born  of 
heat,  5.  Karddama,  6.  Granthi,  and  7.  that  born  of  all  the  faults.®  ; 

Atisara  (Diarrhoea)  is  of  sijf  varieties.  They  are  1.  that  born 
of  wind,  2.  that  born  of  bile,  3.  that  born  of  phlegm,  4.  that  born  of 
wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  5.  that  born  of  fear,  and  6.  that  born  of 
grief.10 

Udavarta  is  of  six  varieties.  They  are  1.  that  born  of  the  wind, 
2.  that  born  of  the  urine,  3.  that  born  of  the  stools,  4.  that  born  of 
semen,  5.  that  born  of  vomiting,  and  6.  that  born  of  catarrh.f11 

Gulma  (abdominal  tumours)  is  of  five  varieties.  They  are  1. 
that  born  of  wind,  3.  that  born  of  bile,  3.  that  born  of  phlegm, 
4.  that  born  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  together,  and  5.  that  born  of 
the  blood.12 

Spleen  is  of  five  varieties.  They  are  the  same  as  in  the  case 
of  Gulma  above.1* 

Consumption  is  of  five  varieties.  They  are  1.  that  born  of 
wind,  2.  that  born  of  bile,  3.  that  born  of  phlegm,  4.  that  born  of 
wounds,  and  5.  that  born  of  waste.14 

Asthma  is  of  five  varieties.  They  are  1.  violent  Asthma,  2. 
Urddha9wasa  or  that  in  which  the  breath  goes  upwards,  3.  Chhinna- 
^wasa  or  that  in  which  the  breath  seems  to  be  broken,  4.  Tamaka, 
and  5.  Kshudra-t15 

Hiccup  is  of  five  varieties.  They  are  x.  violent,  2,  deep,  3. 
Vyapeta  or  Yamala,  4.  Kshudra  (mild),  and  5.  that  born  of  food 
(or  a  loaded  stomach).16 

*  Vide  p.  p.  194  and  195  ante.—T. 

+  It  has  been  already  said  that  Udavarta  is  a  general  name  for  many  diseases  whose 
common  characteristic  is  the  suppression  of  the  normal  functions  of  some  abdominal  organs. 
Suppression  of  urine,  suppression  of  stools  &c.,  all  fall  under  Udavarta. — T, 

J  The  symptoms  of  Tamaka  and  Kshudra  are  set  forth  in  the  Lesson  on 
Asthma,  supra— T . 


CUARA  KA  -SAM  HIT  A. 


2lS 

thirst  is  of  five  kinds.  They  are  i.  that  born  of  wind,  2.  that 
born  of  bile,  3.  that  born  of  undigested  food  in  the  stomach,  4.  that 
born  of  waste  (of  tissues  and  elements),  and  5.  that  born  of  the 
supervening  afflictions  of  a  disease.17 

Vomiting  is  of  five  kinds.  They  are  1.  that  born  of  having 
taken  food  of  a  repulsive  kind,  2.  that  born  of  the  excitement  of 
the  wind,  3.  that  born  of  the  excitement  of  the  bile,  4.  that  born  of 
the  excitement  of  the  phlegm,  and  5.  that  born  of  the  excitement 
of  all  the  faults,  viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  together.18 

Disgust  for  food  is  of  five  kinds.  They  are  1.  that  born  of 
yvind,  2.  that  born  of  bile,  3.  that  born  of  phlegm,  4.  that  born  of 
aversion  for  food,  and  5.  that  born  of  toil  or  fatigue.1® 

Diseases  of  the  Head  are  of  fivejvarieties.  Regarding  what 
has  been  said  before,  they  are  1.  that  born  of  wind,  2.  that  born 
of  bile,  3.  that  born  of  phlegm,  4,  that  born  of  wind,  bile,’  and 
phlegm  all  together,  and  5.  that  born  of  worms.20 

Thoracic  diseases  are  of  five  varieties.  They  have  been  ex¬ 
plained  in  the  Lesson  on  the  diseases  of  the  Head.  (Like  diseases 
of  the  Head,  they  are  1.  that  born  of  wind,  2.  that  born  of  bile,  3, 
that  born  of  phlegm,  4.  that  born  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  all 
together,  and  5.  that  born  of  worms).21 

Anaemia  is  of  five  varieties.  They  are  1.  that  of  the  wind  2. 
that  born  of  the  bile,  3.  that  born  of  the  phlegm,  4.  that  born  of  all 
the  faults  together,  and  5.  that  born  of  eating  burnt  or  dry  earth 
or  clods  of  clay  22 

Lunacy  or  madness  is  of  five  varieties.  They  are  1.  that  born 
of  the  wind,  2.  that  born  of  the  bile,  3,  that  born  of  the  phlegm, 
4.  that  born  of  all  the  faults  together,  and  5.  that  born  of  adventitious 
circumstances  (such  as  sudden  fright,  evil  spirits,  &c.)23 

Apasmara  or  Delusion  is  of  four  varieties.  They  are  1.  that 
born  of  the  wind,  2.  that  born  of  the  bile,  3.  that  born  of  the  phlegm, 
aind  4.  that  born  of  all  the  faults  together.24 

Diseases,  of  the  Eye,  diseases  of  the  Nose,  diseases  of  the 
Mouth,  diseases  of  the  Grahani,  Mada  or  delirium  tremens,  and 


216 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHI TK. 


Loss  of  consciousness  or  swoon,  is  each  of  four  varieties.  They 
are  exactly  the  same  as  in  the  case  of  Apasmara  or  Epilepsy 
above ;  ( that  is;  i.  those  born  of  the  wind,  2.  those  born  of 
the  bile,  3.  those  born  of  the  phlegm,  and  4.  those  born  of  all  the 
faults  together).25 

£osha  or  Phthisis  is  of  four  varieties.  They  are  1 .  that  borrt 
of  acts  of  temerity  or  rashness,  2.  that  born  of  suppressing  the 
urgings  of  nature,  3.  that  born  of  waste  ( of  tissues  and  other 
elements),  and  4.  that  born  of  taking  food  made  of  disagreeing 
ingredients*28 

Loss  of  virility  is  of  four  kinds.  They  are  i.  that  born  of 
some  physical  obstruction  to  the  emission  of  the  semen,  2.  that 
born  of  the  absence  of  erection,  3.  that  born  of  decrepitude  or  old 
age,  and  4.  that  born  of  the  decrease  or  attenuation  of  the  semen.27 

£otha  or  Inflammation  is  of  three  kinds.  They  are  1.  that 
born  of  the  wind,  2.  that  born  of  the  bile,  and  3.  that  born  of  the 
phlegm.28 

Kilasa  or  Leucoderma  is  of  three  kinds.  They  are  1.  that 
which  presents  a  red  color,  2.  that  which  ptesents  a  coppery  color, 
and  3.  that  which  presents  a  white  color.2® 

Lohita-pitta  (or  Rakta-pitta >,  z. e.,  Hemorrhage,  is  of  three 
kinds.  They  are  1.  that  which  affects  the  upper  part  of  the  body 
and  in  which  the  discharge  takes  place  through  the  upper  organs, 
2.  that  which  affects  the  lower  parts  of  the  body  and  in  which  the 
discharge  is  downward,  and  3.  that  which  affects  both  the  parts  of 
the  body  and  in  .which  the  discharge  is  both  upward  aud  down¬ 
ward.30 

Fever  is  of  two  kinds.  They  are  1.  that  which  arises  from 
Cold  and  in  which  the  patient  expresses  a  desire  for  hot  or  warm 
things,  and  2.  that  which  arises  from  heat  and  in  which  the  patient 
expresses  a  desire  for  cold  or  cooling  things.31 

Vradhna  or  Abscess  is  of  two  kinds.  They  are  i.  that  which 
is  constitutional,  and  2.  that  which  is  caused  by  adventitious  cir¬ 
cumstances  (such  as  wounds,  touch  of  poisonous  plants,  or  bites  of 
poisonous  worms,  &c.)32 


NOTICE. 


The  English  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  will 
be  issued  in  successive  fascicules  of  4  forms,  Roval 
octavo,  each;  12  fascicules  will  be  issued  every  year. 
Under  favorable  circumstances,  the  number  of  fasci¬ 
cules  or  the  number  of  forms  in  each  fascicule  may  be 
increased.  For  subscribers  in  India  paying  in  advance 
the  charge  is  Rs.  32  for  the  whole  work.  For  sub* 
scribers  in  Europe  and  America,  the  charge  is  £3  in 
advance  post  free.  The  price  for  each  part  is 
one  Rupee.  The  arrear  rate  is  Rs.  40  (in  India)  pay¬ 
able  (if  subscribers  wish)  in  instalments  of  Rs.  10  each. 
Remittances  to  be  made  to  the  Publisher,  200,  Corn* 
wallis  Street,  Calcutta,  by  drafts  on  Indian  Banks  or 
Postal  money-orders. 


The  following  publications  relating  to  Hindu  Medical 
Science  may  be  had  at  No.  200 ,  Cornwallis'  Street , 
Calcutta ,  India. 


1.  Charaka-Samhita  in  original,  with  Chakrapanidat 
ta’s  Commentary  ;  edited  by  Pandit  Avinash 
Chandra  Kaviratna  (published  in  Devanagara 
character  in  successive  fascicules)  Price  Rs.  20 
in  advance. 

2.  Susruta-Samhita  (in  original)  with  £)allanacharya’s 
Commentary,  edited  by  Pundit  Avihash  Chandra 
Kaviratna  (published  in  Devanagara  character  in 
successive  fascicules).  Price  Rs.  19  in  advance. 

3.  Bengali  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  with  the 
original  text  (complete)  in  the  Bengali  character. 
Price  Rs.  12. 

4.  Hindi  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive 
fascicules  I  Price  Rs.  16  in  advance. 

5.  Bengali  translation  of  Susruta-Samhita  (published 
in  successive  fascicules).  Price  Rs.  10  in  advance. 

6.  Hindi  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive 
fascicules).  Price  Rs.  15  in  advance. 

7.  Chikitsa  Sammilani.  (a  monthly  medical  journal 
in  Bengali).  Subscription  in  advance  for  one  year 
Rs.  3-6  ;  for  the  poorer  classes,  Rs.  2-6,  (Back 
volumes  for  seven  years  may  be  had  for  Rs.  21,  or 
Rs.  3  for  each  volume  embracing  12  numbers.) 


PART  VIII. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


PUBLISHKD  BY 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  of  Susruta  Samhita 
( in  original  )  WITH  COMMENTARIES ;  Bengali  AND 
Hindi  translator  of  Charaka  Samhita  and 
of  Susruta  Samhita;  editor  of  Chikitsa- 
Sammilani  (  Medical  Journal  in 
Bengali) ;  PRACTITIONER  OF 

the  Hindu  System 
of  Medicine, 

&c.,  &c.,  &c. 


Calcutta ; 

Printed  by  D.  C.  Dass  &  Co., 
“Corinthian  Press,”  33,  New  China  Bazar 
and 

Published  at 
200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved. ) 


CHA  RAKA-SAM  H  IT  A. 


217 


Ayama  or  Tetanus  is  of  two  kinds.  They  are  i.  External  and 
2.  Internal.3-8 

Gridhrasi  or  Sciatica  is  of  two  kinds.  They  are  i.  that  born 
of  wind,  and  2.  that  born  of  wind  and  phlegm.34 

Kamala  or  aggravated  Jaundice  is  of  two  kinds.  They  are 
i.  that  which  affects  a  Koshtha  or  any  viscus  (such  as  heart,  lungs, 
stomach,  bowels,  &c.,)  and  2.  that  which  affects  any'  duct  leading 
from  a  viscus.35 

Diseases  of  the  Ama  or  stomach  are  of  two  kinds.  They  are 
i.  Alasaka  or  Tympanites,  and  2.  Visuchi  or  Visuchika,  i.  e., 
Cholera.38 

Vata-rakta  (Leprosy)  is  of  two  kinds.  They  are  i.  Gambhira 
or  deep,  and  2.  Uttana  or  supercial.*37 

Piles  are  of  two  kinds.  They  are  i.  Dry,  and  2.  Wet.38 

Urustambha  (paralysis  or  Rheumatism  of  the  thigh)  is  of 
one  kind.  It  arises  from  the  three  faults  together  affecting  the 
abdominal  region.39 

Sanyasa  ( Apoplexy ),  characterised  by  disorders  of  all  the 
three  faults  and  affecting  both  mind  and  body,  is  of  one  kind40 

Mahagada  or  the  great  disease  is  of  one  kind.  It  is  charac¬ 
terised  by  inattention  to  what  is  proper  (  and  attention  to  things 
improper). -J41 

There  are  twenty  species  of  worms.  They  are  as  follows  : 
Yuka  and  Pipilaka,  constituting  two  varieties,  are  born  of  external 
impurities:  Ke?ada,  Lomada,  Lomadwipa,  Saurasa,  Audumvara, 
and  Jantumatri, — these  six  varieties  are  born  in  the  blood  :  Antrada, 
Udarada,  Hridayachara,  Chyurava,  Darbhapushpa,  Saugandhika, 
and  Mahaguda, — these  seven  varieties  are  born  of  the  phlegm  in 
the  body  :  Kakeruka,  Makeruka,  Leliha,  Sa9ulaka,  Sausurada, — 
these  five  varieties  are  born  in  the  stools.  Even  these  are  the 
twenty  varieties  of  worms  in  the  physical  organism.^42 

*  Vata-rakta  is  a  kind  of  leprosy.  The  word  is  sometimes  used  for  gout  or 
rheumatism. 

t  Mahagada  is  a  disease  in  which  the  patient  develops  all  sorts  of  vagaries  and 
eccentricities.  Hateful  actions  appear  as  proper,  and  proper  actions  appear  hateful.—?’ 

J  It  is  impossible  to  translate  these  names  or  .identify  them  with  thos  mentioned  •' 

28 


218  CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 

There  are  twenty  varieties  of  Prameha  or  diabetes.  They 
are  as  follow: — i.  Udakameha,  2.  Ikshuvalika,  3.  Rasameha, 
4,  Sandrameha,  5.  Sandraprasadameha,  6.  £uktameha,  7.  £itameha, 
8.  £anairmeha,  9.  Sikatameha,  and  10.  Lalameha, — these  are  born 
of  the  phlegm  ;  1 1.  Ksharameha,  12.  Kalameha,  13.  Nilameha,  14. 
Lohitameha,  Manjishthameha,  and  Haridrameha, — these  six  are  born 
of  the  bile;  17.  Vasameha,  18.  Majjameha,  19.  Hastimeha,  and 
20.  Madhumeha, — these  four  are  born  of  the  wind.  Even  these 
are  the  twenty  varieties  of  Prameha.*43 

There  are  twenty  varieties  of  diseases  affecting  the  genital 
organs  of  women.  They  are  as  follow: — 1.  that  born  of  wind, 
2.  that  born  of  bile,  3.  that  born  of  phlegm,  and  4.  that  born  of  all 
three  together.  The  remaining  sixteen  kinds,  ascertained  by  con¬ 
siderations  of  contact  with  the  vitiated  elements  as  their  cause,  are 
mentioned  below.*f*  They  are  i.Raktayoni,  2.Arajashka,  3.Acharana, 
4.  Aticharana,  5.  Prakcharana,  6.  Upapluta,  7.  Paripluta, 
8.  Udavartini,  9.  Karnini,  10.  Putraghni,  n.  Antarmukhi, 
12.  Suchimukhi,  13.  £ushka,  14.  Vamini,  15.  Shandayoni,  and 
16.  Mahay  oni. 

These  are  the  sixteen  varieties  of  diseases  of  the  genital 
organs  of  women.  They  are  simply  mentioned  here.  The  names 
only  are  given  with  reference  to  what  has  been  said  in  the  second 
aphorism  above.44 


European  Medical  works.  The  etymologies  of  some  can  be  given.  Kefada  is  hair-eater ; 
Lomada  is  eater  of  the  hair  on  every  other  part  of  the  body  save  the  head  ;  Antrada  is 
eater  of  the  entrails ;  U darada  is  eater  of  the  stomach  ;  Hridayachara  is  moving  in  the 
heart ;  Darbhapushpa  is  of  the  form  of  the  flower  of  the  Darbha  or  Saccharum  cylindri- 
cum.  The  etymologies  of  the  other  names  are  not  so  well  known,  or  if  guessed,  would 
throw  no  light  upon  the  forms  and  habits  of  the  worms  indicated. — T. 

*  All  these  different  kinds  of  Prameha  or  urinary  affections  are  fully  described  in 
later  portions  of  the  treatise.  The  distinctions  are  founded  upon  the  character  of  the 
urine  passed,  i.  e.,  its  quality  and  quantity,  and  the  ingredients  that  may  be  found  to  be 
mixed  with  it.  —  T. 

t  ‘Dushya-samsarga-prakriti’  is  explained  thus :  ‘pralcriti’  is  cause ;  ‘samsarga’  is 
contact ;  and  ‘dushya’  is  constituent  elements  of  the  body,  such  as  blood,  &c.  They 
are  called  ‘dushya’  because  of  their  susceptibility  of  being  affected  or  vitiated  by  wind, 
bile,  'and  phlegm  which  are  called  ‘doshas’  or  faults.  These  sixteen  varieties  are  ascer¬ 
tained  by  a  reference  to,  or  consideration  of,  their  contact  with  vitiated  blood  or  other 
elements  of  the  body  as  their  cause.  Thus  some  diseases  may  co-exist  with  vitiated 
blood,  some  with  vitiated  fat,  &c.—  T. 


CEARAKA-SAMHITA.  219 

Here  occur  two  verses. 

Among  the  diseases  mentioned  in  this  Lesson  called  Ashto- 
dariya,  three  are  of  twenty  varieties ;  three  of  only  kind  ;  three  of 
three  kinds;  eight  of  two  varieties ;  ten  of  four  varieties;  twelve 
of  five  varieties ;  four  of  eight  varieties ;  two  of  six  varieties;  and 
three  of  seven  varieties.  Even  thus  has  this  Lesson  on  diseases 
been  compiled.45-46 

All  constitutional  diseases  that  affect  oneself  never  spring  from 
any  other  source  than  one’s  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm.  Even  as  a 
bird,  roving  wheresoever  it  likes,  can  never  transgress  its  own 
shadow,  after  the  same  manner  all  the  diseases  that  afflict  a  person, 
born  of  the  disorders  of  his  own  constituent  elements,  can  never 
transgress  his  own  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm.  Intelligent  physicians 
observing  the  especial  seat  or  place,  the  indications,  and  the  ex¬ 
citing  causes,  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  refer  all  diseases  as  caused 
by  disorders  of  wind,  or  bile,  or  phlegm.*47 

[Here  are  two  verses.] 

All  the  numerous  diseases  that  appear  in  the  body,  arising  from 
the  disorders  of  one’s  constituent  elements,  are  not  separable 
from  ( disorders  of )  bile,  phlegm  and  wind.  All  diseases,  however, 
that  are  accidental,  are  distinguished  therefrom.1  The  Accidental 
becoming  aggravated,  follows  the  Constitutional  disease ;  similarly 
the  Constitutional,  becoming  aggravated,  follows  the  Accidental. ‘j' 
Hence,  ascertaining  properly  the  adjunct  and  the  cause,  the  work 
of  treatment  should  be  commenced.2 


*  ‘Sthana-samsthana-prakriti-viceshan’  is  explained  by  the  Commentators  as  follows  : 
‘slhana’  is  the  seat  or  place,  where  the  wind,  &c.  have  been  excited,  such  as  blood,  or 
stomach,  &c.  ‘Samsthana’  is  ‘lingam’  or  particular  indications  or  symptoms  noticeable  ; 
•Prakriti’  is  cause,  such  as  excessive  eating  or  sleeping,  absence  of  oily  food  or  of 
sleep,  &c. — T. 

t  What  is  stated  here  is  this:  diseases  are  either  Constitutional  or  Accidental. 
The  former  are  evidently  inseparable  from  disorders  of  wind,  bile  and  phlegm.  The 
latter  may  at  first  sight  be  regarded  as  separable  therefrom.  But  even  Accidental 
diseases,  when  aggravated,  (as  when  a  wound  is  deep  and  has  begun  to  fester),  fever, 
loss  of  strength  and  appetite,  headache,  and  other  Constitutional  diseases  may  set  in, 
caused  by  disorders  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  induced  by  the  Accidental  disease.  A 
Constitutional  disease  also,  becoming  aggravated,  may  apparently  be  cured  ;  but  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  its  seeds  being  present  in  the  body,  one  becomes  more  susceptible  of  catching 
diseaes  by  accidents  than  another  who  has  been  always  hale. — T. 


220 


charaka-samhitA. 


Thus  ends  the  Nineteenth  Lesson  called  the  Ashtodariya  in  the 
treatise  of  Agniveya  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  XX. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  called  Maharoga.  Thus 
said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.*1 

The  diseases  that  occur  are  of  four  kinds  :  They  are  i.  Acci¬ 
dental,  2.  those  born  of  wind,  3.  those  born  of  bile,  and  4.  those 
born  of  phlegm. 

Though  distributed  into  four  kinds,  their  character  as  disease 
is  of  one  kind,  in  consequence  of  the  common  element  being  present 
in  all  of  them  of  producing  affliction  or  pain. 

In  consequence,  again,  of  diseases  being  distributed  into  two 
kinds,  viz.,  Accidental  and  Constitutional,  their  causes  are  of 
two  kinds. 

In  consequence,  again,  of  the  distinction  between  mind  and 
body,  the  substrata  of  disease  are  of  two  kinds. 

The  modifications,  again,  of  those  four  are  innumerable,  in 
consequence  of  the  differences  in  respect  of  causes,  seats,  symp¬ 
toms,  areas,  and  varieties,  being  innumerable.f 2-6 

The  immediate  causes  of  Accidental  diseases  are,  verily, 
wounds  inflicted  by  nails,  or  teeth,  or  falls,  incantations  (  with  Athar- 
van  rites),  curses  (of  men  possessed  of  ascetic  puissance),  assaults 
of  evil  spirits,  acts  of  violence  (done  with  weapons,  &c).  binding, 
pressure,  cords,  burns,  Mantras,  fall  of  lightning,  and  the  assaults 
of  other  physical  agents.7  4 

Of  all  Constitutional  diseases  the  causes  are  disorders  of  wind, 
bile,  and  phlegm.8 


*  ‘Maharogadhyaya’ implies  an  elaborate  or  long-extending  lesson  on  diseases.  Here 
numerous  diseases  have  been  named,  and  their  causes,  and  other  considerations. — T. 

f  In  the  sixth  sentence,  some  texts  omit  ‘esham.’  The  sense  remains  the  same. 
‘Prakriti’  is  cause ;  ‘adhishthanam’ is  seat ;  ‘linga’  is  symptoms  or  external ;  indications  ; 
‘ayatana’  is  the  area  or  place  where  wind,  bile,  or  phlegm,  may  be  excited  or  attenuated  ; 
‘  vikalpa’  is  variety,  as  in  the  case  of  swellings,  in  respect  of  pairi,  color,  extent,  &c. — T. 


charaka-samhita. 


221 


The  inducing  causes  of  both  Accidental  and  Constitutional 
diseases  are  injudicious  correlation  of  objects  with  the  senses,  want 
of  wisdom  or  foresight,  and  time. 

Verily,  all  the  four  kinds  of  diseases,  when  aggravated,  follow 
one  another.  No  doubt,  however,  can  arise  in  the  mailer  of 
distinguishing  one  from  another.9 

Accidental  disease  arises  at  first  with  pain  and  afterwards 
causes  disorders  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm. 

In  Constitutional  diseases,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  in  the  first 
instance  become  disordered  and  afterwards  lead  to  pain. 

The  respective  divisions  of  the  body  shall  now  be  laid  down 
that  constitute  the  seats  of  the  three  faults  ( viz.,  wind,  bile, 
and  phlegm).10 

They  are  as  follow  : — 

The  hypogastric  or  pubic  region,  the  place  where  the  faeces 
collect,  the  regions  about  the  loins,  the  thighs,  the  feet  and  the 
bones  are  the  seats  of  wind.  That  portion  of  the  stomach,  however, 
where  digestion  goes  on,  among  the  seats  of  wind,  is  in  particular 
the  seat  thereof.11 

Sweat,  the  thorax,  saliva,  blood,  and  that  portion  of  the 
stomach  where  undigested  food  remains,  are  the  seats  of  bile. 
Amongst  these  all,  the  last  is  especially  the  seat  of  bile.12 

The  thorax,  the  head,  the  throat,  all  the  joints,  that  portion  of 
of  the  stomach  which  holds  the  undigested  food,  and  the  fat  are 
the  seats  of  phlegm.  Amongst  these  all,  the  thorax  is  especially 
the  seat  of  phlegm.13 

Verily,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  wander  over  every  part  of  the 
body.  Excited  or  unexcited,  they  produce  bad  or  good  consequences 
in  every  part  of  the  body. 

In  their  normal  or  unexcited  state  they  produce  beneficial 
results,  such  as  growth,  strength,  good  complexion,  clearness  of 
the  senses,  &c. 

When  not  in  their  normal  state,  they  produce  many  evil 
consequences  called  Disease. 


222 


charaka-samhjtA. 


Amongst  diseases  there  are  some  that  are  due  to  ordinary 
causes,  and  some  to  diverse  other  causes. 

Diseases  duo  to  ordinary  causes  have  been  expounded  in  the 
Lesson  called  Ashtodariya.  Diseases  due  to  diverse  other  causes 
shall  now  be  explained.14-17 

They  are  as  follows : — 

The  diseases  of  Wind  are  of  Eighty  kinds  ;  those  of  Bile  are  of 
forty  kinds;  those  of  Phlegm  are  of  twenty  kinds.18 

As  regards  this,  we  shall  first  expound  the  diseases  due  to 
Wind*  They  are  as  follows  : — 

i.  Nakhabheda,  2.  Vipadika,  3.  Padagiula,  4.  Padabhrangsha, 
5.  Suptapada,  6.  Vatakhuddata,  7.  Gulphagraha,  8.Pindikodveshtana, 
9.  Gridhrasi,  10.  Janubheda,  n.  Januviijlesha,  12.  Urustambha, 
I3  Urushada,  14.  Pangulya,  15.  Gudabhrangfa,  16.  Gudarti, 


*  I  have  thought  it  fit  to  give  the  Sanskrit  names  in  the  text.  Their  equivalents 
in  English  will  be  given  below.  The  fact  is,  the  identification,  in  every  instance,  may 
not  be  accurate.  The  names  in  original  may  help  scholars  to  detect  inaccuracies  and 
even  errors.  Differences  in  readings  may  be  observed  in  this  passage.  The  above  list 
has  been  compiled  from  two  printed  texts. — T. 

1.  Nakhabheda  is  otherwise  called  Kunakha.  It  implies  a  diseased  nail. 
Psoriasis  of  nails. 

2.  Vipadika  implies  sores  or  blisters  in  the  hands  and  feet.  A  kibe  or  ulcerated 
chilblain. 

3.  Padacjula  is  a  sharp  pain  in  the  feet. 

4.  Padabhrangpa  is  a  distortion  of  the  feet  from  their  natural  shape. 

5.  Suptapada  implies  benumbed  or  paralysed  feet. 

6.  Vatakhuddata  is  another  name  for  Andhaka  as  Chakrapanidatta  explains. 
Kaviraja  Gangadhara  says  that  it  is  othewise  called  Chaluka.  It  is  probabh 
a  kind  of  pain  that  moves  over  the  feet. 

7.  Gulphagraha  is  pain  in  the  ankle. 

8.  Pinddikodveshtana  is  twitching  of  the  calves  of  the  legs. 

9.  Gridhrasi  is  Sciatica. 

10.  Janubheda  is  Fracture  of  the  knee. 

11.  Januviqlesha  is  Dislocation  of  the  knee. 

12.  Urustambha  is  Rheumatism  or  paralysis  of  the  thigh.  It  sometimes  leads  to 
suppuration  and  requires  operation. 

13.  Urusada  is  weakness  of  the  thigh. 

14.  Pangulya  is  total  lameness  occasioned  by  malformation  of  the  legs  or  owing 
to  the  legs  being  undeveloped. 

15.  Gudabhrang9a  is  Prolapsus  ani. 

16.  Gudarti  is  Ulceration  "with  pain  in  the  anus. 


CH  A  RA  KA-SAMHITA. 


223 


17.  Vrishanotksliepa,  18.  Vankshananaha,  19.  (^onitabheda, 
20.  Vidbheda,  2i.Udavarta,  22.  Khanjatwa,  23.  Kuvjatwa,  24.  Vama- 
natwa,  25.  Trikagraha,  26.  Prishthagraha,  27,  Par$avamardda,  28. 
Udaraveshta,  29.  Unmada,  30.  Hriddrava,  31.  Vaksbogharsba,  32. 
Vaksha-uparodha,  33.  Vakshastoda,  34.  Vahwjosha,  35  Grivastambha, 
36.  Manyastambha,  37.  Kanthopadhwangsa,  38.  Hanubheda,  39. 
Oshthabheda,  40.  Dantabheda,  41.  Dantafaithilya,  42.  Mukatwa, 
43.  Vaksanga,  44.  Kasayasyata,  45.  Mukha^sha,  46.  Arasajnata, 


17.  Vrishanotkshepa  is  a  bursting  out  of  the  testes  from  their  fleshy  case. 

18.  Vankshananaha  is  a  griping  pain  in  the  groins  or  the  pubic  or  iliac  regions. 

19.  Conitabheda  implies  Hemorrhages  of  every  kind. 

20.  Vidbheda  is  a  particular  kind  of  diarrhoea  that  is  regarded  as  induced  by 
disorders  of  wind. 

21.  Udavarta  is  a  general  name  for  abdominal  diseases  characterised  by  pain  and 
induced  by  suppression  of  wind. 

22.  Khanjatwa  is  lameness  of  foot. 

23.  Kuvjatwa  is  hump-back. 

24.  Vamanatwa  is  dwarfness. 

25.  Trikagraha  is  inflammation  or  pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  spine. 

26.  Prishthagraha  is  inflammation  or  pain  in  the  back. 

27.  Pari;avamardda  is  pain  on  the  sides  or  flanks. 

28.  Udaraveshta  is  a  pain  in  the  abdomen  causing  the  sensation  of  the  abdomen 
being  pressed  by  a  heavy  substance  wrapped  all  around  it  on  the  outside. 

29.  Unmada  is  Lunacy. 

30.  Hriddrava  is  Palpitation  of  heart. 

31.  Vakshogharsha  is,  probably,  a  sensation  of  the  chest  being  pressed  from  within. 

32.  Vaksha-uparodha  is  pain  in  the  chest,  inducing  a  sensation  of  heavy  pressure 
on  it  from  outside. 

33.  Vakshastoda  is  pain  in  the  chest,  inducing  a  sensation  of  needles  or  sharp- 
pointed  stakes  piercing  against  it. 

34.  Vahufosha  is  emaciation  of  the  arms. 

35.  Grivastambha  is  stiffness  of  the  neck. 

36.  Manyastambha  is  wry  neck. 

37.  Kanthopadhwangsa  is  hoarseness  or  suppression  of  the  voice. 

38.  Hanubheda  is  dislocation  of  the  cheek-bones. 

39.  Oshthabheda  is  a  rupture  of  the  lips. 

40.  Dantabheda  is  falling  off  of  the  teeth. 

41.  Dantacaithilya  is  looseness  of  the  teeth. 

42.  Mukatwa  is  dumbness. 

43.  Vaksanga  is  temporary  dumbness, 'or  difficulty  of  speech,  (such  as  stammering), 
or  unintelligibility  of  speech. 

44.  Kasayasyata  is  the  presence  of  an  astringent  flavour  or  taste  in  the  mouth. 

45.  Mukha<josha  is  dryness  of  the  mouth. 

46.  Arasajnata  is  loss  of  the  sensation  of  flavour  or  taste. 


224 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHI TA. 


47.  Ghrananacja,  48.  Karnatjula,  49.  Atjavdacjravana,  50.  Uuchailnjruti, 
51.  Vadhiryya,  52  Vartmastamblia,  53.  Vartmasankocha,  54.  Timira, 
55.  Akshitjula,  56.  Akshivyudaca,  57.  Bhruvyudasa,  58.  £ankhabheda, 
59.  Lalalabheda,  60.  £iroruj,  61.  Ke^abhumisphutana,  62.  Arddita, 
63.  Ekangaroga,  64.  Sarvangaroga,  65.  Pakshabadha,  66.  Akshepaka, 
67.  Dandaka,  68.  £rama,  69.  Blirama,  70.  Vepathu,  71.  Jrimbha, 
72.  Hikka,  73.  Visada,  74.  Atipralapa,  75.  Glani,  76.  Raukshmya, 


47.  Ghranana?a  is  loss  of  the  sensation  of  smell. 

48.  Kanmyula  is  Otalgia. 

49.  AQavda<jravana  is  that  form  of  deafness  "in  which  the  person  can  hear  words 
uttered  very  softly  or  in  whispers  only. 

50.  Uchaihfruti  is  that  form  of  deafness  in  which  the  person  hears  only  such  words 
as  are  uttered  very  loudly. 

51.  Vadhiryya  is  complete  deafness. 

52.  Vartmaslambha  is  paralysis  of  the  eyelids. 

53.  Vartmasankocha  is  contraction  of  the  eyelids. 

54  Timira  is  Gutta  serena  or  Cataract,  causing  complete  loss  of  sight.  The  com¬ 
plete  loss  of  the  organ  is  implied  by  Timira. 

55.  Akshifula  is  inflammation  with  sharp  pain  in  the  eye. 

56.  Akshivyudasa  is  Inversion  of  the  eyeball  or  balls. 

57.  Bhruvyudasa  is  a  falling  down  of  the  eyebrows. 

58.  Cankhabheda  is  pain  in  the  temporal  bone  or  its  depression  or  fracture. 

59.  Lalatabheda  is  pain  in  the  frontal  bone,  or  its  depression  or  fracture. 

60.  Ciroruj  is  Headache. 

61.  Kefabhumisphutana  implies  sores  in  that  part  of  the  head  which  is  covered 
with  hair. 

62.  Arddita  is  Facial  paralysis. 

63.  Ekangaroga  is  partial  or  local  paralysis. 

64.  Sarvangaroga  is  complete  paralysis. 

65.  Pakshabadha  is  Hemiplegia. 

66.  Akshepaka  means  convulsions  both  apoplectic  and  hysterical. 

67.  Dandaka  is  such  a  stiffness  of  the  whole  body  that  the  patient  resembles  a  stake 
of  wood. 

68.  Crama  is  such  weakness  or  exhaustion  of  the  system  that  one  feels  completely 
worn  out  after  even  slight  exertion. 

69.  Bhrama  is  swimming  of  the  head  with  a  sensation  of  rotatory  motion  of  the 
whole  body.  Chakrapanidatta  thinks  it  refers  to  loss  of  memory. 

70.  Vepathu  is  Paralysis  Agitans. 

71.  Jrimbha  is  constant  yawning. 

72.  Hikka  is  Hiccup. 

73.  Visada  is  cheerlessness  of  mind. 

74.  Atipralapa  is  violent  Delirium. 

75.  Glani  is  Melancholia. 

76.  Raukshmya  is  general  dryness  caused  by  the  absence  of  fatty  matter. 


CllA  RA  KA  -SA  M II  IT  A. 


225 


77.  Parushya,  78.  (jlyavarunavabhasata,  79.  Asapna,  and  80. 
Anavasthitachittatwa.  Theseare  the  Eighty  disorders  due  to  Wind.*10 
Among  the  innumerable  diseases  caused  by  disorders  of  Wind, 
only  those  have  been  mentioned  that  are  generally  noticed. 

Verily,  in  ad  these  diseases  of  Wind  (that  have  been  mentioned) 
and  in  others  that  have  not  been  mentioned,  skilful  physicians, 
ascertaining  what  the  unmodified  nature  is  of  the  Wind  by  itself,  and 
what  the  indications  are  of  its  abnormal  functions  (in  the  body) 
and  what  the  parts  are  of  the  body  where  the  Wind  resides,  should, 
freed  from  doubt,  diagnose  the  character  of  the  disease  as  due  to 
the  action  of  the  Wind.*20-21 

It  is  to  be  done  as  follows : — 

Dryness,  lightness,  clearness,  coolness,  motion,  and  formless¬ 
ness,  are  the  attributes  of  the  Wind  by  itself.  In  consequence  of 
the  Wind  being  so,  the  indications  of  its  abnormal  functions,  as  it 
exists  in  the  different  limbs  of  the  body,  are  these : — 

Falling  out,  displacement,  extension  or  enlargement,  burst¬ 
ing  of  limbs,  cheerlessness,  joy,  thirst,  tremours,  pain  in  the  whole 
body,  twitching,  piercing  pains  (  as  if  caused  by  needles),  inflam¬ 
mations,  painful  sensation  as  if  caused  by  the  limb  (that  is  its  seat) 
being  tightly  bound  with  cords,  and  fractures;  also  roughness  of 
the  skin,  hardness  of  the  limbs,  heaviness  of  the  limbs  and  absence 
of  activity,  perforations  in  the  limbs,  redness  of  complexion,  astrin¬ 
gent  taste  in  the  mouth,  tastelessness  in  the  mouth,  severe  pains  of  a 
local  character,  swellings,  sleep,  contractions  (of  skin,  muscles, 
nerves,  &c.),  and  numbness  or  paralysis  of  limbs. 

When  endued  with  these  symptoms,  the  physician  assigns  the 
disease  to  the  action  of  the  Wind.f  2 


77.  Parushya  is  a  general  hardness  or  roughness  of  the  limbs. 

78.  Cyavarunavabhasata  is  a  paleness  and  redness  of  the  complexion. 

79.  Asapna  is  Insomnia  or  sleeplessness. 

80.  Anavasthitachittatwa  is  restlessness  of  mind. 

*  ‘  Aparinami  ’  is  unmodified  or  normal.  The  words  ‘  Vayoridamatmarupam’ 
means  ‘this  is  the  own  form  of  the  wind,’  i.e.,  these  are  the  attributes  of  the  wind  by  itself 
or  in  its  form  as  unmodified  by  disturbing  causes — T. 

f  ‘  Sada  ’  and  ‘harsha,’  which  I  render  ‘  cheerlessness  and  joy,’  may  also  mean  the 
indications,  in  the  body,  of  those  mental  states,  and  not  those  mental  states  only.  Thus, 
weakness  or  langour,  and  horripilation  are  due  to  Wind. — T. 

29 


22o 


.  CHAR  A  KA  -SA  M  HI  TA. 


Diseases  of  the  wind  should  be  treated  with  the  aid  of  medicines 
that  are  sweet,  or  sour,  or  saltish,  or  those  that  are  cool  and  warm. 
Settling  also  the  measure  and  the  time,  the  other  expedients  to  be 
employed  are  the  administration  of  Sweda,  of  Oils,  of  enemata,  of 
oily  enemata,  of  cerebral  purgatives,  of  diet;  rubbing  medicated 
oils,  application  of  unguents,  baths  including  pouring  and  sprink¬ 
ling  (medicated)  waters,  and  such  other  expedients  as  are  destruc¬ 
tive  of  the  wind. 

Amongst  these,  the  use  of  enemata  of  both  kinds,  {viz.,  dry 
and  oily),  is  regarded  by  physicians  as  the  foremost  of  all  expedi¬ 
ents  in  treating  of  diseases  of  the  wind.28 

Enemata  of  both  kinds,  at  the  very  outset,  entering  that  part 
of  the  abdomen  where  digestion  goes  on,  tears  up  the  root  of  that 
wind  which  generates  disorders. 

The  wind  being  subjugated  there,  the  diverse  diseases  gener¬ 
ated  in  diverse  parts  of  the  body  by  disorders  of  the  wind,  become 
allayed  even  as  when  the  root  of  a  large  tree  is  cut  off,  the  trunk 
and  branches  and  twigs  and  flowers  and  fruits  and  leaves  neces¬ 
sarily  meet  with  destruction.24 

After  this  the  forty  kinds  of  diseases  due  to  disorders  of  the 
Bile  are  being  explained.  They  are  i.  Osha,  2.  Plosha,  3.  Daha,  4. 
Davathu,  5.  Dhumaka,  6.  Amlaka,  7.  Vidaha,  8.  Antardaha,  9. 
Ang5adaha,  10.  Ushmadhikya,  n.  \tisweda,  13.  Angagandha, 


1.  Osha  is  that  disease  in  which  the  patient  experiences  the  sensation  of  a  fire  being 

always  placed  very  near  to  his  body. 

2.  Plosha  is  that  disease  in  which  the  patient  has  the  sensation  of  his  body  being 

slightly  scorched  by  fire. 

3.  Daha  is  a  sensation  of  burning  experienced  in  every  part  of  the  body, 

4.  Davathu  is  a  sensation  of  every  part  of  the  body  having  been  subject  to  a  painful 

inflammation, 

5.  Dhumaka  is  the  emitting  of  smoke  or  vapours  from  the  mouth. 

6.  Amlaka  implies  constant  eructatations  of  an  acid  character,  or  actual  acidity  in 

the  stomach, 

y.  Vidaha  implies  imperfect  digestion  of  what  has  been  eaten. 

8,  Antardaha  implies  a  burning  sensation  within  the  body,  generally|within  the  thorax, 

9.  Angcadaha  is  a  burning  sensation  experienced  in  the  shoulders. 

10.  Ushmadhikya  fs  excess  of  internal  heat  in  the  body. 

11.  Atisweda  is  excess  of  perspiration.  The  patient  may  be  seen  to  be  always  perspi, 

ring  more  or  less  copiously. 

12.  Angagandha  implies  a  foetid  smell  ip  every  part  of  the  body, 


CilA  kA  ka-samhITA. 


227 


*3.  Angavadarana,  14.  Conitakleda,  15.  Mangsakleda,  16.  Twagdahaj 
17.  Mangsadaha,  18.  Tangmangsadarana,  19.  Oharmadaranaj  20. 
Raktakotha,  2i.  RaktaVisphota,  22.  Raktapitta,  23.  Raktamanda- 
Iani,  24.  Haritatwam,  25.  Haridratwam,  26.  Nilika,  27.  KakshS) 
28.  Kamala,  29.  Tiktasyata,  30.  Putimukhala,  31.  Trishadhikya, 
32.  Atripti  33.  Asyapaka,  34.  Galapaka,  35.  Akshipaka,  36.  Guda- 
paka  37.  Medhrapaka,  38.  Jivadana,  39.  Tamaprave9a,  and 

13.  Angavadarana  implies  sores  caused  by  the  bursting  of  the  body; 

14.  Conitakleda  implies  the  existehce  of  impurities  in  the  blood. 

15.  Mangsakleda  is  the  generation  of  impurities  in  the  flesh. 

16.  Twagdaha  implies  a  burning  sensation  on  the  outer  surface  or  skin  of  the  body. 

17.  Mangsadaha  is  a  sensation  of  burning  that  is  felt  to  be  deeper,  i.  e.,  in  the  flesh. 

18.  Tangmangsadarana  implies  a  bursting  of  both  the  skin  and  the  flesh. 

19.  Charmadarana  is  a  bursting  of  the  seven  lairs  of  the  skin.  The  difference  between 

the  bursting  of  the  Twak  and  that  of  the  Charma  seems  to  be  that  in  the 
former  the  bursting  takes  places  vertically,  while  in  the  latter  it  takes  place 
laterally  or  horizontally. 

20.  Raktakotha  implies  an  eruption  on  the  body  that  resembles  the  swelling  caused 

by  the  sting  of  a  hornet. 

21.  RaktaVisphota  is  a  malignant  pustule  presenting  a  red  complexion. 

22.  Raktapitta  implies  Hemorrhages  caused  by  excitement  of  the  bile. 

23.  Raktamandalani  imply  circular  eruptions  or  swellings  on  the  body,  of  a  red  colour. 

24.  Haritatwam  is  that  disease  in  which  the  colour  of  the  whole  body  becomes 

greenish. 

25.  Haridratwam  is  that  disease  in  which  the  colour  of  the  whole  body  becomes 

yellowish. 

26.  Nilika  implies  black  spots  on  the  face  and  is  reckoned  among  minor  diseases. 

27.  Kaksha  is  a  painful  abscess  in  the  axilla. 

28.  Kamala  is  aggravated  Jaundice. 

29.  Tiktasyata  is  a  constant  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth. 

30.  Putimukhata  is  a  foetid  smell  in  the  mouth. 

31.  Trishadhikya  is  an  excess  of  thirst,  and  not  the  insatiable  desire  for  cool  water, 

as  the  Commentator  points  out,  for  that  is  a  disease  which  is  ‘  Samanyajah’ 
and  is  not  specially  due  to  the  excitement  of  the  bile. 

32.  Atripti  is  insatiable  hunger  so  that  the  patient  devours  large  quantities  of  food 

and  still  experiences  the  sensation  of  hunger. 

33.  Asyapaka  is  inflammation  of  the  mouth. 

34.  Galapaka  is  abscess  in  the  throat. 

35.  Akshipaka  is  suppuration  of  the  globe  of  the  eye. 

36.  Gudapaka  is  abscess  in  the  anus,  or  inflammation  of  the  anus  ending  in 

suppuration. 

37.  Medhrapaka  is  inflammation  of  the  whole  penis  ending  in  suppuration. 

38.  Jivadana  implies  bloody  motions,  so  called  because  of  the  life-blood  being 

regarded  as  escaping  from  out  of  the  body  ;  caused  by  injudicious  administra¬ 
tion  of  purgatives. 

39.  Tamaprave9a  is  mental  indistinctness  or  aberration. 


228 


CllA  RA  KA-SA  MU  IT  A. 


4o.  Harita-haridra-rmitra-netra-varchchastwam.  These  are  the  forty 
diseases  due  to  disorders  of  the  Bile. 

The  diseases  due  to  disorders  of  the  Bile  are  innumerable.  Of 
them,  only  those  are  mentioned  that  are  generally  met  with,25 

Verily,  in  all  these  diseases  due  to  disorders  of  the  Bile  that 
have  been  mentioned  and  in  those  also  that  have  not  been  men¬ 
tioned,  skilful  physicians,  ascertaining  what  the  unmodified  nature 
is  of  the  Bile  by  itself,  and  what  the  indications  are  of  its  abnormal 
functions,  or  what  the  parts  of  the  body  are  where  it  has  its 
seat,  should,  freed  from  doubts,  conclude  particular  diseases  to  be 
due  to  (disorders  of)  the  Bile.28 

The  ascertainment  is  to  be  made  as  follows. 

The  attributes  of  the  Bile  by  itself  are  heat,  keenness,  lightness, 
and  slight  oiliness  ;  in  color,  it  is  not  white  ;  its  scent  is  like  that  of 
raw  meat  ;  its  taste  is  twofold,  viz., bitter  and  sour.27 

In  consequence  of  the  true  or  unmodified  nature  of  Bile  by 
itself  being  so,  the  indications  of  its  functions  when  it  is  in  a 
modified  or  excited  condition  are  these  : — 

Penetrating  into  those  parts  of  the  body  that  constitute  its  seats, 
the  effects  it  produces  are  burning,  warmth,  suppuration,  sweat,  im¬ 
purities,  gangrenous  ulcerations,  secretions,  and  redness.  Corres¬ 
ponding  to  its  scent  and  complexion  and  taste  (as  displayed  by  it 
in  its  unmodified  state),  become  its  scent  and  complexion  and 
taste  when  it  undergoes  modification  by  aggravation  or  excitement. 

These  are  the  functions  of  the  Bile  when  excited  or  aggravated. 

When  endued  with  these  indications,  the  skilful  physician 
should  diagnose  the  disease  as  due  to  disorders  of  the  Bile.2** 


40.  Harita-haridra-mutra-netra-varchchastwam  implies  that  disease  in  which  the 
urine,  the  eyes  and  the  ordure  becomes  greenish-yellow  or  green  and  yellow. 

*  The  Commentators  explain  that  as  the  color  of  the  Bile  in  its  noripal  state  is  not 
-white,  when  excited,  it  produces  all  sorts  of  color  in  the  body  that  are  not  white.  The 
scent  of  Bile,  again,  being  that  of  raw  meat,  when  excited,  Bile  makes  the  body  smell  like 
raw  meat.  Its  taste  also  being  bitter  and  sour,  when  excited,  it  produces  in  the  mouth 
taste  that  is  bitter  and  sour. — T. 


C//A  RA  t< A-S  AM  11  it  A. 


Diseases  caused  by  disorders  of  the  Bile  should  be  treated  by 
administration  of  such  agents  as  are  sweet  or  bitter  or  astringent 
to  the  taste,  or  as  are  cooling. 

In  treating  of  them  the  aid  should  be  takeft  of  Oils,  of  purga-* 
fives,  of  unguents,  of  fomentation,  of  medicinal  oils  for  rubbing, 
of  baths,  and  such  other*  operations  and  processes  as  are  destructive 
of  Bile.  Physicians,  however,  regard  purgatives  as  the  foremost  of 
all  agents  in  the  treatment  of  diseases  of  the  Bile.29 

Purgatives,  entering  at  first  that  part  of  the  stomach  which 
holds  the  undigested  food,  destroy  the  root  of  that  Bile  which  causes 
the  disorders.  The  Bile  being  subjugated  there,  the  diseases 
brought  about  by  the  excited  Bile  in  diverse  parts  of  the  body 
become  allayed.  As  when  the  fire  within  a  chamber  is  put  out,  the 
fire-chamber  itself  becomes  cool,  even  so  the  excited  Bile  is  allayed 
when  its  cause  is  removed.30 

We  shall  next  expound  the  twenty  varieties  of  diseases  caused 
by  excitement  of  the  Phlegm. 

These  are  as  follows : — i.T ripti,  2 .  T andra,  3 .  Nidradhiky  a,  4.  Stai- 
mitya,  5,  Gurugatrata,  6.  Alasya,  7.  Mukhamadhuryya,  8.  Mukhagrava, 
9.  Cleshmodgirana,  10.  Valanaga,  n.  Apakti,  12.  Hridayoplepa, 
13.  Kanthopalepa,  14.  Dhamanipratichaya,  15.  Galaganda, 


1.  Tripti  is  a  sense  of  fulness  in  the  stomach  without  having  eaten  anything. 

2.  Tandra  is  drowsiness. 

3.  Nidradhikya  is  excessive  sleep. 

4.  Staimitya  is  rigidity. 

5.  Gurugatrata  implies  a  sense  of  heaviness  in  all  the  limbs. 

6.  Alasya  is  distaste  for  all  kinds  of  exertion. 

7.  Mukhamadhuryya  is  the  presence  of  a  sweet  taste  in  the  mouth. 

8.  Mukhacrava  is  a  constant  discharge  of  saliva  and  other  matter  from  the  mouth. 

9.  Cleshmodgirana  is  the  constant  throwing  up  of  phlegmatic  impurities. 

10.  Valanaca  is  the  entire  loss  of  strength. 

n.  Apakti  is  inability  to  digest  the  food  taken. 

12.  Hridayopalepa  implies  a  sensation  of  the  heart  or  the  entire  cardiac  region 
■  being  covered  over  with  a  coating  of  phlegm, 

13.  Kanthopalepa  implies  a  sensation  of  the  throat  being  covered  over  with  a 

coating  of  phlegm. 

14.  Dhamanipratichaya  is  a  heaviness  of  the  veins  and  nerves. 

15.  Galaganda  is  enlargement  of  the  glands  of  the  neck  or  Bronchocele, 


2§0 


CH  A  RA  KA  -  SA  MH I TA. 


16.  Atisthaulyam,  17.  Citagnlta,  18.  Udardda,  ig.  Cwetavabhasata, 
and  20.  Cweta-mutra-netra-varchchastwam. 

The  diseases  due  to  excitement  of  the  Phlegm  are  innumer* 
able.  Only  those  that  commonly  appear  have  been  mentioned.31 

Verily,  in  all  these  diseases  of  the  Phlegm  that  have  been 
mentioned,  as  also  in  others  not  mentioned,  skilful  physicians,  as¬ 
certaining  what  the  unmodified  nature  is  of  the  Phlegm  by  itself, 
and  what  the  indications  are  of  its  functions  when  it  is  excited, 
and  what  the  parts  of  the  body  are  where  it  has  its  seat,  should, 
freed  from  doubt,  conclude  particular  diseases  to  be  due  to  (dis¬ 
orders  of)  the  Phlegm.33 

The  ascertainment  is  to  be  made  as  follows. 

The  attributes  or  indications  of  the  Phlegm  by  itself  are 
whiteness,  cold,  heaviness,  oiliness,  sweetness,  firmness,  sliminess, 
and  softness  like  that  of  good  earth  or  clay.33 

In  consequence  of  its  being  so,  the  indications  of  its  excited 
state  are  as  follow  : — 

Entering  those  particular  parts  of  the  body  that  constitute  its 
seats,  it  produces  whiteness  of  complexion,  cold,  itching,  dulness, 
heaviness,  oiliness,  loss  of  sensation  or  paralysis,  sleep,  impure 
secretions,  excrescences,  sensation  of  tightness  as  if  bound  with 
cords,  sense  of  sweetness,  and  procrastination  in  respect  of  work. 

When  diseases  are  endued  with  these  symptoms,  the  physician 
should  attribute  them  to  (disorders  of)  the  Phlegm.3* 

The  diseases  of  the  Phlegm  should  be  treated  with  such 
agents  as  are  pungent,  bitter,  astringent,  keen,  warm,  and  dry. 


16.  Atisthaulyam  is  a  plethoric  fatness  of  the  body. 

17.  Citagnita  is  loss  of  appetite  and  inability  to  take  any  food. 

11.  Udardda  is  a  name  about  which  physicians  differ.  Some  think  that  a  kind  of 
Erysipelas  is  meant.  Some  regard  it  as  identical  with  Citapitta  or  Urticaria. 
The  Commentator  (Gangadhara)  l  quotes  from  some  authorities  each  of 
whom  differs  from  every  other. 

19.  Cwetatabhasata  is  a  whiteness  of  complexion.  The  body  becomes  very  pale 
when  this  disease  appears. 

so.  Cweta-mutra-netra-varchchastwam  is  whiteness  of  the  urine,  whiteness  of  the 
eyes,  and  whiteness  of  the  complexion. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


231 


In  treating  of  them,  the  aid  should  be  taken  of  Swedana,  of 
emetics,  of  errhines,  of  physical  exercise,  and  similar  other  opera¬ 
tions  that  are  destructive  of  Phlegm. 

Among  all  these  operations,  physicians  regard  the  application 
of  purgatives,  settling  the  measure  and  the  times  thereof,  as  the 
foremost  in  point  of  efficiency.8 * 

The  purgative,  entering  at  first  that  part  of  the  stomach 
which  contains  undigested  food,  destroys  the  root  of  that  Phlegm 
which  causes  the  disease. 

The  Phlegm  being  subjugated  there,  the  diseases  brought 
about  by  the  excited  Phlegm  in  diverse  parts  of  the  body  become 
allayed. 

As  paddy  and  barley  and  other  crops  are  dried  up  when  the 
water  collected  in  the  field  escapes  away  upon  the  ridges  enclosing 
it  being  broken,  even  so  diseases  caused  by  the  Phlegm  are  des¬ 
troyed  upon  the  root  of  the  Phlegm  being  thus  destroyed.36 

( Here  occur  some  verses.) 

The  diseases  should  first  be  carefully  ascertained.  After  this, 
the  medicine  to  be  applied  should  be  carefully  selected.  Subse¬ 
quent  to  this,  the  physician  should,  with  full  knowledge  of  conse¬ 
quences  commence  the  treatment.3 T 

That  physician  who,  without  carefully  ascertaining  the  disease, 
commences  its  treatment,  seldom  meets  with  success  even  if  he  be 
well  conversant  with  medicines  and  their  application. 38 

That  physician  who  is  well  conversant  with  the  features  of 
disease,  who  has  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  all  medicines,  and 
who  has  knowledge  of  the  considerations  dependant  upon  time 
and  place,  achieves  success  without  doubt.88 

( Here  occur  some  verses  containing  a  summary ,) 

A  classification,  in  brief,  of  the  diseases  that  occur,  their 
nature,  their  seats,  their  modifications,  their  causes,  the  inducing 
circumstances,  the  dispelling  of  doubts  (in  diagnosis ),  the 
co-existence  of  diseases  (in  consequence  of  their  inducing  and 
following  each  other),  the  respective  of  seats  of  the  faults,  enumer- 


232  CHAR  A  KA-SA  M  H  IT  A. 

ation  of  different  kinds  of  diseases  as  caused  by  excitement  of 
particular  faults,  the  respective  indications  of  the  faults  in  them¬ 
selves  or  in  their  normal  states,  the  indications  of  their  functions 
when  they  are  excited,  the  kind  of  drugs  and  of  operations  that 
should  be  resorted  to  for  treating  the  diseases  brought  about  by  the 
different  faults,  have  all  been  properly  laid  down  in  this  Lesson 
called  Maharoga  by  the  Rishi  conversant  with  truth.1-3* 

Thus  ends  the  Lesson  called  Maharoga  in  the  treatise  of 
Agnive9a  as  revised  by  Charaka.f 


*  These  summaries  are  of  great  use  from  the  manner  of  their  compilation.  Here, 
for  example,  some  of  the  words  used  in  the  summary  throw  light  upon  the  corresponding 
portions  of  the  text  to  which  they  refer.  First  comes  Samgraha  or  the  brief  classification 
of  diseases  into  4  kinds.  ( Vide  aphorism  2).  As  regards  Prakriti  or  nature  of-  diseases, 
it  occurs  in  aphorism  4.  That  which  has  been  called  Deca  here  is  the  Adhisthana  of 
aphorism  5  which  has  been  rendered  Substratum.  Vikarah  are  the  modifications  referred 
to  in  aphorism  6.  The  Mukhani  or  proximate  causes  are  referred  to  in  aphorisms  7  and 
8.  The  Iranam,  called  Preranam  in  the  text,  is,  of  course,  the  original  cause.  This, 
and  also  Anuvandha  or  co-existence  of  diseases,  and  Asandeha  or  absence  of  doubt  or 
certitude  respecting  the  characters  of  diseases  though  existing  together,  are  referred 
to  in  aphorism  9.  The  seats'  of  the  faults  occur  in  aphorisms  numbered  1 1  to  13. 
Each  item  in  the  Summary  should  be  carefully  studied  by  a  reference  to  the  text.  The 
arrangement  of  paragraphs  in  the  text  may  often  be  corrected  in  this  way.— T. 

+  This  Lesson  is  exceedingly  important.  It  is  really  regarded  as  the  very  basis  of  the 
Hindu  system  of  Medicine.  Wind,  Bile,  and  Phlegm  are  the  three  things  that  should  be 
carefully  understood  before  Charaka’s  system  can  be  understood.  Each  Science  must 
have  its  technical  terms.  In  the  selection  of  technical  terms,  however,  care  should  be 
taken  to  avoid  words  which  in  common  use  have  other  meanings.  Unfortunately,  the 
framers  of  the  Hindu  system  of  Medicine  did  not  take  this  care.  The  three  words  they 
chose  had  and  have  other  acceptations.  Hence,  the  terms  they  employed  have  been  very 
much  misunderstood.  Wind  is  not  the  atmosphere,  Bile  is  not  the  secretion  of  the  liver 
hat  helps  digestion  ;  and  Phlegm  is  not  the  secretions  that  persons  afflicted  with  cold 
throw  out.  They  are,  on  the  other  hand,  technical  terms  that  imply  certain  states  of  the 
physical  constitution.  Certain  operations  in  healthy  and  unhealthy  bodies  are  attributed 
to  the  agency  of  certain  forces  in  their  normal  and  abnormal  states.  The  belief  in  the 
existence  of  these  forces  is  no  more  unscientific  than  the  belief  in  Gravitation  as  a  force 
residing  in  solid  bodies.  Gravitation,  apart  from  the  fact  of  the  falling  down  of  solid 
bodies,  is  no  longer  believed.  Yet  there  is  a  convenience  in  speaking  of  Gravitation  as 
a  force.  After  the  same  manner,  certain  groups  of  physical  phenomena  are  ascribed  to 
the  existence  of  certain  forces  called  Wind,  Bile,  and  Phlegm.  As  forces,  one  may  not 
know  anything  more  of  them  than  the  phenomena  they  display.  Yet  in  conceiving 
their  existence  there  can  be  no  error  or  inconvenience.  To  say  that  the  Hindu  system  of 
Medicine  is  unscientific  in  consequence  of  .  its  reliance  on  this  trinity  of  causes  with  respect 
to  both  health  and  disease,  can  proceed  only  from  a  misapprehension  of  the  true  import  of 
the  terms  employed.— T. 


CHa  RA  KA-SA  MHITA.  233 

LESSON  XXI. 

We  shall  next  expound  the  Lesson  called  Ashta-ninditiya  or 
that  on  the  eight  persons  worthy  of  condemnation. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.1 

Referring  to  the  body,  there  are  eight  persons  that  are  regard¬ 
ed  as  worthy  of  condemnation. 

They  areas  follow: — i.  one  that  is  very  tall  in  stature  ;  2. 
one  that  is  very  short  in  stature  ;  3.  one  that  is  very  hairy  ;  4.  one 
that  is  not  at  all  hairy  ;  5.  one  that  is  very  dark  (or  black)  of  com¬ 
plexion  ;  6.  one  that  is  very  white  of  complexion  ;  7.  one  that  is 
Very  corpulent  or  obese  ;  and  8.  one  that  is  very  emaciated  Or  lean.2 

Amongst  these,  of  him  that  is  very  corpulent  and  him  that  is 
very  lean,  there  are  certain  incidents,  wanting  in  the  others,  that 
are  especially  worthy  of  condemnation. 

Of  him  that  is  very  corpulent  are  these  eight  faults,  viz.,  1.  dimi¬ 
nution  of  the  period  of  life,  2.  (untimely)  attack  of  decrepitude,  3. 
excessive  difficulty  of  sexual  congress,  4.  weakness,  5.  foetid  smell 
in  every  part  of  the  body,  6.  excessive  perspiration,  7.  abnormal 
appetite  for  food,  and  8.  abnormal  thirst.3 

Excessive  corpulence  arises  from  taking  excessive  food,  from 
habitual  use  of  food  that  is  heavy  or  sweet  or  cooling  or  oily,  from 
want  of  physical  exercise,  from  complete  avoidance  of  sexual 
congress,  from  indulgence  in  sleep  during  the  day,  from  constant 
joy,  from  the  complete  absence  of  mental  exertion  and  anxiety, 
and  from  the  nature  of  the  seed  from  which  one  has  taken  one’s 
birth.*4 

Of  the  man  that  is  excessively  corpulent,  the  fat'  predominates 
over  the  other  constituent  ingredients.  Possessed  already  of  much 
fat,  that  fat  goes  on  increasing,  without  the  other  elements  increas¬ 
ing  with  it.  Hence  a  diminution  takes  place  in  his  period  of  life. 

In  consequence  of  the  body  being  lax  and  exceedingly  soft, 


*  ‘  Vija-swabhavat’  implies  heridity ;  i.e.,  some  are  very  corpulent  because  their 


234  Cl/A  RA  KA-SAMIIirA. 

and  of  the  heaviness  of  the  fat,  an  (untimely)  attack  of  decrepitude 
takes  place. 

In  consequence  of  attenuation  of  the  vital  seed  and  all  the 
ducts  being  covered  with  fat,  the  corpulent  man  experiences  a 
difficulty  in  sexual  congress. 

The  weakness  the  corpulent  man  feels  is  owing  to  the  inhar¬ 
monious  condition  of  the  constituent  elements  of  his  body. 

The  foetid  smell  that  issues  out  of  his  body  is  due  to  the  fault 
of  fat,  to  the  nature  of  fat  itself,  and  the  excess  of  perspiration 
(which  fat  induces). 

In  consequence  of  the  fat,  which  predominates  in  the  corpu¬ 
lent  man,  existing  in  contact  with  phlegm  and,  therefore,  of  its 
attribute  of  emitting  secretions,  and,  lastly,  in  consequence  of  the 
corpulent  man's  inability  to  bear  or  go  through  physical  exercises 
of  any  kind,  there  is  excess  of  perspiration  in  him. 

In  consequence  of  his  digestive  fire  being  very  strong  and  of 
there  being  excess  of  wind  in  the  bowels  (and  every  other  viscus), 
there  is  excess  of  hunger  in  him,  as  also  excess  of  thirst.6 

{Here  occur  verses.) 

In  consequence  of  the  ducts  being  all  covered  with  fat,  the 
wind,  in  especial,  wandering  through  the  bowels,  stirs  up  the  diges¬ 
tive  fire  and  causing  it  to  burn  fiercely  consumes  whatever  food 
is  taken.  For  this  reason  the  corpulent  man  very  speedily  digests 
the  food  he  takes,  and  desires  to  take  food  at  very  short  intervals. 
If  delay  occurs  in  giving  him  food  when  he  feels  hungry,  diverse 
diseases  occur.2  These  two  in  especial,  viz.,  fire  and  the  wind, 
cause  diverse  afflictions  (in  his  system).  These  two  consume  the 
corpulent  man,  even  as  a  forest-conflagration  consumes  a  forest.3 

When  the  fat  suddenly  increases  to  a  great  extent,  wind  and 
th'e  others  (viz,,  bile  and  phlegm),  causing  many  dreadful  diseases, 
quickly  destroy  life.4 

f  ‘  Kala-vyatikramat’  is  explained  by  Chakrapanidatta  as  ‘  Bhpjana-kalatikramat.’ 
This  is,  I  think,  correct.  KavirajaGangadhara  is  for  taking  the  expression  as  implying 
*  Vayasah  kaladhikyat’  or  old  age.  This  would  be  far-fetched. —  T. 


CH  A  RA  KA  -SA  MHITA. 


235 


When  in  consequence  of  a  person’s  fat  and  flesh  having  in¬ 
creased  greatly,  his  buttocks,  belly,  and  breasts  become  so  flaccid 
as  to  tremble  or  oscillate  (while  he  walks),  when,  in  fact,  his  growth 
has  been  such  as  to  be  pronounced  abnormal,  and  when  his  power 
for  exertion  has  become  very  much  weakened,  he  is  then  said  to  be 
excessively  corpulent  or  obese.5 

Thus  have  the  faults,  the  causes,  and  the  appearance  or  form 
of  a  person  in  whose  body  fat  predominates  over  the  other  consti¬ 
tuent  ingredients,  have  been  indicated. 

After  this,  the  faults  are  being  laid  down  that  attach  to  exce.s,. 
sive  leanness  or  emaciation.*® 

The  habitual  use  of  dry  food  and  drink,  fasts,  insufficiency  of 
food,  excessive  administration  of  purgatives  and  emetics,  grief, 
suppression  of  the  urgings  of  nature  and  sleep,  habitual  use  of  dry 
unguents  and  indulgence  in  baths  without  rubbing  oil  on  the  body, 
natural  waste,  or  the  waste  that  follows  disease  and  excessive 
wrath, — these  make  a  man  lean  or  emaciated.f 7-8 

A  man  that  is  emaciated  cannot  bear  physical  exercise,  or 
eating  that  goes  beyond  the  point  of  gratification,  or  hunger,  or 
thirst,  or  medicines  that  are  necessary.  Like  these,  the  emaciated 
man  cannot  bear  also  cold  or  heat  or  sexual  congress.9 

Spleen,  consumption,  phthisis,  asthma,  abdominal  tumours, 
piles,  and  other  abdominal  diseases,  as  also  those  diseases  that 
affect  the  Grahani,  assail  the  emaciated  man.10 

That  man  is  called  excessively  emaciated  or  lean  whose 
buttocks  and  abdomen  and  neck  have  dried  up  and  become  wasted, 
whose  body  is  covered  all  over  with  a  net  of  swollen  nerves,  whose 
skin  and  bones  have  become  dry,  and  the  joints  of  whose  body 
have  become  swollen.11 


*  ‘  Vachyam,’  Chakrapanidatta  explains,  implies  either  ‘  abhidheyam,’  or  *  ninditam’ 
or  ‘  avadyam.’  I  adopt  the  latter  meaning. — T. 

t  In  Verse  7,  instead  of  ‘  Veganidravinigrahah’  some  texts  read  ‘  nidravegavini- 
graha.’  If  the  latter  reading  be  adopted,  the  meaning  will  be  ‘  suppression  of  the  urging 
of  sleep.  *  Udvartana’  is  the  rubbing  of  unguents  on  the  body.  By  ‘  ruksha-snana’  is 
meant  a  bath  without  rubbing  the  body  previously  with  oil.— T. 


charakasamhitA. 


He  that  is  very  corpulent,  and  he  that  is  very  emaciated,  both 
these  are  to  be  regarded  as  always  diseased. 

They  should,  therefore,  be  always  subjected  to  treatment  (by 
administration  of  medicines  and  diet)  that  is  calculated  to  reduce 
bulk  and  promote  nutrition  and  growth.12 

Among  the  two,  viz.,  excessive  corpulency  and  excessive 
emaciation,  the  latter  is  rather  tolerable  ;  for  though  the  corpulent 
and  the  emaciated  are  equally  situated,  yet  if  disease  assails 
both  of  them,  it  is  sure  to  afflict  the  corpulent  man  more  than 
the  emaciated  one.*13 

That  man  the  measure  of  whose  growth  is  proportionate  and 
whose  limbs  are  symmetrical,  is  never,  in  consequence  of  the 
firmness  or  strength  of  his  senses,  overwhelmed  by  the  force  which 
diseases,  (when  they  afflict  him)  putforth.f14 

He  who  succeeds  in  bearing  hunger,  thirst,  and  the  heat  of 
the  sun,  and  in  bearing  also  cold  and  physical  labour,  who  can 
eat  and  digest  agreeably  to  the  vigor  of  his  digestive  fire,  is 
seen  to  have  a  proportionate  measure  of  growth.15 

In  reducing  the  bulk  of  persons  that  are  very  corpulent,  food 
that  is  heavy  and  such  dietary  regulations  and  other  practices  as 
fall  within  Atarpana,  are  beneficial.  For  the  nourishment, 
however,  of  persons  that  are  very  lean,  food  that  is  light  and 
such  dietary  regulations  and  other  practices  as  fall  within 
Santarpana,  are  beneficial. J1 

*  The  sense  seems  to  be  this  :  both  corpulency  and  emaciation  are  worthy  of  con¬ 
demnation  ;  still  if  it  be  asked  whether  one  is  worse  than  the  other,  then  the  answer 
should  be  that  emaciation  is  more  tolerable  than  corpulency,  the  reason  being  that 
though  the  situation  in  other  respect  is  nearly  equal  of  the  corpulent  man  and  the 
emaciated  man,  yet  when  a  supervening  disease,  such  as  fever,  comes,  it  is  seen  tq  afflict 
or  torment  the  former  more  than  the  latter.  —  T. 

+  ‘  Sama-mangsa-pramanah’  is  taken  by  the  Commentators  as  implying  ‘  one  who  is 
neither  very  tall  nor  very  short,  and  neither  very  corpulent  nor  very  lean  ;  the  word 
f  mangsa’  is  used  to  imply  growth.— 71 

X  ‘  Atarpanam’  and  ‘  Santarpanam’  are  two  WPfds  that  should  be  understood 
properly.  The  first  literally  implies  ‘  food  that  does  not  gratify’  and  the  second,  ‘  food 
that  gratifies.’  They  are,  however,  technical  words  ;  and  as  such,  Santarpanam  means,  as 
Will  appear  later  on,  a  soothing  course  of  treatment  or  indulgence  iii  oily  food  and  certain 
practices  (such  as  sleep  at  day  time  &c,)  which  exercises  a  sedative  and  nutritive  effect 
pn  the  physical  system.  Atarpanam  is  the  reverse  of  this.— T. 


cearaka-samhita. 


237 


Such  food  and  drink  as  are  destructive  of  wind  as  also  of 
phlegm  and  fat,  and  dry,  and  warm,  and  keen  enemata,  and  dry 
unguents,71  the  use  of  Guduchi  (a)  and  Bhadramusta  (6)  and  of 
the  triple  fruit,  the  use  of  butter-milk  and  vinous  spirit,  the  use  of 
honey,18  and  Viclanga,  ( c ),  ‘Nagara  (d),  Kshara  ( e ),  pounded 
black  iron  and  honey,  the  use  of  the  flour  of  barley  and  pounded 
Amlaka  (/),  is  said  to  be  very  beneficial  (for  reducing  corpus 
lency).*19 

The  use  also  of  the  five  ingredients  beginning  with  Vilwa, 
( g ),  mixed  with  honey,  and  the  use  of  £ilajatu  ( h )  with  the  juice  of 
Agnimantha  (?),  are  also  very  beneficial.20 


a.  Tinospora  Cordifolia  ;  syn.  Menispermum  Cordifalium. 

b.  A  variety  pf  Cyperus  rotundas,  Linn. 

c.  Embelia  Ribes  ;  syn.  Embetia  Glandulifera. 

d.  Nagara  is  dry  ginger  reduced  to  powder. 

e.  By  Kshara  that  of  barley  is  meant,  or,  as  it  is  called,  Yavakshara.  Vide  note,/, 

in  page  17  ante. — T. 

f.  Phyllanthus  Emblica ,  Linn. 

*  Pounded  black  iron  that  is  referred  to  here  consists  of  a  very  impalpable  powder 
e  that  will  float  on  water  and  will  pot  irritate  the  eyes  when  applied  to  them.  It  is  usual 
to  rub  the  iron  with  cow’s  urine  apd  roast  it  about  a  hundred  times.  On  chemical 
analysis  it  is  found  to  be  a  mixture  of  the  proto  and  peroxide  of  iron.’  Mat.  Med.  of  the 
Hindus ,  by  U-  C.  Dull.  The  triple  fruit  is,  of  course,  the  Chebulic,  Embleic,  and 
Belleric  myrobalans. 

The  mention  of  honey  a  second  time  implies  that  it  is  to  be  mixed  with  what  goes 
before.—  T. 

g.  Panchamula  may  be  of  various  kinds.  There  are  two  principal  divisions ;  one 
is  called  the  Swalpa  and  the  other  the  Mahat.  When  said  to  begin  with  Vilwa, 
what  is  meant  is  the  infusion  or  decoction  of  the  barks  of  these  five,  1.  Mgle  Marmelos, 
2.  Cqlosanth.es  lndica,  syn.  Bignonia  lndica ,  3.  Gmelina  Arborea ,  4.  Stereospermum 
tSuave-olens ;  syn.  Bignonia  Suave-olens,  and  5.  Premna  Serratifolia ,  Linn,  syn. 
Premna  spinosa,  Roxb. 

h.  “  Silajatu  literally  means  stope  and  lac.  The  term  is  applied  to  certain  bitu¬ 
minous  substances  said  to  exude  from  rocks  during  the  hot  weather.  It  is  said  to  be  pro¬ 
duced  in  the  Vjndhya  and  other  mountains  where  iron  abounds.  It  is  a  dark,  sticky, 
unctious  substance  resembling  bdellium  in  appearance.  It  has  a  bitter  taste  and  a  strong 
smell,  resembling  stale  cow’s  urine.  Over  platinum  foil,  it  burns  with  a  little  in¬ 
flammable  smoke  and  leaves  a  large  quantity  of  ashes  consisting  chiefly  of  lime, 
magnesia,  silica,  and  iron  in  a  mixed  state  of  Proto  and  Peroxide,  "—Mat.  Med.  of 
the  Hindus,  by  U.  C.  Dutt. 

%.  Commonly  called  Gapiari,  Premna  Serratifolia.  syn.  Premna  spinosa. 


238 


CHARAKA-SaMHIIA. 


Prasatika  (a),  Priyangu  ( b ),  £yamaka  (tr),  Yavaka  (d),  Yava 
(g),  Jurnahbha  {/),  Kodrava  (g),  Mudga  ( h ),  Kulathwa  (2),  Mukush- 
taka  (/),  the  seeds  of  Aclalci  ( k ),  with  Patola  (/),  and  Amlaka  (m), 
should  be  given  to  the  patient  for  eating,  who  should,  afterwards 
drink  water  mixed  with  honey.21-28 

Such  vinous  spirits  also  should  be  taken  in  judicious  measures 
as  are  destructive  of  fat,  flesh,  and  phlegm,  for  reducing  excessive 
corpulency.23  Night-keeping,  sexual  intercouse,  physical  exercise, 
mental  exertion,  should  also  be  gradually  indulged  in  if  one  desires 
to  reduce  once's  corpulency.24 

Sleep,  joy,  delightful  (seats  and)  beds,  contentedness  of  mind, 
tranquillity  of  mind,  abstention  from  thought  and  sexual  intercourse 
and  physical  exercise,  acquisition  of  delightful  objects  and  meetings 
with  persons  that  are  dear,25  new  rice,  new  wines  and  spirits, 
the  juice  (soup)  of  meat  obtained  from  animals  that  are  domestic 
or  that  belong  to  marshy  regions  or  that  live  in  water,  diverse 
kinds  of  meat  that  are  dressed  properly  and  agreeably,  curds, 
ghee,  and  milk,26  the  different  kinds  of  sugarcane,  of  £ali  paddy, 
Phaseolus  Roxburghii,  wheat;  different  kinds  of  confectionery, 
the  administration  of  enemata,  the  use  of  food  that  is  oily  Or 
sweet,  the  rubbing  of  oil  on  the  body  at  all  times,27  the  rubbing 
of  oily  and  cooling  linniments,  baths,  the  use  of  perfumes  and 
floral  wreaths,  wearing  of  white  clothes,  the  correction  of  faults 
by  opportune  administration  of  correctives,28  recourse  to  processes 


a.  A  variety  of  paddy,  called  in  Bengal  Uri  dhan. 

b.  A  variety  of  paddy  is  meant  and  not  the  tree  of  that  name,  viz.,  Aglaia 

Roxburghiana. 

c.  A  variety  of  paddy. 

d.  A  smaller  variety  of  barley. 

e.  The  larger  variety  of  barley. 

/.  Called  in  Bengali  Janara. 

g.  A  variety  of  paddy,  called  in  Bengali  Kodo-dhan.  Paspalum  -  Scrobiailalum, 

I.inn. 

h.  Phaseolus  Mungo. 

i.  Dolichos  uni/loruz,  Lamk  ;  syn,  Doliehos  bijlorus,  Roxb. 

J.  Called  Van-muga  in  Bengali.  A  variety  of  Phaseolus  Mungo. 

k.  Called  also  Arahar.  Cajanus  Indicus  ;  syn.  Cytisus  Cajon,  Linn. 

l.  Trichosanthes  dioica,  Roxb. 

m.  Pkyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn ;  syn.  Emblica  officinalis. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA MHI TA. 


230 


and  drugs  as  promote  nutrition  and  strength  and  as  fall  within 
Rasayana,— these  destroy  emaciation  and  leanness  and  effectually 
bring  about  growth.*29 

In  consequence  of  total  abstention  from  thought  or  anxiety  in 
respect  of  any  act,  by  recourse  to  diet  and  practices  called  Santar- 
pana,  and  through  sound  sleep  every  day,  one,  without  doubt, 
advances  in  growth  like  a  boar.80 

When,  the  mind  being  fatigued,  they  that  are  the  souls  of 
action  (viz.,  the  senses),  becoming  fatigued,  recede  from  their 
objects,  it  is  then  that  one  sleeps. f31 

Happiness  and  misery,  growth  and  waste,  strength  and  weak¬ 
ness,  virility  and  sterility,  knowledge  and  ignorance,  life  and  death, 
all  depend  upon  (judicious  and  injudicious)  sleep.82 

Sleep,  when  indulged  on  improper  occasions  or  in  excess,  or 
not  at  all,  does  not  contribute  to  either  happiness  or  longevity,  for 
it  is  even  like  the  Last  Night.88 

When  indulged  judiciously,  that  very  thing,  viz.,  sleep,  endues 
the  body  with  happiness  and  longevity,  even  as  infallible  intelli¬ 
gence  is  brought  unto  the  Yogin  by  ascetic  success.^84 

They  who  have  been  wearied  by  singing,  study,  alcoholic 
stimulants,  sexual  congress,  acts  involving  physical  exertion, 


*  ‘  Sukha  cayya’  means  such  seats  and  beds  as  are  very  comfortable  and  delightful. 
<  Priyadar?anam’  is  literally,  ‘  seeing  what  is  dear,’  implying  the  acquisition  of  agreeable 
objects  and  encounters  with  friends' and  dear  ones.  All  kinds  of  new  rice  are  very 
nutritive.  ‘  Meat  dressed  properly  and  agreeably,’  i.e.,  suitable  to  the  constitution  of 
the  patient.  ‘  Guda-vaikritam’  is  food  prepared  with  modifications  of  raw-sugar.  ‘  Ud- 
vartana’  is  gentle  rubbing  upwards  of  unguents,  linniments,  and  medicated  oils. —  T. 

■f  Sleep,  according  to  this  definition,  is  a  total  suspension  of  mental  faculties  as 
also  the  senses,  such  suspension  being  due  to  weariness  caused  by  continued  action. 
The  word  ‘Karmatmanah’  implies,  of  course,  the  Senses.  The  compound  literally  means 
*  the  souls  of  acts,’  i.e.,  those  from  which  acts  flow.—  T. 

%  The  second  line  of  Verse  33  is  read  variously.  The  reading  I  adopt  is  ‘Sukhayushi 
nava  etc..  Kalaratririvagata.’  Kalaratri  is  the  Last  Night  of  the  universe  when  all 
things  are  destroyed*  By  ‘  Siddhi’  is  meant  ascetic  success.  The  understandings  of 
Yogins  are  always  infallible.  —T. 


240 


CH  A  RA  KA  -  SA  MH  /  TA. 


burthen-bearing,  and  long  journeys,  they  who  are  unable  to  digest 
food  they  take  in  consequence  of  the  weakness  of  their  stomachs, 
they  who  have  sustained  injuries  on  their  bodies,  they  who  are 
weak,  they  who  are  old  in  years,  they  who  are  of  tender  age,35 
they  who  are  afflicted  by  thirst  or  diarrhoea  or  deep-seated  pain  in 
the  chest  or  the  abdomen,  they  who  are  labouring  under  Asthma 
and  Hiccup,  they  who  are  emaciated  or  lean,  they  who  have  got  falls 
from  high  places,  they  who  have  received  violent  blows,  they  who 
have  lost  their  reason,  they  who  have  become  fatigued  by  riding  on 
animals  or  cars  or  by  night-keeping,36  and  they  who  have  been  ex¬ 
hausted  by  indulgence  in  wrath  and  grief  and  fear,  should  indulge 
in  sleep  during  day-time.  Verily,  all  these  persons  should,  at 
all  seasons,  indulge  in  sleep  at  day-time.37 

In  consequence  of  the  harmony  being  restored  of  these  the 
constituent  elements  of  the  bodies  of  these  men,  their  strength 
becomes  rennovated.  The  phlegm  (that  results  from  sleep)  causes 
the  growth  of  all  their  limbs,  and  the  period  of  their  life  acquires 
stability.38 

Again  in  the  summer  season,  when  the  wind  also  increases 
in  the  system,  in  consequence  especially  of  the  duration  of  night 
being  reduced,  sleep  at  day-time  is  applauded  in  respect  of  all 
persons  who  become  dry  through  the  Sun’s  Taking.39* 

In  all  other  seasons  except  the  Summer,  sleep  at  day-time 
causes  the  phlegm  and  the  bile  to  be  excited.  Hence  in  seasons 
other  than  Summer,  sleep  at  day-time  is  not  desirable.40 

These  men  should  never  indulge  in  sleep  at  day-time  ;  viz., 
those  that  are  fatty,  those  that  generally  drink  medicated  oils  and 
ghee  (for  correction  of  faults),  those  that  have  phlegmatic  constitu¬ 
tions,  those  that  are  labouring  under  diseases  due  to  excitement  of 
the  phlegm,  and  those  that  are  afflicted  with  poisons.41 

i.  Halimaka,  2,  (jarah-gula,  3.  Staimityam,  4.  Gurugatrata, 


*  Vide  Aphorism  3  in  Lesson  VI  ante. 

1.  Halimaka  is  black  or  malignant  jaundice. 

2.  Cirah-fula  is  acute  or  painful  headache. 

3.  Staimitya  is  rigidity  of  the  body. 

4.  Gurugatrata  is  heaviness  of  the  limbs  or  body. 


CI1A  RAKA  -SA  MH/T A . 


241 


5.  Angamardda,  6.  Agninaca,  7.  Hridaya-praleipa,  8.  £otha,  9- 
Arochaka,  10.  HrillaSa,  li.  Pinasa,  12.  Ardahabhedaka,  13.  Kotharu, 
14.  Pidaka,  15.  Kandu,  16,  Tandra,  17.  Kasa,  18.  diseases  of  the 
Gala,  19.  Smritipramoha,  20,.  Buddhipramoha,  21.  Sangrodha  of 
all  the  ducts,  Pever,  weakness  of  the  senses,  aggravation  of  dis¬ 
orders  already  present  and  due  to  the  action  of  poison  in  the 
system, — these  are  sure  to  afflict  a  man  in  consequence  of  the 
injudicious  indulgence  of  sleep. 

Hence,  the  man  of  wisdom,  after  ascertaining  what  sleep  is 
beneficial  and  what  injurious,  should  have  his  sleep.42-46 

Night-keeping  produces  dryness  in  the  system;  while  sleep 
at  day-time  leads  to  oiliness.  Indulgence  in  sleep  in  a  sitting 
posture,  is  not  productive  of  dryness  or  oiliness.48 

In  the  matter  of  keeping  up  the  body,  sleep  is  regarded  to  be 
productive  of  as  much  happiness  as  the  taking  of  food.  It  may 
be  observed  in  especial  that  corpulency  and  leanness  arise  from 
food  and  sleep*. 4 1 


5.  Angamardda  is  a  general  lassitude  or  langour  of  the  body. 

6.  Agninaca  is  loss  of  the  digestive  fire. 

7.  Hridaya-pralepa  is  a  sensation  of  the  cardiac  region  being  enveloped  with  a 

coating  of  phlegm. 

8.  Cotha  is  Inflamation  or  swelling. 

9.  Arochaka  is  disgust  for  food. 

10.  Hrillasa  is  hiccup. 

11.  Pinasa  is  Inflammatioh  of  the  Schneiderian  membrane,  and  loss  of  smell. 

12.  Arddhavabhedaka  is  tlemicrama. 

13.  Kotharu  or  Kotha  is  urticaria  evanida. 

14.  Pidaka  implies  eruptions  on  the  skin,  of  different  kinds. 
i$.  Kandu  is  Itching. 

16.  Tandra  is  drowsiness. 

17.  Kasa  is  consumption. 

18.  Diseases  of  the  Gala  imply  the  diverse  affections  of  the  throat  and  the  neck. 

Bronehocele,  enlargement  of  the  lymphatic  glands,  &c.,  would  fall  within  it. 

19.  Smriti-pramoha  is  partialor  complete  loss  of  memory. 

20.  Buddhi-pramoha  is  loss  of 'understanding. 

2t.  Sangrodha  of  the  ducts  implies  obstruction  in  the  principal  channels  by  which- 
blood  and  the  other  juices  of  the  body  travel  from  one  part  of  the  system  to 
another.  Strangury,  retention  of  urine  and  stools,  &c.,  would  come  within  it. 
*  I.e.,  the  injudicious  enjoyment  of  food  and  sleep.  —  T. 

30 


242 


CHARA  KA-SAMHITA. 


The  rubbing  of  oils  on  the  body,  the  application  of  unguents 
and  liniments,  baths,  drinking  the  juice  of  animals  that  are 
domesticated  or  living  in  marshy  regions,  eating  food  that  consists 
of  (boiled)  rice,  with  curds  and  milk,  the  administration  of  Oils, 
drinking  wines  and  other  stimulants,  happiness  of  mind,  the  use 
of  such  perfumes  as  are  agreeable  to  the  mind,  the  hearing  of  such 
sounds  as  are  agreeable,  champooing  of  the  limbs,  the  use  of  such 
collyrium  as  is  soothing  to  the  eye,  the  application  of  soothing 
unguents  on  the  head  and  the  face,  the  use  of  well-spread  beds 
and  of  comfortable  rooms,  and  the  advent  of  the  proper  hour, — 
these  soon  bring  that  sleep  which  has  been  dispelled  by  ill¬ 
ness  *48_sa 

The  administration  of  purgatives  and  of  errhines,  vomiting, 
fear,  anxiety,  wrath,  smoking,  physical  exercises  and  efforts, 
hemorrhages,  fasting,  comfortless-  beds,  the  possession  of  the 
quality  of  Sattwa  in  excess,  the  subjugation  of  the  quality  of 
Tamas  (by  the  practice  of  penances), — these  dispel  injurious  sleep 
when  it  is  about  to  come  over  one.f51-52 

These  should  be  known  as  the  causes  of  the  loss  of  sleep,  viz. 
action,  age,  disease,  the  character  of  one’s  constitution,  and  (excit¬ 
ed)  wind.J5'8 


*  ‘Kalastathochitah’  implies-the',uchitah’  or  proper  ‘Kala’  orltime,  for  sleep;  Different 
persons  have  different  times  for  sleep  according  as  they  have  courted  sleep  in  practice. 

‘  Pranashta  yanimittatah’  means  that  sleep  which  has  been  lost  through  any  ‘animittam’ 
or  illness.  If  the  word-  be  taken  as  ‘  nimittatah’,  it  would  yield  the  same  sense.— T. 

f  In  Verses  5r.  and  52,  reference  is  made  to  ‘  Ahitam  nidraprasangam,’  i.e. 
‘Atiyoga-yukta-nidra’  or  that  sleep  which  islin  excess  of  what  is  proper.  In  the  next  Verse, 
reference  is  made  to  the  causes  that  destroy  *  Samayoganidra-  or  the  proper  sleep  of  a 
healthy  man.  For  Sattwa  and  Tamas  vide  note  in  next  page. —  T. 

J  As  said  in  the  previous  note,  reference  is  made  here  to  the-  loss  of  the- proper  sleep 
of  a  healthy  man.  By  action  is  meant  some  important  act  that  fully  engrosses  the  atten¬ 
tion.  By  ‘  Kala’  ’is  meant  old  age,  for  old  men  are  seen  to  sleep  less  than  younger 
persons.  ‘  Vikarah’  would  include  all  diseases.  ‘  Prakriti’  is-  explained  as  ‘  Swabhavah’ 
or  the  nature  of  a  person.  There  are  persons  whose'nature  is  SHch  that  they  sleep  less 
than  others.  By  ‘  Vayu’  is  meant  the  wind  in  an  excited  state.  The  Commentator 
Gangadhara  points  out  that  Susruta  also  assigns  the  same  reasons  for  the  loss  of  a  healthy 
xhan’s  sleep.  The  mention  of  excited  wind,  after  reference  to  disease,  is  due  to 
Jhe  especial  hostility  of  wind  to  sleep. —  T. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


243 


Sleep  arises  from  Tamas,  from  phlegm  also,  from  the  weari¬ 
ness  of  both  mind  and  body,  from  hurts  and  wounds  ;  it  is  induced 
also  by  disease ;  it  arises  also  from  the  very  nature  of  Night.64 

Amongst  these,  that  sleep  which  arises  from  the  nature  of 
Night  is  called  the  Nurse  of  all  creatures.  The  sleep  that  arises 
from  Tamas  is  regarded  as  the  root  of  evil. 

The  sleep  that  arises  from  the  other  causes  is  regarded  as 
due  to  Disease.*66 

Here  occur  some  verses  containing  a  Summary. 

Those  men  that  are  censurable,  those  two  among  them  that  are 
censurable  in  especial,  the  faults  for  which  the  censurable  ones  are 
censured,  the  causes  of  those  faults,  the  medicines  that  should  be  ad¬ 
ministered  to  the  two  censurable  persons,1  the  persons  unto  whom  at 
what  time  sleep  is  beneficial,  and  those  unto  whom  at  what  time  sleep 
is  not  beneficial,  the  medicines  for  excessive  sleep  and  sleepless¬ 
ness,  the  causes  from  which  sleep  arises,2  what  sleep  is  of  what 
kind  or  character,  have  all  been  expounded  by  Punarvasu  in  this 
Lesson  called  Ashtaninditiya.3 

Thus  ends  the  twenty-first  Lesson  called  Ashtaninditiya  in 
the  treatise  of  Agnive5a  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  XXII. 

We  shall  next  expound  the  Lesson  called  Langhana-Vring- 
haniya.  Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.f1 


*  There  are  three  attributes  of  man  viz. ,  Sattwa  (Goodness),  Rajas.  (Passion),  and 
Tamas  (Darkness).  The  first  induces  thoughts  of  Godhead  ;  the  second  leads  to  action 
the  third  is  the  root  of  sleep  and  inactivity  and  ignorance,  &c.  Weariness  of  mind  and 
body  induces  sleep  at  unseasonable  hours.  The  sleep  induced  by  phlegm,  that  induced 
by  weariness  of  mind  and  body,  and  that  induced  by  hurts  and  wounds,  are  all  regarded 
as  due  to  disease.  That  sleep  only  which  is  induced  by  the  nature  of  Night  is  the  Nurse 
of  living  creatures,  being  very  beneficial  in  its  effects. —  T. 

t  The  words  1  Langhana’  and  ‘  Vring-hana'  have  been  clearly  explained  in  course  of 
the  Lesspn.  —  T. 


244 


CH  A  RAN  A  -  SMA  III  TA, 


The  son  of  Atri,  urging  them  to  attend,  addressed  his  six 
foremost  of  disciples  having  Agnive$a  as  their  first  and  all  of 
whom  were  endued  with  penances  and  Vedic  study,  saying, — He 
is  a  true  physician  who  knows  the  time  when  the  administration 
should  be  resorted  to  of  the  courses  of  treatment  called  Langhana, 
Vring-hana,  Rukshana,  Snehana,  Swedana,  and  Stambhana, 
Even  this  (was  what  he  said)  .**-* 

Unto  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  who  had  said  so,  Agnivetja 
said, — O  illustrious  one,  what  is  Langhana,  and  who  are  they  that 
should  be  subjected  to  this  treatment?  What,  is  Vring-hana  and 
who  should  be  subjected  to  it  ?  What  again,  is  Rukshana  and 
who  are  they  that  should  undergo  it?4  Similarly,  what  are  Snehana 
and  Swedana  and  Stambhana,  and  who  are  the  persons  unto  whom 
these  should  be  administered  ?  O  preceptor,  it  behoveth  thee  to 
tell  us  this  !5  It  behoveth  thee  also  to  expound  what  the  indications 
are  of  every  one  of  these  courses  of"  treatment  as  applied  judiciously, 
insufficiently,  and  excessively.f6 

Hearing  these  words  of  Agnivega,  the  preceptor  said, — Any' 
thing  that  lightens  or  attenuates  (the  aggravated  humours  and  altered 
constituents)  in  the  body  has  been  said  to  be  a  Langhana.  That 
which  promotes  nutrition  and  bulk  of  the  body  is  known  as 
Vring-hana.  That  which  brings  about  dryness,  and  roughness  and 
paleness  is  said  to  be1  Rukshana.  That  which  leads  to  secretions 
of  oily  matter,  softness  of  the  body,  and  increase  of  impurities,  is 
said  to  be  Snehana.  Anything  that  produces  perspiration  and  des¬ 
troys  stiffness  and  heaviness  and  sensation  of  cold  is  said  to  be 
Swedana.  That  which  constipates  or  stops  the  motion  of  such 
constituents  of  the  body  as  are  liquid,  restless,  and  endued  with 
motion,  is  said  to  be  Stamhhana.7-9 

*  All  these  technical  words  have  been  explained  in  full  in  course  of  this  Lesson. 
'Urging  them’  is  explained  by  the  Commentators  as  having  reference  to  the  well-known 
custom  of  pupils  never  soliciting  lessons  from  the  preceptor  but  the  latter’s  lecturing 
the  pupils  of  his  own  accord. — T. 

f  ‘  Kritakritativrittanam’  is  explained  as  follows  :  ‘  Kritam’  is  ‘  Samyak  kritam’  ; 
•  Akritam’  is  ‘  Asamyak  or  mithya  kritam’  ;  and  ‘  Ativrittam’  implies  the  »  Atiyoga’  of 
application. — T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHITA. 


245 


Such  things  as  are  light,  warm,  pungent,  not  slimy,  dry,  sub¬ 
tile,  rough,  unstable,  and  hard,  are  generally  Langhana.*10 

Such  things  as  are  heavy,  cooling,  soft,  exceedingly  oily,  gross, 
slimy,  mild  stable,  and  smooth,  are  generally  said  to  be  Vrin- 
ghaoa.t11 

Such  things  as  are  dry,  productive  of  lightness,  pungent,  warm, 
stable,  not  slimy,  and  hard,  are  generally  Rukshana.12 

Such  things  as  are  liquid,  subtile,  stable,  oily,  slimy,  heavy, 
cooling,  not  pungent  or  mild,  and  soft,  are  generally  regarded  as 
Snehana.13 

Such  things  as  are  warm,  pungent,  unstable,  oily,  dry,  subtile, 
liquid,  stable  and  heavy,  are  generally  said  to  be  Swedana.f1* 

Such  things  as  are  regarded  to  be  cooling,  mild,  soft,  smooth, 
dry,  subtile,  liquid,  unstable,  and  light,  are  generally  said  to  be 
Stambhana.16 

The  four  kinds  of  corrective  processes  {viz.,  administration 
of  emetics,  of  purgatives,  of  errhines  or  cerebral  purgatives,  and 
dry  enemata),  as  also  bearing  thirst  and  wind  and  the  heat  of  the 
Sun,  drinking  the  medicines  called  Pachana,  fast,  and  physical  ex¬ 
ercise, — -these  are  all  included  under  Langhana^1 8 

*  Each  of  these  attributes  should  be  well  understood.  ‘  Laghu’  is  light,  in  the  sense 
of  being  easily  digestible.  ‘  Ushna’ is  warm  or  hot,  i.e>,  producing  heat  in  the  body. 

« Tikshna’  is  pungent.  Then  ‘  Vishada’  is  not  slimy.  ‘  Ruksha’  is  productive  of 
dryness  in  the  whole  system.  ‘  Sukshma’  is  subtile,  implying  that  the  drug  itself  is 
minute  and  has  its  operation  on  the  minuter  parts  of  the  physical  organism.  ‘  Kshara,’ 
used  with  reference  to  a  drug,  implies  productive  of  roughness.  ‘  Sara’  means  moving 
or  unstable.  ‘  Kathina’  implies  hard,  the  thing  itself  should  be  so.— T. 

t  It  should  be  noted  that  all  these  attributes  are  the  reverse  of  those  mentioned  in 
the  previous  Verse.  Laghu  has  its  reverse  in  Guru  ;  Ushna  in  Cita  ;  Tikshna  in  Manda  j 
Vishada  in  Pichcchila  ;  Ruksha  in  Snigdha  ;  Sukshma  in  Sthula  ;  Sara  in 
Sthira  ;  Khara  in  Slakshma  ;  and  Kathina  in  Mridu. — T. 

J  The  Commentator  Gangadhara  points  out  that  oily  and  dry  are  opposite,  as  also 
stable  and  unstable.  The  meaning,  of  course,  is  that  either  of  such  things  may  be  taken 
for  the  operation  called  Swedana. — T. 

§  '  Pachana’  is  an  infusion  or  decoction  of  various  drugs  which  promotes  digestion 
or  brings  bad  humours  into  maturity.  The  drugs  employed  are  chiefly  carminatives  or 
gentle  stimuli.— T. 


246 


CM  A  RA  I<A  SA  MH  l  TA . 


Those  persons  that  have  phlegm  and  bile  as  also  blood  and 
impurities  in  excess,  and  those  that  have  got  their  wind  in  an  excited 
or  disordered  state,  as  also  those  that  have  large  bodies  or  strength 
in  excess,  are  fit  for  Langhana  through  the  four  kinds  of  corrective 
processes  (mentioned  above.,)*17 

They  who  are  afflicted  with  diseases  that  are  of  middling 
strength  and  that  have  arisen  from  (disorders  of)  the  phlegm  and 
the  bile,  such  as  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  thoracic  diseases,  choleraic 
diarrhoea,  tympanites,  fever,  suppression  of  stools  and  urine,  heavi¬ 
ness  of  the  limbs,  eructations,  hiccup,  nausea  or  disgust  for  food; 
and  other  diseases  of  the  kind,  are  generally  treated  at  the  outset, 
by  the  wise  physician,  with  the  aid  of  Pachana.t18-19 

After  this  (it  should  be  stated  that)  when  persons  get  the  dis¬ 
eases  mentioned  above  in  a  weak  form,  then  those  diseases  of 
theirs  should  be  subjugated  by  means  of  fasts  and  by  endurance  of 
thirst  without  slaking  it.20 

All  diseases  that  are  of  middling  strength  should  be  subju¬ 
gated  by  exercise  and  exposure  to  the  sun  (good  light)  and  (fresh) 
air.  As  regards  strong  men  again,  what  difficulty  is  there  in  sub¬ 
jugating  their  diseases,  when  these  are  weak,  by  the  same  means  ?21 

For  those  persons  who  have  got  skin-diseases  or  who  are  suffer¬ 
ing  under  the  urinary  affections  known  by  the  name  of  Meha,  or 
who  have  become  oily  (in  consequence  of  the  administration  of 
Oils),  or  whose  systems  have  become  full  of  impurities,  or  who 
have  undergone  the  administration  of  Vring-hana,  or  who  have  got 
diseases  due  to  disorders  of  the  wind,  the  administration  of 
Langhana  has  been  laid  down,  in  the  season  of  dew.Jaa 

Unpierced  by  envenomed  arrows,  undiseased,  and  obtained 
from  full-grown  animals,  the  flesh  of  such  deer  and  fish  and  fowl 
as  range  of  their  free  will  in  regions  adapted  to  their  own  natures, 
is  said  to  be  Vringhana.23 

*  The  ‘  Vhjuddhibhib’  here  js  the  same  as  the  ‘  San9uddhih’  of  the  previous 
Verse.- T. 

t  See  note  in  p.  245  ante ,  under  Verse  16.—  T. 

$  For  Langhana  see  Verses  10  and  16  ante  of  this  Lesson.— TV 


CM  A  RA  RA-SA  M  HIT  A. 


247. 


Those  that  have  lost  their  vitality,  those  that  have  received 
Wounds,  those  that  are  lean  or  emaciated,  those  that  are  old,  those 
that  are  weak,  those  that  walk  long  distances  every  day,  and  those 
that  indulge  in  sexual  congress  and  drink  (stimulants)  every  day, 
have  been  said  to  deserve  Vring-hana.24 

For  those  men  that  have  been  reduced  or  wasted  by  such 
diseases  as  Consumption  and  Piles  and  afflictions  of  the  Grahani, 
the  juice,  rendered  light  (by  preparation),  of  the  flesh  of  carni¬ 
vorous  animals  is  a  Vring-hana  (that  operates  quickly).*2® 

Baths,  gentle  rubbing  of  the  body  (with  medicated  oils),  sleep, 
honey  and  other  sweets,  oily  enemata,  sugar,  and  milk  and  ghee, 
know,  are  Vring-hanas  for  all  persons.26 

The  use  of  such  things  as  are  pungent,  bitter,  and  of  astrin¬ 
gent  taste,  incontinence  with  respect  to  women,  and  the  use  of 
cakes  of  mustard  seeds  and  sesame  after  the  oil  has  been  pressed 
out  of  them,  of  butter  milk,  and  of  honey  and  other  sweets,  cons¬ 
titute  that  which  is  called  Rukshana.f27 

Those  diseases  which  are  characterised  by  excess  of  secre¬ 
tions,  those  which  are  caused  by  violent  excitement  of  the  faults, 
those  diseases  that  have  their  seats  in  the  vital  parts  of  the  body. 
Rheumatism  of  the  thigh,  and  such  other  afflictions,  deserve,  it  has 
been  said,  the  administration  of  Rukshanas.28 

What  the  Oils  are  and  who  the  persons  are  unto  whom  Oils 
should  be  administered,  what  the  different  kinds  are  of  Sweda  and 
who  the  persons  are  unto  whom  they  should  be  administered,  have 
all  been  mentioned  by  me  in  detail  in  the  Lessons  called  respec¬ 
tively  ‘That  on  Snehas’  and  ‘  That  on  Swedas’29 

Such  things  as  are  liquid,  minute,  unstable  (moving),  such 
things  as  produce  the  sensation  of  cold,  and  such  as  are  agreeable 
or  bitter  or  astringent  to  the  taste,  are  all  called  Stambharra.f30 

*  I  follow  the'  Commentator  Gangadhara  in  adding  the  words  enclosed  withw 
paranthises.— T. 

f  For  Rukshana  see  Verses  8  and  12  ante  of  this  Lesson.  —  T. 

%  For  Stambhana  see  Verses  8'  and  15  ante  of  this  Lesson.  —  T, 


248 


CHAR  A  K  A-S  AM  Hi  TA. 


Such  men  as  are  scorched  by  (excess  of)  bile  or  salts  or  fire, 
such  as  are  afflicted  by  vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  of  by  poison  or 
the  excessive  administration  of  Sweda,  and  others  Under  similar 
circumstances,  deserve  the  administration  of  the  treatment  called 
Rukshana. 

When  wind,  Urine,  and  stools  are  passed  (freely),  when  the 
body  becomes  light,  when  the  thorax,  the  eructations,  and  the 
throat  become  purified,  when  dulness  and  exhaustion  disappear, 
when  perspiration  shows  itself,  when  liking  for  food  returns,  when 
hunger  and  thirst  arise  together,  and  when  the  mind  becomes 
cheerful,  it  should  then  be  held  that  the  Langhana  desirable  to  be 
observed  has  been  properly  observed.*32-33 

A  sensation  as  if  all  the  joints  are  broken,  . pain  in  all  the 
body,  cough,  dryness  of  the  mouth,  loss  of  appetite,  disgust  for 
food,  thirst,  weakness  of  the  ears  and  eyes,  34  continued  indistinct¬ 
ness  of  mind  and  error,  upward  motion  of  the  wind  (causing 
hiccup,  asthmatic  breath,  &c.),  darkness  of  heart,  loss  of  the 
strength  of  the  fire  in  the  body, — these  will  happen  if  Langhana 
becomes  excessive")*38 

Strength  and  consciousness  of  nourishment  of  growth,  and 
divestment  of  all  those  faults  that  attach  to  leanness  or  emacia¬ 
tion,  are  the  indications  of  a  judicious  administration  of  Vrin£- 
hana.  If  Vring-hana  becomes  excessive,  the  result  is  corpulency.):3 0 

The  indications  of  judicious  and  excessive  Langhana  are  also 
those  of  judicious  and  excessive  Rukshana. 

When  those  diseases  that  have  been  said  to  require  Stam- 
bhana  have  been  subjugated  and  the  patient  succeeds  in  regain-  1 

*  ‘When  the  thorax,  the  eructations,  and  the  throat  become  purified,’  i.  e.,  when 
there  is  no  pain  in  the  thorax  and  it  becomes  freed  from  all  phlegmatic  secretions,  when 
the  eructations  do  not  possess  any  kind  of  disagreeable  smell,  and  when  the  throat  be¬ 
comes  free  from  phlegm.  For  Langhana  see  Verses  8  and  ifi  ante. _ T. 

f  Loss  of  appetite  here  implies  its  loss  after  its  first  appearance.  ‘  Hridi  tamas  ’ 
Implies  darkness  of  heart  or  cheerlessness.  Loss  of  the  strength  of  the  fire  in  the  body 
implies  loss  of  vital  heat. — T. 

t  ‘Pushtyupalambha’  is  ‘Poshanarambha-jnanam. — T. 


NOTICE. 


The  English  translation  of  Charaka-SamhitcL  will 
be  issued  in  successive  fascicules  of  4  forms,  Royal 
octavo,  each;  12  fascicules  will  be  issued  every  year. 
Under  favorable  circumstances,  the  number  of  fasci¬ 
cules  or  the  number  of  forms  in  each  fascicule  may  be 
increased.  For  subscribers  in  India  paying  in  advance 
the  charge  is  Rs.  32  for  the  whole  work.  For  sub¬ 
scribers  in  Europe  and  America,  the  charge  is  £ 3  in 
advance  post  free.  The  price  for  each  part  is 
one  Rupee.  The  arrear  rate  is  Rs.  40  (in  India)  pay¬ 
able  (if  subscribers  wish)  in  instalments  of  Rs.  10  each. 
Rv'.mittances  to  be  made  to  the  Publisher,  200,  Corn¬ 
wallis  Street,  Calcutta,  by  drafts  on  Indian  Banks  or 
Postal  money-orders. 


The  following  publications  relating  to  Hindu  Medical 
Science  may  be  had  at  No.  200,  Cornwallis'  Street, 
Calcutta ,  India. 


1.  Charaka-Samhita  in  original,  with  Chakrapanidat 
ta’s  Commentary  ;  edited  by  Pandit  Avinash 
Chandra  Kaviratna  (published  in  Devanagara 

.  character  in  successive  fascicules}  Price  Rs.  20 
in  advance. 

2.  Susruta-Samhita  (in  original)  with  Dallanacharya’s 
Commentary,  edited  by  Pundit  Avinash  Chandra 
Kaviratna  (published  in  Devanagara  character  in 
successive  fascicules).  Price  Rs.  19  in  advance. 

3.  Bengali  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  with  the 
original  text  (complete)  in  the  Bengali  character. 
Price  Rs.  12. 

4.  Hindi  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive 
fascicules).  Price  Rs.  16  in  advance, 

5.  Bengali  translation  of  Susruta-Samhita  (published 
in  successive  fascicules).  Price  Rs.  10  in  advance. 

6.  Hindi  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive 
fascicules).  Price  Rs.  15  in  advance. 

7.  Chikitsa  Sammilani ,  (a  monthly  medical  journal 
in  Bengali).  Subscription  in  advance  for  one  year 
Rs,  3-6  ;  for  the  poorer  classes,  Rs.  2-6.  (Back 
volumes  for  seven  years  may  be  had  for  Rs.  21,  or 
Rs.  3  for  each  volume  embracing  12  numbers.) 


PART  IX. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


Published  by 

AVI  MASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  of  Susruta  Samhita 

(in  original)  WITH  COMMENTARIES;  Bengali  AND 
Hindi  translator  of  Charaka  Samhita  and 
of  Susruta  Samhita  ;  editor  of  Chikitsa- 
Sammilani  (  Medical  Journal  in 
Bengali) ;  Practitioner  of 
the  Hindu  System 
of  Medicine, 

&c„  &c„  &c. 


Calcutta ; 

Printed  by  D.  C.  Dass  &  Co., 
“Corinthian  Press,”  33,  New  China  Bazar 
and 

Published  at 
200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved. ) 


From  the  Annual  Address  Delivered  to  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal 

BY 

The  Hon’ble  Sir  Charles  Alfred  Elliott,  k.c.s.i., 
Lieutenant-Governor  of  Bengal. 

Medical  Literature. 

Pundit  Avinash  Chundra  Kaviratna’s  translation  of  Charaka- 
Samhita  is  progressing  and  has  been  found  full  of  interesting  matter. 
It  has  been  very  favourably  received  by  European  scholars.  The  work  is 
a  most  difficult  one,  involving  the  scientific  identification  of  the  Sanscrit 
names  of  hundreds  of  drugs.  As  I  have  elsewhere  referred  at  length  to 
Dr.  Hcernle’s  edition  of  the  Bower  M.S.,  I  shall  content  myself  here  with 
merely  drawing  attention  to  it  as  an  important  contribution  to  Indian 
Medical  history. 

From  Mr.  G.  H.  Grierson,  Magistrate  and  Collector  of  Howrah. 

Magistrate’s  House, 
Howrah,  10th  February,  1894. 

My  Dear  Sir, — Thanks  for  the  8th  fasciculus  of  Charalca.  I  wish 
that  other  translators  had  your  epthusiasm  and  the  love  of  accuracy 
which  distinguishes  your  work. 

Yours  sincerely, 
(Sd.)  G.  H.  Grierson. 

From  Dr..  Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.A.,  M.D., 

German  town,  Philadelphia. 
Dear  Sir,  *  *  *  * 

If  one  were  to  compare,  for  instance,  the  mortality  from  cholera  and 
similar  diseases,  under  the  ancient  and  under  modern  treatment,  I  am  sure 
one  would  find  most  to  blush  for  in  the  statistics.  The  world,  so  far  as 
the  treatment  of  disease  is  concerned,  needs  enlightenment,  and  I  would 
rather  trust  the  ancient  Hindu  practice  than  the  allopathic  practice  of 
what  we  are  wont  to  term  this  enlightened  age  *  *  ■  *  *  * 

Yours  sincerely, 

(Sd.)  Geo.  H  Clark,  M.A.,  M.D. 


From  Dr.  Adolf  G.  Vogeler,  M.D.,  Editor,  Western  Druggist, 
Chicago,  U.S.A. 

My  Dear  Sir,  *  *  *  * 

Charka-Samhita  is  a  revelation  to  me.  Although  not  particularly  a 
student  of  Oriental  literature,  I  have  always  had  a  profound  respect  for 
ancient  Hindus,  know  of  their  attainments  and  philosonhical  development 
from  general  reading.  However,  I  could  never  have  imagined,  without 
access  to  this  translation,  how  far  advanced  in  civilization  was  that  race 
so  many  centuries  ago,  how  accurately  those  men  had  observed  nature, 
and  how  acutely  and  correctly  they  reasoned.  It  is  truly  wonderful.  Much, 
of  course,  of  what  is  written  seems  mere  chaff  or  our  mind  is  incapable 
of  coming  into  rapport  with  the  metaphysical  mind  of  the  Hindu  ;  but 
studying  through  these  chapters  may  well  result  iu  taking  out  of  us  of 
the  present  day  much  of  the  self-conceit  we  love  to  indulge  in. 

*  *  *  * 

Yery  truly  yours, 

(Sd.)  Adolf  G.  Vogeler, 
Editor,  Western  Druggist. 


ABSTRACT 


OP 

THE  CONTENTS  OF  THE  NINTH  FASCICULUS. 

In  Lesson  XXIII  are  explained  the  incidents  relating  to  Santarpana  or  indulgence 
in  food  and  acts  that  is  both  sedative  and  nutritive. 

The  diseases  that  arise  from  such  indulgence  are  enumerated,  such  as  diabetes, 
Itches,  &c. 

The  treatment  is  then  laid  down  that  is  advisable  for  persons  afflicted  with  diseases 
s:  'due  to  such  indulgence, 

The  remedies  in  the  form  of  indulgence,  in  excess,  in  food  and  practices  which  are 
the  reverse  of  Santarpana,  are  called  Apatarpana. 

The  diseases  due  to  Apatarpana  are  then  enumerated,  together  with  the  -remedies 
that  are  advisable  to  be  administered. 

Lesson  XXIV  treats  of  the  nature  and  characteristics  of  the  Blood. 

What  generates  pure  blood  is  explained. 

It  is  pure  blood  that  brings  about  strength  and  complexion  and  the  happiness  of 
health. 

How  the  blood  becomes  impure. 

The  diseases  that  are  due  to  impure  blood  are  enumerated. 

The  treatment  is  expounded  of  diseases  due  to  impure  or  vitiated  blood. 

The  respective  indications;  of  blood  when  it  is  vitiated  by  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm, 
-  separately  or  iiV  combination. 

-  The  indications  of  pure  blood. 

Vitiated  blood  leads  to  Insanity,  Swoons,  and  Apoplexy.  The  indications  of  these 
diseases  are  set  forth  in  detail. 

The  treatment  to  be  followed  in  these  respective  diseases. 

Lesson  XXV  is  devoted  to  the  discussion  of  the  various  theories  of  the  creation  of 
man.  This  discussion  contains  the  essence  of  the  different  systems  of  Hindu  philosophy 
in  respect  of  the  cosmogony  of  the  world  and  living  creatures.  The  objections  to  each 
system  are  also  explained. 

The  unutility  of  such  discussion  is-  shown. 

In  The  use  of  beneficial  food  is  the  cause  of  the  growth  of  a  person  ;  while  that  of 
food  that  is  injurious  is  the  cause  of  disease. 

\Vhat  constitutes  beneficial  food  and  what  constitutes  food  thafis  injurious. 

The  regulations  about  diet  are  set  forth  in'detail. 

The  different  classifications  of  food  depending  upon  different  considerations. 

A  detailed  enumeration  of  the  qualities  of  those  substances  that  are  used  as  food. 

.  The  observations  on  diet,  it  will  be  seen,  are  extremely  interesting. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


249 


mg  his  strength,  he  is  said  to  have  undergone  judicious  Stam¬ 
bhana.*37 

Paleness  of  complexion,  paralytic  state  of  the  limbs,  lockjaw, 
suppression  of  stools  and  of  the  free  action  of  the  heart,  are  the  in¬ 
dications  of  one  who  has  undergone  excessive  Stambhana;38 

The  indications  have  thus  been  laid  down,  in  brief,  of  the  six 
(methods  or  processes,  viz.,  Langhana,  &c.,)  when  judiciously 
applied.  Mention  has  also  been  made  of  the  diseases  in  which 
they  are  resorted  to  as  correctives,  as  also  of  the  indications  of 
failure  to  restore  the  faults  to  harmony  (if  Langhana,  &c.,  be  not 
sufficient)  or  of  the  aggravation  of  those  faults  (if  Langhana,  &c., 
be  excessive).t39 

Thus  have  the  six  (processes)  been  expounded  which,  as 
methods  of  treatment,  are  sufficient  for  all  diseases.  If  consider- 
tions  of  measure  and  time  be  observed,  they  prove  successful  in 
the  cure  of  all  curable  diseases.40 

In  conseqnence  of  the  innumerable  varieties  of  combination 
under  which  the  faults  manifest  themselves  the  methods  of  treat¬ 
ment  also  are  combined.  However  combined,  they  can  never 
transcend  their  sixfold  character,  even  as  the  (causes  of  disease, 
viz.,)  wind  and  the  rest,  however  combined,  cannot  transcend 
their  threefold  character. J41 


*  For  Rukshana  see  Verses  8  and  12  ante  ;  for  Stambhana  see  Verses  9  and  15  and 
3t  ante.- T. 

f  ‘  Tadaushadhanam  ’  means,  as  explained  by  Gangadhara, 1  Tat  aushadham  yesham, 
i.  e„  Vyadhinam  that  is,  those  diseases  in  which  Langhana  &c.  are  correctives.  ‘Dha- 
tunam  ’  here  implies  the  faults,  viz.,  wind,  bile  and  phlegm.  ‘  Asama’  is  ‘  a?anti  ’  in 
case  of  Langhana,  &c.,  being  insufficient. — T. 

t  The  methods  of  treatment  are  combined,  i.  e.,  Langhana  may  be  combined  with 
Stambhana,  or  Stambhana  with  Vrimhana,  or  Vrimhana  with  Snehana  or  Swedana,  &c. 
However  combined,  those  methods  cannot  transcend  the  six  original  methods  mentioned 
in  this  Lesson.  The  illustration  is  well-chosen.  Diseases  are  innumerable  and  are 
caused  by  diverse  permutations  and  combinations  of  attenuation  or  aggravation  of  the 
three  faults.  However  innumerable,  they  can  never  transcend  the  threefold  faults. — T. 


32 


250 


CHARAKA-SAMH 1 7  A. 


Thus  have  the  six  methods,  in.  pursuance  to  which  all  treat¬ 
ment  has  been  introduced,  been  expounded  in  this  Lesson  on 
Langhana  (and  the  rest)  by  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri,  agreeably  to 
the  questions  (of  his  disciple  Agniveca-)2 

Thus  ends  the  twenty-second  Lesson  called  Langhana-Vrim- 
haniya  in  the  treatise  of  Agniveca  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


lesson  xx'irr. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  called  Santarpaniyav 
Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.*1 

One  who  gratifies  oneself  with  such  things  as  are  oily,  or 
sweet,  or  heavy,  or  slimy,  or  with  new  rice,  or  new  spirits  and  wines, 
or  meat  of  aquatic  animals  or  of  those  living  in  marshy  regions, 
or  with  the  juice  of  the  cow  (milk),  or  with  cakes  made  with  raw 
sugar  or  other  ingredients,  taken  to  excess,  one  that  is  averse 
to  all  exertion,  or  that  indulges  in  sleep  at  day-time,  and  that  habi¬ 
tually  uses  good  beds  and  seats  and  other  comforts,  3  gets  numerous 
diseases  in  consequence  of  such  indulgence,  at  once  sedative  and 
nutritive,  in  food  and  acts,  called  Tarpana. 

Those  diseases  are  diabetes,  Itches,  eruptions  on  the  body, 
urticaria  evanida,  anaemia  and  jaundice,  fever,  4  the  diverse  varie¬ 
ties  of  skin-diseases  (commonly  called  leprosy),  indigestion  and 
the  other  diseases  born  of  it  (such  as  diarrhoea,  cholera),  stran¬ 
gury  or  suppression  of  urine,  disgust  for  food,  drowsiness  and 
procrastination,  loss  of  virility,  corpulency,  inactivity,  heaviness  of 
the  body,  6  stoppage  of  the  ducts  of  the  different  senses,  stupe¬ 
faction  of  the  understanding  or  the  mind,  lassitude  or  enervation 
inducing  a  dreaming  wakefulness,  and  swellings  or  inflammations. 


The  meaning  of  the  word  Santarpana  will  abundantly  appear  from  the  follow- 


CHaRAKA-SAMHITA.  251 

and  other  diseases  of  the  kind,  unless  the  person  soon  undergoes 
treatment  for  prevention  of  the  same.8* 

For  such  men  have  been  laid  down  the  administration  of 
emetics,  and  purgatives,  blood-letting,  physical  exertion,  fasts,  the 
different  kinds  of  smoking,  the  diverse  methods  of  Swedana,  eating 
chebulic  myrobalans  (reduced  to  powder  and)  mixed  with  honey, 
and  use,  generally,  of  food  that  is  dry,  as  also  the  application  of 
all  those  powders  and  plasters  that  have  been  laid  down  as  des¬ 
tructive  of  Itches  and  urticaria  evanida.7"8 

The  decoction,  in  water,  of  the  triple  fruit,  Aragbadha  {a), 
Patha  ( b ),  Saptap'arna  (c),  with  Vatsaka(«?),  Musta  (e),  and  Nimva  (f), 
with  Madana  ( g ),  should  be  drunk.9  With  the  aid  of  this,  admin¬ 
istered  in  proper  measure  and  at  the  proper  time,  Diabetes  and  the 
other  diseases  arising  from  Santarpana  (indulgence  in  sedative  and 
nutrive  food  and  practices)  are  sure  to  disappear  from  those 
persons  that  have  recourse  to  it.l0t 

Musta  (A),  Aragbadha  (t),  Patha  (/),  the  triple  fruit  (k), 


*  By  indulging  in  such  food  and  such  acts  are  are  both  sedative  and  nutritive,  a 
person  incurs  the  risk  of  catching  the  several  diseases  idicated.  *  Kushtha’  has  many 
varieties,  such  as  Leucoderma,  Psorsiasis,  Furuncle,  &c.  Though  ‘  Kushtha’ is  different 
from  tubercular  Leprosy,  yet  it  is  commonly  taken  as  a  kind  of  leprosy  whose  action 
is  confined  to  the  skin  without  being  deep. — T. 

a.  Cassia  fistula,  Linn  ;  syn.  Cathartocarpus  fistula,  Pers. 

b.  Cissampelos  hernandifolia,  Linn  ;  syn.  Stephania  hernandifolia,  Walp , 

■c.  A  Istonia  scholaris ;  syn,  Echites  scholaris,  Roxb. 

d.  Otherwise  called  Indrayava.  The  seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica,  Wall. 

e.  Cyperus  rotundas,  Linn. 

f  Melia  Azadirachta,  Linn  ;  syn.  Azadirachta  Indica,  fiuss, 

g.  Randia  ditmetorum,  Lamk.  Amongst  these,  the  exudation  of  a,  the  bark  of 
b  and  c,  and  /,  and  the  fruits  of  d  and  g,  and  e  by  itself,  are  taken.  AH  these  are  boileif 
in  water  and  the  decoction  is  obtained. — T. 

+  The  decoction  here  specified  is  an  emetic.  The  triple  fruit  consists  of  the. 
Chebulic,  the  Emblic,  and  the  Belleric  myrobalans. 

h.  Vide  note  e  above. 

i.  Vide  note  a  above. 

j.  Vide  note  b  above. 

k.  Vide  note  +  above. 


252 


CHAJRAKA-SMAfilTA 


Devadaru  (a),  Afwadangshtra  (6),  Khadira  (c),  Nimva  ( d ),  Haridra 
(e),  the  bark  of  Vatsaka  (f),11 — the  infusion  of  these,  according  to 
the  strength  of  the  disease,  one  should  drink  every  morning.  By 
this,  one  is  sure  to  be  freed  from  the  diseases  due  to  Santarpana 
(indulgence  in  sedative  and  nutritive  food  arid  acts.).1? 


With  these,  accompanied  by  oil,  and  administered  for  rubbing 
as  Udvartana  or  Udgharshana  or  for  baths,  all  faults  of  the  skin 
become  cured. 13^ 

Kushtha  (g),  Gomedaka  (Ji),  Assafoedita,  the  bones  of  the  crane, 
the  three  Ushans  (*),  Vacha  (/),  Vrishaka  (k),  small,  cardamoms, 
A9wadangshtra  (/),  Kharahva  ( m ),  A9mabhedika  («),  mixed  with 
butter-milk  or  whey  or  with  the  sour  juice  obtained  from  Vadara 
(o),  if  drunk,  cures  strangury  and  diabetes.1  E- 


a.  Cedrus  deodara  ;  syn.  Pinus  deodara ,  Roxb. 

b.  Called  also  Gokhuri.  Tributes,  terrestris,  Linn ;  syn.  Tributes  lanuginosus, 

c.  A,cacia  Catechu ;  syn.  Mimosa  Catechu,  Linn. 

d.  Vide  note/p.  35-t 

e.  Circuma  tonga ,  Roxb. 

f.  Halarrhena  antidysenterica,  Wall ;  syn.  Echites  antidysenterica,  Roxb. 

*  Udvartana  is  rubbing  after  the  body  has  been  previously  rubbed  with  oil.  Ud-. 
gharshana  is  rubbing  without  the  body  having  been  previously  rubbed  with  oil.  The 
oil  referred  to  in  this  is  the  oil  of  mustard  seeds. — T. 

g.  Saussurea  auriculata;  syn.  Aflotaxis  auriculata. 

h.  The  Commentators  speak  of  it  as  a  kind  of  gem  or  precious  stone. 

i.  The  three  Ushanas  are  dry  ginger,  Piper  longttm,  Linn,  and  Piper  nigrum , 
Linn,  or  black  pepper. 

j.  Acorus  calamus,  Linn. 

k.  Vrishaka  is  otherwise  .called  Vasaka  ;  it  is  Justicia  Adhatoda,  Roxb;  syn, 
Adhatoda  Vasica,  Nees. 

l.  Called  also  Gokhuri ;  vide  note  b  above. 

m.  Kharahva  is,  as  explained  by  Gangadhara,  the  Ajamoda  of  Khorasan.  PimpU 
nella  involucrata  :  syn,  Apte’n  involucratum,  Roxb. 

n.  Otherwise  called  Pashanabhedika.  In  Bengali,  Patharchur,  Coleus  A mboini 
pis,  Linn;  syn.  Coleus  aromaticus,  Benth, 

0.  Zixyphus  Jujuba, 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  M  HIT  A. 


253 


The  diseases  beginning  with  Diabetes  (that  have  been  mentioned 
as  due  to  Santarpana  (indulgence  in  sedative  and  nutritive  food  and 
practices)  are  cured  by  the  administration  of  Chebulic  myrobalans 
(reduced  to  powder)  mixed  writh  butter-milk,  or  of  the  (infusion  of 
the)  triple  fruit  mixed  with  butter-milk,  or  of  the  spirits  known  by 
the  name  of  Arishta.16 

The  Mantha  of  the  three  Ushans  {viz.,  dry  ginger,  Piper  longum, 
and  Piper  nigrum),  the  triple  fruit  ( viz.,  the  three  myrobalans, 
i,e„  the  Chubulic,  the  Emblic,  and  the  Belleric),  honey,  Krimighna, 
with  Ajamoda,  drenched  with  the  infusion  of  Aquilaria  Agallocba, 
and  powdered  barley  and  Ghee,  is  beneficial  in  diseases  due  to 
Santarpana  or  indulgence  in  sedative  and  nutritive  food  and 
practices.17*. 

Dry  ginger.  Piper  longum,  and  Piper  nigrum,  the  seeds  of 
Vidanga  and  Sigru,  (a),  the  triple  fruit  [viz.,  the  Chebulic,  Emblic, 
and  Belleric  myrobalans),  Katurohini  ( b ),  the  two  varieties  of 
Vrihafi  ( c ),  the  two  varieties  of  Haridra  ( d ),  Patha  ( e ),  Ativisha  if) 
Sthira  (g),  Assafoqdita,  the  roots  of  &evuka  ( h ),  Yamani  (i), 


*  Krimighna  is  otherwise  called  Vidanga.  It  is  Embelia  Ribes,  Burnt  ;  syn.  Em¬ 
belia  glandulifera,  Wight.  It  is  called  Krimighna  owing  to  its  seeds  being  endued 
with  anthelmintic  properties.  Loha  is  otherwise  called  Aguru.  It  is,  of  course,  the 
Aquilaria  Agallocha.  As  to  Mantha,  it  is  prepared  in  the  following  way  : — Saklubhih 
Sarpishabhyaktaih  Citavaripariplutaih,  Ndtyachccha,  ndtisandrafcha  mantha  ityabhi- 
dhiyate  ;  i.e.,  the  infusion  is  to  be  taken,  with  cold  water,  and  it  should  be  mixed  with 
flour  of  barley  and  ghee  ;  and  it  should  be  neither  very  thin  nor  thick. — T. 

a.  Vidanga,  as  already  explained,  is  Embelia  Ribes.  Sigru  is  Moringa  pterygos. 
perma  ;  syn.  Hyperanthera  Moringa,  Willd. 

b.  Otherwise  called  Katuka  or  Picorrhiza  Kurroa,  Royle. 

c.  The  two  varieties  of  Vrihati  are  i.  Solatium  Indicum,  Linn,  and  2.  Solanutn 
Xanthocarpum,  Schrad.,  syn.  Solanum  Jacquinii,  Willd. 

g.  The  two  varieties  of  Haridra  are  i,  Circiima  longa,  Roxb,  and  Berberis  Asiatics, 

e.  Cissampelos  hernandifolia,  Linn. 

f.  A  coni  turn  heterophyllum.  Wall. 

a.  Desmodium gangeticum  ;  syn.  Hedysarum  gangelicum,  Linn. 

h.  Called  also  Kemuka.  Coitus  speciosus,  Linn. 

j.  Ptyrhotis  Ajouian  ;  syn.  Ligusticum  Ajowan,  Plan. 


254  CH  A  RA  KA  -SA MHITA. 

Dhauya  (a),  Ciiitraka  (6),  Sauvarchala  ( c ),  Ajaji  (d),  and  Havusha 
(tf) — these  should  all  be  pounded  or  reduced  to  powder.18-10 

Take  a  quantity  of  this  powder,  and  take  as  much  of  the  oil 
of  sesame  and  ghee  and  honey,  each  ;  then  take  of  the  flour  of  fried 
barley  as  much  as  represents  sixteen  times  the  measure  of  each  of 
the  above.  Make  of  all  these  a  (dry)  sedative,  and  drink  it.20  By 
the  use  of  this  medicine,  the  diseases  that  arise  from  indulgence 
in  sedative  and  nutritive  food  and  practices,  become  allayed,  such 
as  diabetes,  the  different  varieties  of  Leprosy,  piles,  aggravated 
Jaundice,21  spleen,  anaemia,  swellings  and  inflammations,  strangury, 
disgust  for  food,  thoracic  diseases,  phthisis,  consumption,  asthma, 
enlargement  of  the  glands  of  the  neck,  22  worms  (in  the  system), 
the  faults  of  the  Grahani,  (abnormal)  whiteness  of  the  skin,  and 
excessive  corpulency.  Verily,  the  use  of  such  a  medicine  causes 
the  digestive  fire  to  blaze  up,  and  enhances  the  memory  and  under¬ 
standing.23* 

One  who  is  habituated  to  physical  exercise  and  exertion,  who 
eats  only  after  proper  digestion,  and  whose  food  consists  of  barley 
and  wheat,  becomes  freed  from  Corpulency  and  from  all  those 
faults  that  are  due  to  indulgence  in  food  and  practices  included 
under  Santarpana.24 

The  diseases  arising  from  indulgence  in  food  and  practices 
included  under  Santarpana,  as  also  the  remedies  in  the  form  of  in¬ 
dulgence  in  the  reverse  thereof  and  included  under  Apatarpana, 
have  thus  been  spoken  of.  After  this  we  shall  speak  of  the  diseases 


a.  Oryza  saliva,  Linn. 

b.  Plumbago  Zeylanica,  Linn. 

c.  A  kind  of  salt  ;  supposed  to  be  Natron,  Vide  note  in  p.  9  ante. 

d.  Cummin  seeds  (of  the  smaller  variety). 

e.  Called  also  Hapusha.  They  are  black  stalks  like  those  of  black  pepper,  possess¬ 
ed  of  an  aromatic  smell. 

*  There  are  two  kinds  of  Santarpana,  viz.,  the  oily  and  the  dry.  The  preparation 
referred  to  in  18  to  20  is  dry  Santarpana.  It  cures  those  diseases  that  arise  form  the  use 
•f  oily  Santarpana.  This  should  be  borne  in  mind  for  understanding  20  and  21.— T. 


CHA  RAKA  SA  M  HIT  A . 


255 


that  arise  from  indulgence  in  food  and  practices  included  under 
Apatarpana,  together  with  their  remedies.*20 

The  loss  of  the  digestive  fire,  of  strength  and  complexion, 
of  Ojas  and  vital  seed  and  flesh,  fever  with  consumption  as  a  super¬ 
vening  malady,  pain  in  the  sides,  disgust  for  food,26  weakness  of 
hearing,  lunacy,  delirium,  pain  in  the  cardiac  region,  suppression  of 
stools  and  urine,  pain  in  the  Calf,  the  thigh,  and  the  lower  part  of 
the  spine,22  a  sensation  like  that  of  the  breaking  of  all  the  joints, 
and  all  other  diseases  born  of  (disorders  of  the)  wind,  as  also  those 
that  spring  from  the  wind  when  it  has  an  upward  course, — all  these 
ailments  are  generated  by  (injudicious)  fasts  or  abstention  from 
Tarpana.28 

Those  medicines  which  have  been  mentioned  as  falling  within 
oily  Santarpana,  and  which  are  capable  of  curing  these  diseases, 
and  which  may  be  taken  (by  the  patient)  without  injury,  are  desir¬ 
ed  by  physicians  possessed  of  knowledge  as  the  medicines  that 
should  be  prescribed  for  the  diseases  mentioned  above.f2® 

One  that  has  been  recently  reduced  by  fast  soon  gains  in 
strength  by  indulging  in  Tarpana.  In  the  case  of  one,  however,  that 
has  been  reduced  by  disease,  Santarpana  does  no  good  unless 
practised  slowly  and  for  sometime.  As  regards  its  efficacy,  how¬ 
ever,  (if  practised  judicously),  even  one  that  has  been  reduced  for 
a  long  time  grows  and  gains  through  it.30 

As  regards  him  that  has  been  weakened  for  a  long  time,  medi¬ 
caments  should  be  administered  by  the  physician  without  haste 


*  It  should  be  noted  here,  as  pointed  out  by  Kaviraja  Gangadhara,  that  Apatar- 
pana  here  implies  indulgence  in  food  and  practices  the  reverse  of  what  is  meant  by  San 
tarpana  of  the  oily  kind,  and  not  the  reverse  of  every  kind  of  Santarpana.  In  stating 
what  the  diseases  are  that  arise  from  Apatarpana,  it  is  this  kind  of  Apatarpana  that  is 
meant.  A  mere  abstention  from  Santarpana  is  not  Apatarpana  as  generally  understood. 
This  will  appear  more  clearly  later  on. — T 

t  Having  stated  the  diseases  due  to  injudicious  fasts,  their  treatment  is  indicated 
here.  Those  medicines  which  fall  within  oily  Santarpana,  and  which  are  capable  of 
curing  the  diseases  mentioned,  and  which,  in  respect  of  the  measure  prescribed,  may  be 
taken  by  the  patient  without  injury  to  his  depleted  system,  are  the  medicines  that  physi¬ 
cians  prescribe  for  curing  the  maladies  born  of  injudicious  fasts. — T, 


256 


charaka-sameitA. 


and  keeping  in  view  the  considerations  dependant  on  the  state  of 
the  body,  the  digestive  fire,  the  (strength  or  weakness)  of  the  faults, 
the  measure  of  the  medicines;  and  the  season  when  treatment  is 
begun  and  continued;31 

For  such  a  man  the  juice  of  meat,  the  diffent  kinds  of  milk,  the 
different  varieties  of  (medicated)  ghee,  the  different  kinds  of  baths; 
(or  oily)  enemata,  rubbing  of  oils  on  the  body,  and  all  such  kinds  of 
food  and  drink  as  fall  within  oily  Tarpana,  are  beneficial.32 

For  persons  afflicted  with  chronic  fever  and  consumption,  for 
those  that  are  exceedingly  emaciated  and  lean,  for  those  labouring 
under  difficulty  of  micturition,  those  afflicted  by  excess  of  thirst, 
and  for  those  who  are  suffering  under  wind  having  an  upward 
course,  I  say  that  Tarpana  is  beneficial.33 

Sugar,  Piper  lortgum,  oil,  ghee,  and  honey,  taken  in  equal  parts, 
mixed  with  flour  of  fried  batley  of  double  the  measure,  should  be 
made  into  a  Mantha.  This  is  beneficial  for  petsons  labouring 
under  the  above  diseases.  This  medicine  leads,  besides,  to  the 
increase  of  their  semen;*31 

Flour  of  fried  barley,  wirtes,  hortey,  and  sugar  constitute  a 
Tarpana  Which,  if  drunk,  corrects  the  course  of  the  wind,  faeces, 
urine,  phlegm,  and  bile.j*35 

The  inspissated  juice  of  the  sugar-cane,  flour  of  fried  barley, 
ghee,  whey,  sour  gruel  (of  rice),  constitutes  a  Tarpana  which,  if 
drunk,  cures  difficulty  of  micturition  and  suppression  of  wind  in 
the  bowels.38 

The  emulsion  (in  fine  powder  with  four  parts  of  cold  water) 
of  the  fruits  of  the  wild  date-palm  {Phoenix  Sylvestus,  Koxb ), 
raisins  (Uvae  Passae),  tamarind  ( TamarincLus  Indica),  sour  pome- 


*  ‘  Mantha’  is  an  emulsion  of  medicines  in  fine  powder  with  four  parts  of  cold  water. 
Vide  note  in  p.  53.— T, 

t  ‘  Anuloma’  and  ‘  Pratiloma’  are  two  words  that  should  be  clearly  understood. 
When  the  motion  or  course  of  anything  becomes  the  reverse  of  what  is  ordinary,  it  is 
said  to  be  ‘  Pratiloma.’  When  corrected  or  restored  to  the  ordinary  state,  the  motion  or 
course  becomes  ‘  Anuloma.  ‘ — *  T. 


CM  A  RA  A  A -SA  M  HIT A. 


257 


granates,  fruits  of  the  Grewia  Asiatica  {Linn),  and  Phyllanthus 
Emblica  {Linn),  are  curative  of  all  disorders  due  to  excessive  drink¬ 
ing  of  alcoholic  spirits  and  other  intoxicants.37 

Such  things  as  have  a  sweet  taste,  with  such  as  have  a  sour 
taste,  mixed  with  water,  and  with  or  without  ghee,  when  made  into 
a  Mantha,  become  a  Santarpana  of  quick  effects  and  contribute  to 
durability  of  complexion  and  strength  of  the  body'.38 

{Here  occurs  averse  containing  a  summary .) 

The  diseases  that  spring  from  (injudicious)  Santarpana  and 
those  that  spring  from  Apatarpana,  with  the  medicines  for  each 
class,  have  all  been  mentioned  in  this  Lesson  called  That  about 
Santarpana.2 

Thus  ends  the  Twenty-third  Lesson,  called  That  about  Santar¬ 
pana,  in  the  treatise  of  Agnivesa  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  XXIV. 

We  shall  next  expound  the  Lesson  called  “Vidhi-£onitiya.”* 
Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.1 

The  rules  that  have  been  properly  laid  down  about  food  and 
practices  of  such  persons  as  conduct  themselves  in  judicious  cor¬ 
relation  with  habitat  and  season  and  constitution  are  the  rules  by 
which  the  blood  of  embodied  creatures,  when  generated  in  the 
system,  becomes  pure.2f 


*“Vidhi”  means  rules  or  ordinances,  and  ‘gonita’  is  blood.  The  compound 
‘Vidhi-gonitiya’  indicates  ‘that  about  the  rules  or  considerations  affecting  the  blood.” 
Some  are  for  taking  the  compound  as  meaning  the  ordinances  according  to  which  the 
blood  becomes  pure  or  impure,’  Instead  of  taking  it,  however,  in  such  a  limited  sense 
the  wider  meaning  would  be  more  rational. —  T. 

tin  the  Lesson  called  ‘Tasyagitiya,’  rules  have  been  elaborately  laid  down 
about  the  food  and  practices  of  such  persons  as  conduct  themselves  in  judicious  correla¬ 
tion  with  the  place  of  dwelling,  season  (with  reference  to  both  time  in  general,  and  age, 
i.  e.,  infancy  or  youth  or  manhood,  &c.),  and  the  character  of  the  constitution.  What 
is  said  here  is  that  those  rules,  if  observed,  contribute  to  make  the  blood  that  is  generat¬ 
ed,  pure.  The  consequences  of  pure  blood  are  laid  down  in  the  next  Verse. _ T. 

33 


258 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA . 


Verily,  it  is  pure  blood  that  brings  about  strength  and  com¬ 
plexion  and  (the)  happiness  (of  health)  and  longevity,  for  the  very 
life  of  living  creatures  is  dependant  on  blood.3 

Through  use  of  food  that  has  become  noxious,  or  that  is  ex¬ 
ceedingly  keen  or  hot,  or  of  too  much  alcohol,  or  of  other  food  of  a 
similar  kind,  as  also  food  that  is  very  saline  or  alkaline,  or  that  is 
sour  or  pungent,1  or  through  use  of  Kulatthwa  (a)  or  Masha  (6)  or 
Nishpava  ( c ),  or  sesame  oil,  or  of  Pindalu  ( d )  and  radishes  and  other 
roots  and  potherbs  and  vegetable  leaves  of  all  kinds,5*  or  through 
use  of  the  flesh  of  aquatic  animals  or  thosejinhabiting  marshy  regions 
and  in  holes  or  of  beasts  and  birds  of  prey,  or  the  use  of  curds  and 
sour  milk  or  whey  or  flour  of  fried  corn  or  wines  and  sour  gruels, 6 1 
or  through  use  of  such]  food  as  is  made  up  of  inharmonious 
elements  (such  as 'milk  and  meat)  or  is  jFoul  or  putrified,  and 
through  sleep  at  day  time  after  eating  such  food  as  is  liquid  or 
heavy,7  through  eating  excessively  so  as  to  overload  the  stomach, 
through  indulgence  in  wrath,  and  exposure  to  sunshine,  and  endur¬ 
ing  the  heat  of  fire,  through]  suppression  of  the  urging  to  vomit, 
through  omission  to  let  blood  at  the  proper  time,8  and  through  ex¬ 
haustion  brought  about  by  labour,  assaults  done  to  the  body,  grief, 
stuffing  the  stomach  with  food  when  indigestion  has  set  in  or 
before  digestion  has  been  complete  of  what  has  been  taken 
previously,  as  also  through  the  very  nature  of  the  season  of  autumn, 
the  blood  becomes  impure. 

In  consequence  of  the  blood  becoming  impure,  different  kinds 
of  diseases  spring  up.  These  are  sores  in  the  mouth,  pustules  in 


*  ‘Harita’  ordinarily  implies  ‘of  potherbs  and  vegetable  leaves.  The  Commentator 
Gangadhara  understands  it  to  include  black-pepper:and  other  spices. — T. 

+•  ‘Prasaha’  includes  beasts  and  birds  of  prey. — T. 

a,  Dolichos  uniflorus,  Lamk,  syn.  Dolichos  biflorus  Roxb . 

b.  Phaseolus  Roxburghii,  syn.  Phaseolus  radiatus ,  Roxb. 

.  c.  Dolichos  sinensis,  Linn. 

d.  Called  in  Bengali  Chubri-alu.  Dioscorea  globosa  ;'Roxb. 

t  ‘Ajirnadhyafanat’  means  ‘eating  upon  indigestion  and  before  digestion  has  been 
complete  of  what  has  been  taken  previously.’  Indigestion  is  a  disease,  while  ‘before 
digestion’  has  been  complete  does  not  imply  indigestion. — T, 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHITA. 


259 


the  nose,  suppuration  of  the  globe  of  the  eye,  Ozoena,  foetid  smell 
from  the  mouth,10  abdominal  tumours,  Syphilis,  Erysipelas,  hemorr¬ 
hage,  general  lassitude  or  enervation,  deep-seated  abscesses,  dis¬ 
charge  of  blood  through  the  urinary  channel,  dismenorrhsea  and 
menorrhagia.  Leprosy,11  paleness  of  complexion,  loss  of  the  diges¬ 
tive  fire,  thirst,  sensation  of  heaviness  in  all  the  limbs,  sensation  of 
heat  in  the  body,  excessive  weakness,  disgust  for  food,  headaches,12 
pungent  taste  in  all  food  and  drink,  bitter  and  sour  eructations, 
general  exhaustion,  excessive  wrath,  stupefaction  of  the  under¬ 
standing,  presence  of  a  saltish  taste  in  the  mouth,13  excessive 
perspiration,  foetid  smell  in  the  body,  all  the  appearances  of  intoxi- 
tion,  tremours,  hoarseness  of  speech  with  even  loss  of  voice, 
drowsiness,  excessive  sleep,  darkness  of  vision,14  itching  of  the 
body,  pains,  Urticaria  evanida,  eruptions,  tubercular  leprosy,  and 
the  cutaneous  eruptions  called  Charmadala  * 

All  these  diseases  should  be  known  as  due  to  diseased  blood.15 

All  those  diseases  that  are  curable  but  that  cannot  be  cured 
by  the  application  of  cool,  hot,  oily,  and  dry  methods  of  treatment, 
should  be  ascribed  to  diseased  blood  as  their  cause.16 

In  diseases  caused  by  vitiated  blood,  such  treatment  should  be 
adopted  as  is  destructive  of  the  faults  of  blood  and  the  bile. 
Hence,  the  administration  of  purgatives,  fasts,  and  blood-letting, 
should  be  resorted  to.1T 

In  letting  out  blood,  the  operation  should  be  resorted  to  after 
examination  of  the  measure  of  the  patient’s  strength,  faults,  and 
the  pure  blood  he  has  in  his  body,  as  also  of  the  particular  part 
whence  the  blood  is  to  be  let  out.18 

When  the  blood  is  vitiated  by  the  action  of  the  wind,  it  be¬ 
comes  very  red,  frothy,  not  unctious,  and  thin.  If  vitiated  by  bile, 
it  becomes  darkish-yellow  in  color,  and  warm,  so  that  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  its  warmth  it  does  not  congeal  soon.19 

*  Charmadala  has  been  described  as  eruptions  that  are  red,  painful,  itching,  with 
little  abscesses  that  burst  of  themselves.  The  inflammation  is  so  great  that  the  sTghest 
touch  cannot  be  borne. — T. 


260 


CHARAKA  SAMIIITA. 


If  vitiated  by  the  action  of  phlegm,  it  becomes  a  little  pale 
unctious,  fibrous,  and  thick.  If  the  indications  of  any  two  are 
presented  in  a  combined  state,  the  vitiation  should  be  ascribed  to 
the  action  of  two  faults.  If  all  the  indications  are  present,  the 
vitiation  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  action  of  all  the  three  faults.20 

The  blood  that  happens  to  be  of  the  color  of  molten  gold,  or 
like  that  of  the  insects  called  Indragopa,  or  like  that  of  the  gem 
called  Padmaraga,  or  like  that  of  the  lac-dye,  or  like  that  of  Gunja 
seeds,  should  be  known  as  healthy.+21t 

When  blood  has  been  let  out,  such  food  and  such  drink  as  are 
neither  very  hot  nor  very  cold,  and  as  are  light  and  capable  of 
provoking  the  digestive  fire,  are  beneficial,  for  at  such  a  time  the 
blood  that  remains  in  the  body  becomes  very  mobile.  The  diges¬ 
tive  fire  also  should  be  carefully  kept  up.22{ 

The  blood  of  that  man  is  said  to  be  pure  whose  complexion 
and  senses  are  healthy  and  cheerful,  who  experiences  a  desire  for 
the  gratification  of  every  sense,  the  strength  of  whose  digestive  fire 
is  unimpaired,  and  who  is  endued  with  cheerfulness,  growth,  and 
strength.23 

When  the  faults  (viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm),  becoming  ex¬ 
cited,  either  separately  or  together,  continue  to  exist,  affecting  the 
blood-bearing  ducts  and  those  other  ducts  that  bear  the  different 
juices  and  are  the  channels  of  mental  activity,  of  the  person  who 
takes  foul  food  and  whose  mind  is  overwhelmed  by  Passion  and 
Darkness,  diseases  become  generated,  such  as  insanity,  fainting  or 
swoon,  and  apoplexy.  The  intelligent  physician  should  know  that 
the  strength  of  these  diseases,  in  respect  of  their  predisposing  causes. 


j-  ‘Indragopa’  is  an  insect  of  the  Coccinella  species.  The  Gunja  is  otherwise  called 
ICuncha.  It  is  the  fruit  or  seed  of  the  Abrns  precatorius ,  Linn. 

£  ‘Tada’  implies  after  the  letting  of  blood.  ‘Anavastliitasrik’ .  is  an  adjective  of 
foariram,’  implying  that  the  blood  that  is  in  the  bpdy  is  mobile.  Hence,  if  food  on 
drink  that  is  very  hot  be  taken,  the  mobile  blood  will  become  more  mobile  to  the  injury, 
of  the’body.  If  food  or  drink  that  is  very  cold  be  taken,  the  mobile  blood  may  become 
congealed  or  at  least  lose  all  motion.  The  digestive  fire  also,  at  such  a  time,  becomes 
weak,  Hence,  food  that  is  light  and  that  helps  the  fire  should  be  taken. — T. 


GMaRaKA-SA  HIM  it  a. 


5s61 

symptoms,  and  cure,  increases  in  accordance  with  the  order  in 
which  they  are  stated.*24-25 

When  the  wind  (becoming  excited)  afflicts  the  weakened 
heart,  it  agitates  the  mind  of  the  living  creature  and  darkens  (or 
stupifies)  his  perception.2 7t 

The  (excited)  bile,  and  the  (excited)  phlegm  also,  agitating 
the  minds  of  men  in  the  same  way,  darken  the  perception.  There 
is  some  difference,  however,  in  respect  of  their  action  which  shall 
be  presently  explained.28 J 

That  person,  whose  speech  becomes  indistinct,  copious  in 
measure,  and  quick  (in  respect  of  utterance, )*an  cl  whose  efforts  or 
exertions  become  inconstant  and  unsteady,  and  whose  appearance 
becomes  dry  and  brown-red,  should  be  taken  as  afflicted  by  Insani¬ 
ty  due  to  the  action  of  the  (excited)  wind.29 

That  person,  who  becomes  wrathful,  who  indulges  in  harsh 
speech,  who  becomes  disposed  to  strike  others,  and  fond  of  quarrel, 

*  ‘Rasa-samjnavahani’  is  explained,  as  bearing  Rasa  or  the  liquid  juice  to  which 
food  is  reduced  before  conversion  into  blood.  ‘Samjna’  is  Mind  as  understood  in  Hindu 
philosophy,  viz.,  as  the  sixth  sense,  which,  with  the  other  five,  is  the  servant  of  the 
Understanding.  Certain  ducts  are  believed  to  be  the  channels  of  mental  activity,  the 
optic  nerve,  for  example,  that  carries  the  image  (of  an  object  seen)  to  the  mind. 

‘Malah’  or  the  faults  are,  of  course,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm. 

All  diseases  are  due  to  the  action  of  Passion  and  Darkness.  Unless  these  over¬ 
whelm  the  understanding,  there  can  be  no  error,  and  consequently,  no  breach  of  the 
rules  of  health. 

‘Murchcchaya’  is,  of  course,  fainting  or  swoon,  including  the  swoons  brought  about 
by  epilepsy. 

What  is  stated  in  the  concluding  portion  is  that  the  causes  and  symptoms  of  Apo¬ 
plexy  are  stronger  than  those  of  Swoons,  and  those  of  Swoons  are  stronger  than  Chose  of 
Insanity.  The  efficacy  of  the  curative  agents  also  must  be  stronger  in  the  same  order. — TV 

t  ‘Chetah-sthanam’  is  the  ‘hridayam’  or  heart.  The  wind,  becoming  excited, 
affects  the  heart,  with  the  result  that  the  mind  becomes  agitated  and  its  perception  be¬ 
comes  clouded  or  stupified.  The  excited  bile  and  the  excited  phlegm  also,  do  the 
same  in  a  slightly  different  way. — T. 

+  In  Verse  27,  the  words  are  ‘Sammohayate  Samjnam’  ;  in  28,  ‘Samjnam  akulatam- 
nayati.’  The  sense  is  the  same,  i. e. ,  in  both  cases  the  perception  is  dulled  or  clouded  or 
stupified.  According  to  the  degree  of  stupefaction  the  disease  is  called  Insanity  or 
Swoon  or  Apoplexy. — T, 


262 


CM  A  RA  KA -SA  MHITA. 


and  whose  appearance  becomes  red  or  yellow  or  white,  should  be 
known  as  afflicted  by  Insanity  due  to  the  action  of  the  (excited) 
bile.30 

That  person,  who  indulges  in  speech  that  is  partially  discon¬ 
nected,  who  becomes  possessed  by  drowsiness  and  inactivity,  whose 
appearance  becomes  pale,  and  who  becomes  always  meditative, 
should  be  known  as  afflicted  by  Insanity  due  to  the  action  of  excit¬ 
ed  phlegm.31 

All  these  symptoms  appear  in  Insanity  that  is  due  to  the  action 
of  all  the  faults  excited  together.32 

The  Insanity  that  is  due  to  the  intoxication  of  alcohol  appears 
quickly  and  disappears  as  soon.32 

The  Insanity  due  to  the  action  of  alcohol,  that  due  to  the 
action  of  poison,  and  that  to  the  action  of  the  blood,  can  never 
arise  without  affinity  to  (disorders  of)  wind,  bile  and  phlegm.34 

In  Swoons  due  to  the  action  of  the  (excited)  wind,  the  patient, 
while  beholding  empty  space  of  the.  color  of  blue  or  dark  or  red, 
becomes  suddenly  deprived  of  consciousness  and  soon  regains  it, 
and  discovers  the  symptoms  of  tremour,  pain  in  all  the  limbs,  agita¬ 
tion  of  heart,  gradual  emaciation  of  the  body,  and  brownness  or 
redness  of  complexion. 35-36 

In  Swoons  due  to  the  action  of  the  (excited)  bile,  the  patient, 
while  beholding  empty  space  of  the  color  of  red  or  green  or  yellow, 
suddenly  loses  consciousness  and  awakens  to  sense  with  the  whole 
body  covered  with  perspiration,  and  with  thirst,  burning  sensation, 
and  eyes  either  red  or  yellow  and  indicative  of  agitation,  and  with 
loose  and  watery  motions,  and  a  complexion  that  becomes 
yellow.3T-38t 


*  What  is  meant  by  beholding  empty  space  that  appears  of  the  color  of  blue  or  dark 
&c..  is  this  :  the  Swoon  does  not  come  upon  one  all  on  a  sudden.  While  looking  at 
any  particular  object  or  scene,  such  object  or  scene  gradually  vanishes  from  the  sight  and 
instead,  what  the  man  sees  is  mere  blue  or  dark  or  red  space  for  a  little  while  ;  very  soon 
this  sensation  disappears  and  one  loses  all  consciousness.  Swoons  that  are  so  induced 
and  that  last  for  a  little  while,  are  ascribed  to  action  of  the  wind. — T. 

t  In  Verse  38  the  correct  reading  is  ‘  raktapitakulekshanah’  and  not  ‘raktapitta- 
kulekshanah.’ 


CHA  RAKA-SAMMITA. 


263 


In  Swoons  due  to  the  action  of  the  (excited)  phlegm,  the 
patient,  while  beholding  empty  space  of  the  color  of  clouds  or  as 
if  it  were  enveloped  with  partial  darkness,  becomes  suddenly  de¬ 
prived  of  consciousness  and  regains  it  after  some  time,  and  feels 
as  if  all  his  limbs  are  wrapped  round  with  a  heavy  cloth  or  a  wet 
Skin,  with  watery  discharges  coming  out  of  his  mouth  and  nose, 
and  with  hiccup. 3S_40t 

In  Swoons  brought  about  by  a  combination  of  all  the  faults,  all 
the  symptoms  described  above  occur,  and  the  loss  of  conscious¬ 
ness  comes  after  the  manner  of  the  disease  called  Apasmara,  with 
only  this  difference  that  the  several  frightful  indications  that  ap¬ 
pear  in  Apasmara  do  not  manifest  themselves.  Such  Swoons 
quickly  carry  off  the  patients  subject  to  them.  il\ 

When  the  faults  that  originate  them  in  men  lose  their  viru¬ 
lence,  the  diseases  of  Insanity  and  Swoons  lose  their  violence  of 
themselves.  As  regards  Apoplexy,  it  cannot  be  cured  without 
medicines.4 

The  faults,  which  are  attached  to  the  abode  of  the  life- 
breaths,  becoming  violently  excited,  take  away  the  action  of  speech, 
body,  and  mind,  and  suspend  all  the  functions  (of  life)  of  the 
weakened  living  creature.43 

The  man  that  is  thus  affected  with  Apoplexy  remains  like  a 
post  of  wood,  apparently  dead,  and  becomes  soon  divested  of  life- 


+  ‘Tamoghana’ is  ‘Tamas’  and ‘aghana’  i.e.,  partial  darkness.  After  the  mention 
of  ‘meghasamkacam’  ‘tamoghanaih  avritam’  cannot  imply  ‘Tamobhih  and  ‘ghanaicch- 

%  ‘Apasmara’  is  that  disease  in  which  delusions  appear.  It  is  a  kind  of  frightful 
epilepsy  in  which  the  patient  sees  some  monstrous  being  and  becomes  immediately  de¬ 
prived  of  consciousness.  The  several  frightful  symptoms  are  the  frothing  of  the  mouth, 
the  gnashing  of  teeth,  the  violent  throwing  out  of  the  arms  and  legs,  and  terrible  con¬ 
vulsions  of  the  whole  body.  Swoons  brought  about  by  a  combination  of  [all  the  faults 
are  like  Apasmara  minus  its  frightful  symptoms.  The  patient  quickly  meets  with 
death.  ‘Patayanti’  does  not  mean  ‘throw  down  on  the  ground.’—/' . 

+J  ‘Mada-murchcchayah’  is  a  noun  plural,  the  word  being  ‘Murchechaya.  T. 


Cll  A  RA  KA-SA  Mil  IT  A. 


264 

breaths  in  the  absence  of  such  restoratives  as  are  productive  of  im¬ 
mediate  effects.41* 

As  one  endued  with  intelligence  must  quickly  catch  a  metallic 
Utensil,  while  drowning  in  a  deep  water,  before  it  reaches  the 
bottom,  even  so  (should  the  physician  of  intelligence  conduct  him¬ 
self  towards)  the  person  afflicted  with  Apoplexy.45 

Collyrium,  cerebral  purgatives,  smoke,  snuffs,  punctures  with 
needles,  burns  with  heated  weapons,  pains  inflicted  below  the  nails, 
tearing  out  the  hair  on  the  head  or  on  the  body,  bites  with  the 
teeth,  and  rubbing  the  beans  of  Mucuna  pruriens  on  the  body, 
are  beneficial  towards  awakening  the  man  afflicted  with  Apo¬ 
plexy.40-4^ 

Diverse  kinds  of  strong  spirits  mixed  together,  and  other 
liquids  that  are  very  bitter,  should  also  be  repeatedly  poured  down 
the  throat  of  the  person  that  is  lying  in  an  apoplectic  fit.48J 

Until  consciousness  of  the  patient  is  awakened,  the  juice  of 
Matulunga  (a),  mixed  with  the  Great  Medicine  (b),  should  similar¬ 
ly  be  applied  ;  as  also  Sauvarchala,  mixed  with  spirits,  sour  juices 
and  gruels  and  Assafcedita  and  Ushana  ( c ),  should  be  administered. 
When  consciousness  has  been  awakened,  the  patient  should  have 
light  food  administered  to  him.49-50 


*  ‘Sa  na’  implies  ‘that  man,’  i.e.,  the  weakened  person.  ‘Sadyah  phalah  kriyah’ 
are  curative  operations  or  restoratives  producing  immediate  effects.  The  treatment 
adopted  generally  consists  of  what  tends  to  bring  back  consciousness,  such  as  piercing 
with  needles. —  T. 

f  The  collyrium  is  to  be  applied  to  the  eyes.  It  should  be  possessed  of  biting  or 
irritating  virtues.  ‘Avapida,’  as  also  ‘Pradhamana,  ’  is  a  species  of  cerebral  purgative. 
Both  should  be  of  powerful  effect  before  they  can  be  applied  to  a  person  in  Apoplexy. 
The  parts  below  the  nails  is  very  sensitive.  As  long  as  torture  was  a  recognised  institu¬ 
tion  for  the  defection  of  crime  in  India,  sharp  needles  used  to  be  thrust  below  the  nails  of 
suspected  persons. 

t  ‘Sammurchcchitani’  implies,  as  Gangadhara  explains,  ‘militani.’  Diverse  strong 
spirits,  when  mixed  together,  become  stronger  still. —  T. 

a.  Citrus  medica,  Linn. 

b.  This  word  is  employed  to  imply  diverse  drugs  of  great  efficacy.  What  is 
meant  here  is  dry  ginger. 

c.  Otherwise  called  Chittraka  ;  Plumbago  Zeylanica ,  Linn. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MEITA . 


265 


After  the  patient  has  recovered  consciousness,  light  food 
should  be  administered  to  him.50 

He  should  also  be  made  to  listen  to  narrations  that  excite 
wonder  or  that  appeal  to  his  memory,  or  that  are  agreeable  to  hear. 
He  should  also  be  made  to  listen  to  vocal  and  instrumental  music 
of  great  skill  and  see  delightful  sights.51* 

The  intelligent  physician  should  also,’  after  the  patient  has 
been  restored  to  his  senses,  adopt,  for  removing  the  subsidiary 
symptoms,  the  treatment  of  applying  purgatives  and  emetics, 
smoke  (into  the  nostrils,  for  producing  sneezing),  collyrium  (into 
the  eyes),  astringent  gargles,  and  blood-letting.  The  patient 
should  also  be  made  to  undergo  physical  exercises,  and  his  oody 
should  also  be  subjected  to  rubbing.  Indeed,  his  mind  should  be 
protected  from  relapsing  into  the  insensibility  or  stupefaction  of 
Apoplexy.52-53 

In  cases  of  Insanity  and  Epilepsy,  the  patients  should  first 
have  oils  and  the  different  processes  of  Swedana  applied  to  them. 
Afterwards,  the  five  processes  of  vomiting  &c.  may  be  resorted  to 
according  to  the  measure  of  the  patient’s  strength  and  the  viru¬ 
lence  of  the  disease.5 4f 

In  these  two  diseases  the  application  is  applauded  of  the  eight 
and  twenty  kinds  of  drugs,  as  also  of  bitter  ghee,  and  after  the 
same  manner,  of  the  ghee  called  Maha-shatpala.?°  The  applica¬ 
tion  also  of  the  decoction  of  the  triple  fruit,  mixed  with  ghee  and 
honey  and  sugar  ;  as  also  of  (^ilajatu,  and  of  milk  ;  56  also  of 
Pippali  and  of  Chitraka,  and  of  the  drugs  numbered  among  the 
Rasayanas,  as  also  of  Kaumbha  Ghee,  is  applauded.0 7 f 

*  The  object,  of  course,  is  to  keep  the  mind  active  through  the  emotions.—  T. 

t  The  five  processes  are  vomiting,  purging,  sneezing,  and  the  application  of 
emata  of  the  oily  and  the  dry  varieties. —  T. 

}  The  eight  and  twenty  kinds  of  drugs  are  different  varieties  of  Ghee,  . 

They  form  a  class  called  Paniyakalyana. 

Bitter  Ghee  is  a  preparation  of  Ghee  with  certain  bitter  substances. 


266 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Throug  blood-letting  and  cultivation  of  the  scriptures  and 
the  sciences  as  also  of  intercourse  with  those  that  are  righteou, 
the  diseases  of  Insanity  and  Swoons  that  appear  in  men  become 
alleviated.*8* 

Here  occur  two  verses  containing  a  summary. 

Pure  and  impure  blood,  the  causes  thereof,  the  diseases  that 
arise  from  the  faults  of  blood,  the  medicines  to  be  applied  in  those 
diseases,  the  causes,  indications,  and  medicines  of  Insanity,  Swoons, 
and  Apoplexy. — all  these  have  been  declared  in  this  Lesson  called 
‘  Vidhi-£onitiya’  (Ordinances  in  respect  of  blood).1-2 

Thus  ends  the  Twenty -fourth  Lesson,  called  Vidhi-^onitiya, 
in  the  place  of  aphorisms,  in  the  treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised 
by  Charaka. 


LESSON  XXV. 

We  shall  next  expound  the  Lesson  called  ‘Yajjah-purushiya.* 
Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.f1 


Mahashatpala  is  a  variety  of  Ghee. 

The  triple  fruit?  are  the  three  myrobalans,  chebulic,  emblic,  and  belleric. 

.  For  Cilajatu  vide  note  h  in  p.  237  ante. 

Pippaii  means  the  different  varieties  of  Piper  longum.  Linn;  syn.  Chavia 
Roxburghii. 

Chitraka  is  Plumbago  Zeylaniea,  Linn. 

*  Rasayanas  are  drugs  prepared  with  the  three  myrobalans. 

‘Kaumbhagrita’  is  very  old  ghee,  taken  out  from  a  kumbha  or  earthen  vessel 
in  which  it  is  kept  for  years  together. 

*  ‘Castra’  literally  implies  any  treatise  that  governs  or  rules  the  conduct  of  men. 
Generally,  the  word  is  employed  to  signify  the  scriptures  or  holy  writings.  The  Vedas 
-  are  ‘Castras’  as  well,  though  not  originally  reduced  to  writing.  All  the  treatises  of  ths 
Rishis  are  ‘Castras.’  Then,  again,  the  sciences  of  Vedanta,  Nyaya,  and  the  other 
schools  of  philosophy,  are  all.  ‘Castras,’  in  the  sense  of  being  branches  of  knowledge. 
‘Satwavatam’  may  imply,  besides,  persons  of  understanding,  and  not  the  good  or 
righteous  alone. — T. 

t  The  meaning  of  the  title  will  sufficiently  appear  from  what  follows.— T i 


OH  A  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


267 


In  days  of  yore,  the  great  Rishis  (on  a  certain  occasion), 
while  seated-befpre  the  illustrious  Punarvasu  who  had  direct  and, 
positive  knowledge  of  the  attributes  of  all  things,  raised  this  dis¬ 
course,*2  having  reference  to  the  first  origin  of  the  diseases  of 
this  aggregate,  called  Purusha,  of  soul,  senses,  mind,  and  the 
objects  of  the  senses.-)5 

Just  after  the  topic  had  been  propounded,  the  king  of  Kagi, 
Vamaka  by  name,  approaching  that  conclave  of  Rishis  and  saluting 
them,  uttered  these  words  of  grave  import  :4 

Is  it  fhe  case,  ye  Rishis,  that  diseases  are  regarded  as  born  of 
that  (substance)  whence  man  himself  is  born  ?  Or,  is  it  otherwise  ?’ 

After  the  king  had  said  this,  Punarvasu  said  unto  the  Rishis  :s 

All  of  you  are  persons  whose  doubts  have  been  dispelled  by 
immeasurable  learning  and  knowledge  !  It  behoveth  you  to  remove 
the  doubt  of  the  king  of  Kagi  1J5 

(The  Rishi  named)  Parikshi-Maudgalya,  having  reflected,  first 
said  these  words  :  Purusha  has  his  origin  in  the  Soul.  The  diseases 
also  have  their  origin  in  the  Soul.  The  Soul  is  the  cause.7  The 

#  ‘Pratyakshadharmanam’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  -one  who  has,  through 
penances,  obtained  a  sight  of  Dharma,  the  deity  of  Righteousness.  ’  Dharma  is  the 
great  judge  who  rewards  and  punishes.  This  can  hardly  be  the  meaning  here. — T. 

t  The  literal  meaning  of  the  word  ‘Purusha’  is  he  who  lies  or  dwells  in  a  (material) 
case,  i.e.,  the  body  ;  ordinarily,  it  implies  Person.  That  which  is  called  Person  is  an 
aggregate  of  Soul,  the  senses,  mind,  and  the  objects  of  the  senses.  ‘Mind,’  as  under¬ 
stood  in  Hindu  philosophy,  is  regarded  as  the  sixth  sense.  The  objects  of  the  senses 
are,  of  course,  the  five  primal  elements  of  earth,  water,  light  or  heat,  wind,  and  space 
or  ether.  The  Soul  is  the  owner  of  the  senses,  the  mind,  and  the  material  case  to. 
which  the  senses  and  the  mind  inhere,  There  are  two  opposite  doctrines  regarding  the 
Soul.  One  of  these  is  that  the  Soul  acts  and  suffers  ;  the  other  is  that  it  is  inactive  and 
does  not  suffer,  its  connection  with  the  senses,  the  mind,  and  the  material  case  being  like 
that  of  the  lotus  leaf  with  water.  The  lotus  leaf,  even  if  immersed  in  water,  would  not 
still  be  soaked  nr  drenched  by  it.— T. 

J  The  words  of  the  question  asked  by  the  King,  viz.,  ‘Purusho  Yajjah’  in  Verse  5, 
have  been  taken  for  naming  this  Lesson.  ‘Yaj-jah  Purushah’  literally  implies  ‘that  from 
which  man  hath  sprung.’  Hence,  the  meaning  of  the  name  applied  to  the  Lesson  is 
? About  that  whence  man  hath  sprung.’ 

‘Jnana’ is  ordinary  knowledge  or  learning.  ‘Vijnana’  is  a  deep  knowledge  of  al 
things,  the  result  both  of  study  and  that  spiritual  insight  which  springs  from  penances. 
!Cchettum’  is  literally  ‘to  cut’  ;  hence,  to  remove  or  dispel,  — 7’.;  - 


268 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA. 


Soul  earns  acts,  and  enjoys  (or  endures)  their  fruits  ;  since  pleasure 
and  pain  cannot  arise  without  the  substance  that  is  conscious.*8 

(^araloman  said, — This  is  not  so  ;  for  the  Soul,  which  has  an 
aversion  for  sorrow  or  pain,  would  never  Qf  itself  attach  diseases  to 
itself.9  It  is  the  Mind,  (otherwise)  called  Sattwa,  which,  overwhelm¬ 
ed  with  Rajas  and  Tamas,  is  the  cause  in  the  (matter  of  the)  origin 
of  the  body  and  the  diseases.-]'10 

Varyovida  said, — This  is  not  so.  Verily,  Mind  alone  cannot 
be  the  cause.  Without  the  body  the  very  existence  becomes  impos¬ 
sible  of  bodily  diseases  and  of  Mind.11 

All  creatures  have  sprung  from  Rasa.  The  diverse  diseases 
also  have  sprung  from  it.  And  since  the  Waters  have  Rasa  in 
them,  the  Waters  have  been  said  to  be  the  final  (or  original) 
cause.:]13 

*  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  Purusha  or  man  lias  the  Soul  for  his  cause  ;  i.e. ,  it  is 
the  Soul  that,  with  certain  attributes,  becomes  the  man  or  person.  The  Soul  being  the 
original  cause  of  the  person,  diseases  also  spring  from  or  have  their  birth  in  the  Soul. 
The  Soul  earns  acts,  i.e.,  it  is  the  Soul  that  exerts  and  acts,  and  actions,  therefore,  are 
the  results  of  the  Soul’s  activity.  The  fruits  of  acts,  therefore,  i.e.,  pleasure  and  pain, 
must  be  the  Soul’s  ;  i.e. ,  the  Soul  being  the  actor,  must  enjoy  and  endure  the  con¬ 
sequences  of  his  acts.  Pleasure  and  pain,  again,  are  enjoyed  and  endured  by  a  feeling 
or  conscious  substance.  They  cannot  inhere  to  any  inert  substance. 

‘Pravritti’  literally  means  flow  ;  hence  rise  or  origin. — T. 

t  According  to  this  theory,  the  Soul  is  inactive.  It  is  the  Mind  that  acts, 
through  the  senses  or  organs  of  knowledge  and  action.  The  results  of  acts,  therefore, 
viz.,  pleasure  and  pain,  must  attach  to  the  Mind  and  not  to  the  Soul  which  transcends 
the  Mind  and  is  oniy  the  onlooker.  One  of  the  primal  attributes  of  the  Soul  is  its  aversion 
for  pain.  Rajas  (or  Passion)  and  Tamas  (or  Darkness)  overwhelm  the  Mind,  and 
cause  it  to  act.  The  fruits  of  acts  attach  to  the  Mind  and  dispose  it  to  attract  matter. 
The  shape  or  form  of  the  material  case  depends  upon  the  results  of  acts,  so  that  one 
becomes  a  worm  or  a  bird,  a  horse  or  a  man,  in  consequence  of  one’s  acts.  The  Soul  is 
always  pure  and  stainless.  The  consequences  of  acts  done  must  have  to  be  enjoyed  and 
endured  before  they  can  be  exhausted.  Hence,  abstention  from  acts  is  the  only  means 
by  which  the  Soul  can  gradually  free  itself  from  its  material  case,  the  Linga  or  finer  case, 
and  lastly  the  Karana  Carira  or  its  potentiality  to  attract  a  case.  For  a  fuller  exposir 
tion  of  this  doctrine,  see  the  sections  on  the  Soul,  birth,  body,  &c.,  in  the  Canti  Parva 
of  the  Mahabharata. — T. 

J  By  ‘Rasa’  is  understood  the  liquid  substance  inhering  apparently  to  most  of  the 
pbjects  of  the  world.  Blood  is  the  Rasa  in  the  human  system  :  so  also  the  vital  seed. 


CM  A  RA  KA-SA  M  HIT A. 


Hiranyakhya  said, — This  is  not  so.  The  Soul  has  never  been 
said  to  have  sprung  from  Rasa.  Nor  can  Mind  be  said  to  have 
sprung  from  it,  being  what  it  is,  viz.,  something  that  transcends 
.the  senses.  Some  diseases,  again,  are  due  to  sound.13 

As  regards  Purusha,  he  has  sprung  from  the  combination  of 
the  six  {viz.,  the  five  primal  elements  and  the  Soul).  Hence, 
diseases  also  i  as  inhering  to  Purusha)  must  be  regarded  to  spring 
from  these  six  elements.  The  Sankhyas  of  former  times  ascertain¬ 
ed  (by  observation  and  meditation)  that  this  (which  is  called 
Purusha)  is  a  compound  sprung  from  the  six  elements.*1 

Unto  Kucpka  who  said  so,  (Jaunaka  said, — This  is  not  so.  How 
can  Purusha  spring  into  life  from  only  the  six  elements,  without 
the  intervention  of  the  father  and  the  mother  ?13 

Man  is  seen  to  spring  from  man  ;  a  cow  from  cow  ;  a  horse 
from  horse.  Certain  diseases,  such  as  diabetes  and  others,  are 
derived  from  parents.  Hence,  parents  are  the  causes  of  disease.16 

Bhadrakapya  said,— This  is  not  so;  since  from  a  blind  father 
a  blind  son  does  not  spring.  Your  initial  origin  cannot  be  reason¬ 
ably  ascribed  to  the  father  and  the  mother.  (For  these  had  father 
and  mother,  and  they  too  had  theirs,  and  so  on).  The  living  crea¬ 
ture  should  be  regarded  as  born  of  acts.  His  diseases  also  have 
their  origin  in  acts.  Without  acts,  neither  Purusha  nor  diseases 
can  have  their  origin.18 

Bharadwaja  said, — It  is  not  so  ;  since  the  agent  must  precede 
the  action.  Then,  again,  no  such  action,  undone  by  an  agent,  is 
seen  whose  effect  is  Man.19  The  cause  of  the  origin  or  appear¬ 
ance  of  diseases,  as  of  man  is  Nature,  even  as  Nature  is  the  cause 
of  the  sharpness,  fluidity,  mobility,  and  heat  which  are  the  attributes 
of  Earth,  Water,  Wind  and  Light.*20 

The  sap  which  feeds  them  is  the  Rasa  of  the  vegetables.  Rasa,  however,  is  ultimately 
resolvable  into  Water.  If  Rasa,  therefore,  be  the  cause  of  both  birth  and  the  diseases  to 
which  creatures  are  subject,  the  ultimate  cause  of  birth  and  diseases '  would  then  be 
water. —  T. 

*  Bharadwaja’s  argument  is  this  :  action  cannot  be  the  cause  of  birth  ;  action 
follows  the  agent,  for  without  an  agent  preceding  or  pre-existing,  there  can  be  no  action. 
Then,  again,  as  action  pre-supposes.an  agent,  no  action  can  be  met  with  that  has  not  been 


27Q 


CM  A  RA  KA  -  Sa  Mil  1 TA . 


Kankayana  said, — This  is  not  so  ;  since,  if  it  were  so,  action 
would  not  have  produced  fruits.  As  regards  Nature,  the  accom¬ 
plishment  of  existent  objects  may  or  may  not  flow  from  it.21  But 
Prajapati  (the  Primeval  Patriarch)  the  offspring  of  Brahman, 
possessed  of  immeasurable  will,  is  the  creator  of  this  universe  of 
animate  and  inanimate  objects,  as  also  of  happiness  and  misery*22 

He  of  Atri’s  race  who  had  betaken  himself  to  the  mendicant 
order  said, — This  is  not  so  ;  since  the  primeval  Patriarch,  who 
always  desires  the  good  of  creatures,  cannot,  like  a  wicked  per¬ 
son,  always  attach  misery  to  his  own  progeny.?®  Man  is  the  off¬ 
spring  of  Tjme.  His  diseases  also  are  born  of  Time.  The  whole 
universe  is  subject  to  the  sway  of  Time.  Time  is  everywhere  the 
cause. f24 

While  the  Rishis  were  thus  wrangling  with  one  another, 
Punarvasu  said  unto  them, — Do  not  dispute  !  Truth  becomes  un¬ 
attainable  in  consequence  of  the  taking  of  sides  (by  enquirers).25 
When  assertions  and  contradictions  are  urged  and  advanced  in 
the  guise  of  certainties,  the  disputants  never  attain  to  the  end  of 
the  matter  under  discussion,  even  as  a  person  who  is  turned  round 
and  round  on  an  oil-pressjng  machine  never  attains  to  the  end  of 
his  journey.2?  Casting  off  this  wrangle,  do  ye  think  only  of  the 
truth.  Unless  the  thick  gloom  (of  ignorance)  be  dispelled,  correct 

.done  by  someagent.  An  undone  act  cannot  be  conceived,  whose  effect  would  be  man  or 
the  agent  of  acts.  ‘Tejoantanam’  implies  ‘those  which  have  Tejas  for  their  end  hence, 
.earth,  & c.,  or  the  primal  elements.  —  T. 

*  The  argument  of  Kankayana  is  this  :  Nature  is  not  the  cause  ;  for  if  it  were  the 
cause  of  existent  objects,  no  action  would  have  been  necessary  to  produce  anticipated 
results.  Men  cultivate  the  soil  and  sow  seeds  thereon,  and  as  the  consequence  of  that 
act,  get  crops.  Men  study  with  effort  and  acquire  knowledge.  If  Nature  were  the 
pause,  tilling  of  the  soil  or  laborious  study  would  not  have  been  necessary  for  the  acquisi¬ 
tion  of  crops  and  knowledge.  These  would  have  come  of  themselves.  Most  editions 
read  ‘hyarambhaphalam’  ;  the  reading  ‘hyarambhe  phalam’  would  not  be  incorrect. 
Prajapati  means,  literally,  a  patriarch.  The  oflspring  of  Brahipan,  Prajapati  Kagyapa 
(or  Daksha)  is  the  creator  of  all  things.  He  is  possessed  of  immeasurable  will,  for 
otherwise  the  vast  universe  could  not  flow  from  him. —  T. 

t  ‘Atreya’  is  descendant  of  Atri’s  race.  ‘Bhikshu’  is  a  person  of  the  medicant 
Order.  The  Rishi  whose  answer  is  represented  by  these  Verses  is,  therefore,  a  person  qf 
Atjri’s  race  who  belonged  to  the  mendicant  order, — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA- 


271 


knowledge  can'riot  be  attained  in  the  matter  under  enquiry.27  If 
those  elements,  whose  existence  in  a  state  of  excellence  keeps  a 
man  in  healthy  become  deteriorated,  they  generate  diverse  kinds  of 
diseases.*28 

Having  heard  these  words  of  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri, 
Vam'aka  the  ruler  of  the  K-agis,  once  more  asked-  the  illustrious  son 
of  Atri,  saying, — What,  O  illustrious  one,  is  the  cause  of  the  origin 
and  growth  of  diseases  which  (as  thou  hast  said)  are  born  of  the 
deterioration  of  man  who  (as  a  healthy  creature),  is  the  product  of 
the  excellence  (of  the  elements  that  are  in  him)  ? — 

Unto  him  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said, — The  use  of  benefi¬ 
cial  food,  is  the  one  only  cause  of  the  growth  of  a  person  ;  while 
the  use  of  food  that  is  injurious  is  the  cause  of  disease.28 

Unto  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  who  was  saying  so,  Agnivega 
said, — How,  O  illustrious  one,  shall  we  succeed  in  ascertaining, 
without  the  possibility  of  error,  the  indications  of  food  that  is  bene¬ 
ficial  and  of  food  that  is  injurious  ?  We  see  that  in  consequence  of 
differences  of  measure,  time,  preparation,  habitat,  body,  faults, 
and  persons,  food  that  is  beneficial  and  food  that  is  injurious  pro¬ 
duce  the  very  opposite  efEects.f30 

Unto  him  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said, — 0  Agnivega,  those 
kinds  of  food  that  cause  the  harmonious  elements  of  the  body  to 


*  In  Verse  27,  ‘Adhyatmam’  is  used  for  ‘Truth.’  In. India  the  oil-pressing  machine 
consists  of  a  plank,  besides  other  contrivances,  upon  which  a  man  may  sit  or  lie  down. 
The  plank  goes  round  and  round  (with  the  person  upon  it)  as  the  bull  walks  round  and 
round. — 71 

f  The  question  propounded  by  Agniveija  is  this  :  Food  that  is  regarded  beneficial  is- 
seen  to  produce  injurious  effects,  and  food  that  is  regarded  injurious  is  seen  to  produce 
beneficial  effects.  The  results  that  deend  upon  differences  of  ‘Matra’  or  measure  ;  in 
‘Kriya’ or  the  manner  of  preparation  or  the  mode  of  administration  ;  of  ‘bhumi.’  i.e,, 
habitat,  for  the  same  vegetable  or  animal  procured  from  one  place  has  one  kind  of 
properties,  but  taken  from  another  place  has  another  kind  of  properties  ;  of  body,  i.e.t 
the  weakness  or  strength  of  the  person  to  whom  the  food  is  to  be  given  ;  of  faults,  i.e., 
diseases,  or  the  harmony  or  otherwise  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  ;;  and  lastly,  of  the  very 
constitutions  of  persons.  What  Agniveija,  therefore,  wishes  to  know  is  the  certain  and 
unfailing  indications  of  what  food  is  beneficial  and  what  food  is  otherwise.  ‘Anapavadam’ 
is  ‘Avyabhichari,’  as  explained  by  the  Commentators. —  71 


272 


CHA  RA  K  A  -  SA  ME  I T A . 


remain  in  their  normal  condition,  or  restore  harmony  to  elements 
that  have  become  inharmonious,  thou  shouldst  know,  are  benefi¬ 
cial.  All  kinds  of  food  whose  action  is  the  reverse  of  this,  are  in¬ 
jurious.  These  indications  of  beneficial  and  injurious  food  are  cer¬ 
tain  and  infallible.31 

Unto  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  that  said  so,  Agnive9a  said, — O 
illustrious  one,  instruction  of  this  kind  will  not  be  compre¬ 
hended  by  the  generality  of  physicians.*3 2 

Unto  him  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said, — 0  Agnive9a,  they 
unto  whom  the- science  of  food  is  known  in  respect  of  .properties, 
of  constituent  elements,  and  of  effects,  in  their  entirety,  as  also 
the  considerations  of  measure  and  the  like,  will  succeed  in  compre¬ 
hending  even  this  kind  of  instruction.-}-33 

We  shall  now  discourse  on  this  topic,  referring  to  consider¬ 
ations  of  measure  and  the  like,  in  such  a  Way  that  the  generality 
of  physicians  may,  without  doubt,  comprehend  it. 

As  regards  measure  and  the  like,  there  are  diverse  kinds  of 
alternatives.  We  shall,  aftef  this,  expound  the  Regulations  about 
diet,  referring  to  properties,  constituent  elements,  and  effects,  as 
also  to  especial  division.34 

Those  Regulations  are  as  follows  : — 

In  consequence  of  the  sameness  of  purpose,  the  character  as 
food,  of  all  varieties  of  food,  is  of  only  one  kind.}; 

Food,  in  respect  of  its  source,  is  twofold,  for  it  is  made  up  of 
mobile  and  immobile  objects. 


*  ‘Bhuishtakalpah  sarva  bhishajah’  implies  ‘Prayena  sarva  bhishajah,’  i.e.,  the 
greatest  part  of  physicians. —  T. 

t  ‘Aharatattwam’  is  science  of  food  ;  ‘Gunatah,’  i.e.,  with  respect  to  heaviness  or 
lightness;  ‘Dravyatah,  'i.e.,  With  respect  to  their  constituent  elements,  such  as  watery 
or  fiery,  &c.  ;  ‘ICarmmatah,’  i.e  ,  with  respect  to  the  effects  produced,  such  as  Jivanam  or 
Vrimhanam,  &c.  ‘Sarvavayatah’  refers  to  what  precedes,  as  explained  by  Gangadhara. 
Chakrapanidatta  takes  it  as  referring  to  ‘Mafradaya.’ — T. 

J  Food  is  taken  for  replenishing  the  system.  Whatever  the  kind  of  food,  the  object 
for  which  it  is  taken  is  that  and  no  other.  How  many  kinds  of  food  there  may  be,  their 
character,  therefore,  as  food,  is  of  only  one  kind  ;  i.e.,  looking  at  the  object  for  which 
food  is  taken,  there  can  be  no  classification  of  food,  whatever  its  variety. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHIT 


273 


Its  power  also  is  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  beneficial  and  injurious, 
judged  by  the  differences  in  respect  of  its  after-consequences. 

As  regards  the  manner  of  taking  food,  there  are  four  kinds, 
viz.,  drinking,  swallowing,  chewing,  and  licking. 

In  consequence  of  taste  being  of  six  kinds,  food  is  of  six 
kinds  in  respect  of  taste.*35 

Food  is  of  twenty  kinds,  following  the  qualites  of  heaviness, 
lightness,  coolness,  warmth,  oiliness,  dryness,  stability,  instability 
softness,  hardness,  unctiousness  and  its  reverse,  smoothness,  harsh¬ 
ness,  subtility,  grossness,  solidity  and  liquidness.38 

Food  is  of  infinite  variety  in  consequence  of  the  diversity  of 
ways  in  which  articles  may  be  combined  and  the  diversity  of 
methods  in  which  they  may  be  dressed. 

Those  varieties,  however,  and  ingredients  that  are  used  very 
generally,  as  also  those  modifications  that  are  due  to  well-known 
combinations  and  that  are  very  beneficial  or  very  baneful,  in 
consequence  of  their  nature,  to  mankind,  we  shall,  one  after  an¬ 
other,  lay  down.37 

They  are  as  follow  : — 

Among  that  genus  of  paddy  which  is  known  by  the  name  of 
£uka,  those  paddies  that  are  red  constitute  the  most  beneficial  diet 
and  are  hence  regarded  as  the  best.  Among  the  paddies  included 
under  the  name  of  £ami,  Mudga  is  the  best.  Amongst  waters,  the 
best  is  that  which  falls  from  the  sky.  Among  salts,  the  best  is 
that  which  cometh  from  sea-water.  That  called  Jivanti  is  the  best 
of  all  potherbs.t38 


*  It  has  been  stated  in  an  earlier  portion  of  the  work  that  the  tastes  are  pungent, 
bitter,  astringent,  sweet,  sour,  and  saltish. — T. 

t  All  bearded  paddy  is  called  Cuka.  Cali  paddy  is  that  which  grows  in  a  damp  soil 
or  a  field  covered  with  water.  Mudga  is  the  Phaseolus  Mungo ,  Linn.  It  does  not  fall 
within  the  genus  paddy.  It  seems  that  the  word  Dhanya  originally  meant  grain 
or  seed.  Cami  generally  implies  a  pod  or  legume, 

35 


274 


CHA  RA  KA-Sa  MU  IT  A . 


Among  flesh  of  all  animals  of  the  deer  species,  that  of  the 
Ena  is  the  best  Among  birds,  the  meat  of  the  Lava  is  the  best, 
Among  animals  living  in  holes,  the  meat  of  the  Godha  is  the  best. 
Among  fishes,  the  meat  of  the  Rohita  is  the  best-f 

Among  all  kinds  of  ghee,  that  from  cow’s  milk  is  the  best 
Among  all  varieties  of  milk,  that  of  the  cow  is  the  best.  Among 
all  oils  from  vegetable  substances,  that  from  sesame  is  the  best. 
Among  animals  living  in  marshy  regions,  the  fat  of  the  hog  is  the 
best.  Among  all  piscatorial  animals,  the  fat  of  the  porpoise  is  the 
best.  Among  aquatic  fovyl,  the  fat  of  the  Pakahansa  is  the  best,3® 

Among  all  kinds  of  pecking  fowls,  the  fat  of  the  cock  is  the 
best.  Among  all  animals  that  feed  on  twigs  and  leaves,  the  fat 
of  the  goat  is  the  best.  Among  roots,  ginger  is  the  best.  Among 
fruits,  Uvse  passae  are  the  best.  Among  all  the  products  ;of  the 
sugar-cane,  sugar  is  the  best, 

Thus  have  been  mentioned  those  articles  that  are,  by  nature, 
numbered  among  the  best  varieties  of  food.40 

We  9hall  now  lay  dovyn  some  of  those  articles  that  are  very 
baneful. 

A  small  variety  of  Yava  (called  Yavaka),  being  highly  unsuit¬ 
able  as  diet,  is  regarded  as  the  worst.  Among  the  paddies  known 
by  the  napie  of  Cami,  Masha  is  the  worst,  Among  waters,  the 
worst  is  that  of  rivers  in  the  season  of  rains.  Among  salts,  the 
worst  is  brapkish  earth.  Among  potherbs,  the  \yorst  is  the  mustard 
seed  plant.  Among  meat,  the  worst  is  beef.*4  * 

Among  birds,  the  meat  of  the  black  pigeon  is  the  worst. 
Among  animals  living  in  holes,  the  flesh  of  the  frog  is  the  worst. 
Among  fishes,  the  worst  is  Ghilchima.  Among  ghee,  that  from 

q  Ena  is  a  speeies  qf  deer,  pf  black  colour,  beautiful  eyes,  short  legs,  Lava  is  a  sort 
of  quail  ;  Perdix  Chinensis. 

Godha  is  the  Iguana.  Rohita  is  the  ordinary  Rohu  fish  or  Cyprinus  Roliila. 

*  Masha  is  the  Pheseolus  radiaius,  Roxb.  ‘Yavaka’  is  a  small  variety  of  the  Hordeum 
kexastichum,  Linn.  ‘XJshara’  is  a  kind  of  dry  and  saltish  earth,  \yhich  poor  people 
take  as  a  substitute  of  for  sea-salt.— T. 


OH  A  RA  KA -SA  MHITA . 


275 


sheep’s  miil<  is  the  worst.  Among  milk,  that  from  sheep  is  the 
worst.  Among  vegetable  oils,  that  from  Kusumbha  is  the  wsrst. 
Among  aninials  living  irt  marshy  regions,  the  fat  of  the  buffalo  is 
the  worst  Among  animals  of  the  piscatorial  genus,  the  fat  of  the 
crocodile  is  the  worst.  Among  aquatic  fowl,  the  fat  of  the  Kaka- 
fnadgu  is  the  Worst. 

Of  all  birds,  the  fat  of  the  Karandava  is  the  worst.  Of  all 
animals  that  feed  on  branches  of  trees,  the  fat  of  the  elephant  is 
the  worst.*41* 

Of  all  bulbous  roots,  the  Mulaka  is  the  worst.  Of  fruits,  the 
Worst  is  the  Nikncha.  Of  all  modifications  of  the  juice  of  the 
sugarcane,  the  worst  is  Phanifa; 

Thus  are  those  things  explained  which  are  the  foremo'st  of 
those  modifications  of  food  that  are,  as  regards  their  very  nature', 
productive  of  consequences  the  most  baneful.f43 

Of  the  modifications  of  food  those  have  been  explained  that  are 
beneficial  and  baneful.  After  this,  once  more,  We  shall  lay  down, 
principally,  what  those  articles  are  that  are  used  in  the  Well- 
known  (curative)  operations  and  in  medicines,  along  with  those 
that  are  subsidiary.  J  44 


‘Chilchima  is  a  kind  of  sprat  ;  Cljipea  cultraia.  ‘Kakamadgu’  is  the  water-hen 
or  gallinule. 

*  Some  texts  read  ‘Chataka’  for  ‘Karandava.’  The  formet  means  a  kind  of  sparrow, 
the  latter  an  aquatic  fowl  Of  the  duck  species. — T. 

t ‘Nikucha’ is  spelt  variously,  such  as ‘Likucha’  and  ‘Lakucha,’  In  Bengal  it  is 
generally  known  by  the  name  of  Madara.’  It  is,  of  course,  the  Artocarpus  Lakoocha, 
Roxb. 

‘Phanita*  is  the  inspissated  juice  of  the  sugarcane.  ‘Prakrishtatamani’  is  the 
correct  reading,  and  not ‘Nikrishtatamani.  ’  The  meaning  is  “the  chief  of  those  articles 
that  ate  baneful  afe  mentioned.” — T. 

J  A  few  Only  of  those  modifications  of  food  that  are  beneficial  and  baneful  have 
been  mentioned.  These  are,  therefore,  called  the  ‘Avayava’  of  those  modifications, 
meaning  ‘a  portion,’  i.e.,  some.  ‘Karma’  implies  the  curative  operations  of  purging 
vomiting,  &C.  The  articles  used  in  ‘Karma’  and  those  in  medicines  are  to  be  named, 
together  with  their  ‘AUnVandhas,’  i.e.,  the  subsidiary  articles,  for  promoting  the  action 
of  ‘Karma’  and  of  medicines. — T. 


276 


OHARA  KA  - SA  MHI TA . 


They  are  as  follows  : — 

Food  is  the  foremost  of  all  articles  that  support  life. 

Of  all  articles  that  are  assuring,  water  is  the  foremost. 

Of  all  articles  that  dispel  fatigue  or  exhaustion,  the  best  is 
wine. 

Of  all  articles  that  prolong  life,  milk  is  the  best. 

Of  all  articles  that  promote  nutrition  and  lead  to  increase  of 
flesh,  the  best  is  meat. 

Of  all  articles  that  are  soothing,  the  best  is  juice. 

Of  all  articles  that  promote  the  relish  of  food,  the  best  is  salt. 

Of  all  articles  that  are  agreeable  to  the  taste,  the  best  are  those 
that  have  a  sour  taste.*45 

Of  all  things  that  promote  strength,  the  best  is  the  flesh  of  the 
cock  (or  hen). 

Of  all  things  that  increase  the  semen,  the  best  is  the  vital  seed 
of  the  alligator. 

Of  all  things  that  allay  phlegm  and  bile,  the  best  is  honey. 

Of  all  things  that  allay  wind  and  bile,  the  best  is  ghee. 

Of  all  things  that  allay  wind  and  phlegm  the  best  is  oil. 

Of  all  things  that  are  destructive  of  phlegm,  the  best  is  vomit¬ 
ing  (induced  by  emetics). 

Of  all  things  that  are  destructive  of  bile,  purging  is  the  best. 


*  •AfWasakaranam’ implies ‘articles  that  are  assuring.’  Gangadhara  explains  that, 
of  such,  there  are  many,  such  as  consoling  words,  gifts  of  wealth,  &c.  Among  them  all’, 
the  best  is  water.  This  can  scarcely  be  the  meaning  here.  I  think,  instead  of  ‘assuring,*’ 
the  word  may  be  taken  to  mean  ‘soothing.’  ‘Hridya’  is  a  well-known  word.  It  implies 
things  that  contribute  to  bring  cheerfulness  or  relish.  Salt  is  the  best  of  all  things  that 
promote  the  flavour  or  relish  of  food.  ‘Amla’,  or  things  sour,  are,  by  themselves  aeree- 
able. —  T 


CH  A  RAKA-SAMEITA.  277 

Of  all  things  that  are  destructive  of  wind,  the  best  are  enemata. 

Of  all  things  that  soften  the  body  the  best  are  the  operations 
called. Swedana  (i.e.,  those  that  induce  perspiration). 

Of  all  things  that  make  the  body  firm,  the  best  is  physical 
exercise. 

Of  all  things  that  reduce  corpulency,  the  best  is  sexual  inter¬ 
course. 

Of  all  things  that  reduce  sexual  potency,  the  foremost  are 
alkaline  articles. 

Of  all  things  that  do  not  promote  the  relish  of  food,  the  fore¬ 
most  is  Tinduka  {Diospyros  Embryopteris,  Pers.  ;  syii,  Diospyros 
glutinosa,  Yiosnig.)**6 

Of  all  things  that  are  destructive  of  the  voice,  the  foremost  is 
unripe  Kapittha  ( Feronia  Elephantum). 

Of  all  things  that  are  the  reverse  of  what  is  agreeable  and 
possessed  of  relish,  the  foremost  is  the  ghee  of  sheep’s  milk. 

Of  all  things  that  are  destructive  of  consumption,  that  promote 
secretion  of  milk,  that  are  agreeable  to  the  constitution,  that  pre¬ 
vent  the  fluidity  of  the  blood,  and  that  allay  hemorrhages,  the 
foremost  is  the  ghee  of  goat’s  milk. 

Of  all  things  that  promote  phlegm  and  bile,  the  foremost  is 
sheep’s  milk. 

Of  all  things  that  promote  sleep,  the  foremost  is  the  milk  of 
the  buffalo. 

Of  all  things  that  prevent  secretions  and  cause  heaviness  of 
the  body,  the  foremost  is  badly  formed  curds. 

Of  all  things  that  reduce  corpulency,  the  foremost  is  the  food 
that  consists  of  boiled  Gavedhuka  (a  species  of  Coix). 

*  It  should  be  noted  that  in  naming  the  reverse  of  what  promotes  relish,  something 
that  is  used  as  food  should  be  named,  and  not  anything  of  bad  or  abominable  taste. 
Hence  Tinduka  (commonly  called  Gab)  is  mentioned. —  T. 


278 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Of  all  things  that  contribute  to  the  dryness  of  the  body,  the 
foremost  is  the  food  that  consists  of  boiled  Uddalaka. 

Of  all  things  that  generate  (increase)  urine,  the  foremost  is 
the  sugarcane. 

Of  all  things  that  cause  (increase)  faeces,  the  foremost  are  all 
corns  of  the  barley  species. 

Of  all  things  that  generate  wind,  the  foremost  in  jamvava.* 

Of  all  things  that  generate  phlegmonous  bile,  the  foremost 
are  cakes  of  sesame  seeds. 

Of  all  things  that  generate  acid  bile,  the  foremost  is  Kuiattharf1 

Of  all  things  that  generate  phlegmonous  bile,  the  foreiriost  are 
Masha.J 

Of  all  things  that  are  fit  to  be  used  as  emetics  and  enemata  of 
both  the  dry  and  the  oily  kind,  the  foremost  are  the  fruits  of  the 
Randia  dumetorumA 7 

Of  all  things  that  constitute  agreeable  purgatives,  the  foremost 
is  Trivrit  ( Ip  rrioea  Turpethum,  ;  syn.  Convolvulus  Turpethunt). 

Of  all  things  that  constitute  mild  purgatives,  the  foremost  is 
Chaturangula  (exudation  of  Cassia  fistula,  Linn  ;  syn.  Catharto- 
carpus  fistula,  Pers.) 

Of  all  things  that  constitute  hard  purgatives,  the  foremost  is 
the  exudation  of  Snuhi  (. Euphorbia  Neriijolia,  Linn  ;  syn.  Eu¬ 
phorbia  ligularia,  Roxb.) 


*  ‘Jamvava’  0r  ‘Jamvu’  is  the  fruit  of  the  Eugenia  Jambolana. 
t  Dolichos  unifiorus ,  Lamk  ;  syn.  Dolichos  biflorus,  ttoxb. 

I  Phaseolus  radiata ,  Roxb.  Three  things  are  mentioned  as  generating  phlegmonous 
bile  ;  the  first  is  sheep’s  milk.  The  Commentator  explains  that,  of  all  liquid  substances, 
this  is  the  foremost  one  that  possesses  such  an  attribute.  Then  come  sesame  cakes 
among  cooked  food  ;  and  then  Masha  among  hard  substances.  These  things  are  fore¬ 
most,  in  their  respective  categories,  in  producing  phlegmonous  bile,-- T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHJTA.  279 

Of  all  errhines,  the  foremost  are  the  seeds  of  Pratyakpushpi 
[Achyranthes  aspera ,  Linn  ;  syn.  Achyranthes  bidentata). 

Of  all  things  used  as  amthelmintics,  the  foremost  are  Vidanga 
(the  seeds  of  Embelia  Ribes,  ;  syn.  E.  glandulifera). 

Of  all  things  used  as  antidotes  to  poison,  the  foremost  is 
£irisa  (seeds  of  Mimosa  S irissa,  Roxb  ;  syn,  Albizzia  Lebbek, 
fientham). 

Of  all  things  used  as  remedies  in  leprosy,  the  foremost  is 
Khadira  (exudation  of  Acacia  catechu,  Linn  ;  syn.  Mimosa 
catechu,  Linn). 

Of  all  things  that  are  destructive  of  wind,  the  foremost  is  Rasng 
(  Vanda  Roxburghii  ;  syn.  Gymbidium  tessaloides,  Roxb). 

Of  all  medicines  for  preventing  the  (appearance  of)  marks  of 
age,  the  foremost  is  Amalaka  ( Phyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn  ;  syn. 
Emblica  officinalis ,  Gaert). 

Of  all  things  that  are  regarded  as  beneficial  at  the  outset  of 
treating  a  disease,  the  best  is  Haritaki  (Chebulic  myrobalaus)  * 

Of  all  things  that  provoke  desire  and  that  destroy  wind,  the 
foremost  is  the  root  of  the  Eranda  (Ricinus  communis ,  Linn.) 

Of  all  things  that  provoke  the  appetite,  that  are  used  as 
Pachana,  and  that  cure  epistasis  (suppression  of  the  urine),  the 
foremost  is  the  root  of  Pippali  ( Piper  longum,  Linn  ;  syn.  Ghavica 
Roxburghii). 

Of  all  things  that  are  provocative  of  appetite  and  destructive 
of  pains  and  swellings  in  the  anus,  the  foremost  is  the  root  of 
Chitraka  (. Plumbago  Zeylanica,  Linn :)48 

Of  all  things  that  are  refrigerant,  provocative  of  appetite, 
and  Pachaniya,  and  that  relieve  vomitting  and  cure  diarroea  with 
fever,  the  foremost  is  Udichya  (otherwise  called  Bala  or  Sida 
cordifalia,  Linn). 

*  ‘Pathya’  is  used  here  in  the  $ense  of  what  is  beneficial  if  administered  at  the  outset 
of  a  treatment.  ‘Chikitsadau  hitakarakam.’— ,T, 


280 


charaka-samhitA. 


Of  all  things  that  are  astringent,  provocative  of  appetite,  and 
Pachaniya,  the  foremost  is  Katwanga  (otherwise  called  Syonaka 
or  Golosanthes  Indica  ;  syn.  Bignonia  Indica,  Linn .) 

Of  all  things  that  are  astringent,  provocative  of  appetite,  and 
relieving  of  hemorrhage,  the  foremost  is  Ananta  ( Hemidesmus 
Jndicus  ;  syn.  Ichnocarpus  frutescens.) 

Of  all  things  that  are  astringent,  provocative  of  appetite  and 
Pachaniya,  the  foremost  is  Musta  ( Gyperus  rotundus,  Linn.) 

Of  all  things  that  are  astringent  and  destructive  of  appetite  and 
that  aid  the  secretion  of  phlegm  and  the  flow  of  blood,  the  foremost 
is  \mrila  (otherwise  called  Bhadra-musta  or  Ka9eruka,  i.e.,  Scirpus 
Kysoor,  Roxb). 

Of  all  things  that  are  astringent,  provocative  of  appetite,  and 
relieving  of  wind  and  phlegm,  the  foremost  is  Vilwa  £gle  mar- 
melos). 

Of  all  things  that  are  provocative  of  appetite,  Pachaniya,  * 
astringent,  and  relieving  of  all  the  faults,  viz.,  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm,  the  foremost  is  Ativisha  Aconitum  heterophyllum,  Wall.) 

Of  all  things  that  are  astringent  and  that  stop  hemorrhages, 
the  foremost  are  the  filaments  of  the  Utpala  Nymphoea  stellata, 
Linn),  Kumuda  ( Nymphoea  lotus,  Linn),  and  Padma  ( Nelumbium 
speciosum,  Linni) 

Of  all  things  that  relieve  bile  and  phlegm,  the  foremost  is 
Duralabha  (Alhagi  Maurorum  ;  syn.  Hedysarum  Alhagi,  Linn).4,0 

Of  all  things  that  relieve  excessive  hemorrhage,  the  foremost  is 
the  fragrant  Priyangu  ( Aglaia  Roxburghiana). 

Of  all  things  that  prevent  the  secretion  of  phlegm  and  bile, 
and  the  flow  of  blood,  and  that  dry  up  these  elements,  the  foremost 
is  the  bark  of  Kutaja  ( Holarrhena  antidysenterica,  Wall.) 

Of  all  things  that  are  astringent  and  that  stop  hemorrhages, 
the  foremost  are  the  fruits  of  Kasmari  (otherwise  called  Gambhari, 

{ Gmelina  arbor ea  Linn). 


From  Da.  E.  H.  Gregory,  M.D.,  Saint  Louis.  U.S.A. 

3525,  Lucas  Avenue,  Saint  Louis,  Uh  April,  1894. 
My  Dear  Dr.  Kaviratna,  *  *  *  * 

Your  work  is  certainly  praiseworthy.  It  gives  evidence  of  much  learn¬ 
ing,  and  affords  much  entertainment  and  instruction  to  the  modern  world. 

Yours  very  truly, 

(Sd.)  E.  H.  Gregory,  M.D. 


From  the  American  Druggist  and  Phermaceutical  Record. 

Part  VII. — It  contains  many  curious  and  valuable  facts  pertaining  to 
the  ancient  practice  of  medicine  by  Hindu  sages,  and  must  be  regarded  as 
a  valuable  contribution  to  the  native  literature  of  India. 


Translation  of  a  Notice  (in  Italian)  that  appeared  in  the 
Bibliografia  de  Societa  Asiatica  Italiana. 

Of  the  importance  of  this  publication,  even  those  who  are  strangers 
to  Indian  study  can  form  d  priori  a  clear  conception,  when  they  learn  that 
“Charaka-Samhita”  is  one  of  the  most  ancient  and  famous  treatises  of 
Indian  medicine.  It  has  been  referred  to  the  9th  or  10th  century,  but, 
as  usual,  it  is  impossible  to  state  that  this  is  the  exact  date.  The  learned 
and  indefatigable  Pandit  Avinash  Chunder  Kaviratna,  after  having  pub¬ 
lished  the  Sanskrit  text,  has  now,  by  this  translation,  rendered  the  greatest 
service  not  only  to  Indian  students,  but  also  to  all  those  who  are  in  rerest¬ 
ed  in  the  development  of  customs.  The  difficulties  overcome  by  the 
learned  Pandit  are  manifold,  especially  those  which  relate  to  the 
illustration  of  the  text,  but  this  has  been  provided  for  by  abundant  notes 
relative  to  general  therapeutics,  ritual  and  to  botany. 

In  the  6th  fasciculus,  which  has  just  appeared,  a  kind  of  domestic 
infirmary  is  treated  at  length.  It  should  be  stated  that  this  “Samhita” 
is  likely  to  be  very  useful  even  to  anthropologists,  ethnologists,  and 
naturalists.  The  illustrious  Pandit  may  be  congratulated  on  adding  this 
to  the  other  titles  of  merit  which  he  can  claim  from  the  public. 


From  H.  H.  Kerola  Varma  Valingakoil  Tampuran,  f.m.yv.,  m.r.a.s., 

Trevandrum, 

The  9th  February,  1894. 

Dear  Sir,  ****** 

This  and  the  former  seven  fascicules,  which  I  perused  with  great  in¬ 
terest,  have  afforded  me  considerable  delight,  as  they  contain  very  valu¬ 
able  and  useful  information.  Allow  me  to  congratulate  you  on  your  havino- 
successfully  completed  these  fascicules.  Such  a  popular  work  as  this  wifi 
surely  induce  one  and  all  to  undertake  it  from  motives  of  pecuniary  profit, 
but  I  am  glad  to  find  that  your  motives  are  not  such.  Yet  this  gigantic 
undertaking  will,  no  doubt,  require  money  to  bring  it  to  a  successful  con¬ 
clusion.  I  hope  the  enlightened  public  will  liberally  help  you. 

Yours  faithfully, 

(Sd.)  Kerola  Varma  Valingakoil  Tampuran,  F.M.W.,  M.R.A  .S. 


From  VankatiUo  Ram  Chandra,  Government  Pleader  of  Puna. 
Dear  Sir, 

I  have  received  the  first  eight  parts  of  your  English  translation  of 
“Charaka-Samhita.”  It  is,  I  need  hardly  mention,  a  very  useful  and  im¬ 
portant  work,  and  the  undertaking  is  highly  laudable.  Persons  who  are 
slightly  acquainted  with  Sanskrit  can  derive  much  help  from  the  trans¬ 
lation  to  study  the  original  Sanskrit  work.  Persons  who  are  unacquaint¬ 
ed  with  Sanskrit  will  now  have  light  by  which  they  would  know  what  is 
contained  in  the  Samhita.  The  work  will  show  to  the  foreign  nations 
what  the  ancient  Hindus  were  capable  of  producing.  *  *  *  * 

I  hope,  God  will  crown  your  labour  with  success.  What  is  most  remark¬ 
able  is  that  the  translation  is  made  by  one  who  is  acquainted  with  the 
European  science,  and  consequently  a  person  well  acquainted  with  the 
European  sciences  can  make  the  best  use  of  the  work.  In  short,  the 
work  may  be  said  to  be  a  miracle  of  human  industry.  Please  register  my 
name  as  a  subscriber,  and  kindly  send  me  all  the  numbers,  as  they  are 

issued.  *  *  *  *  * 

I  have  shown  your  books  to  my  friends  here,  and  they  all  admire  the 
undertaking.  A  friend  of  mine,  Mr.  Vaikunt  Vithal,  Hospital  Assistant 
at  Karwar,  has  already  written  to  you. 

I  remain, 

Yours  very  sincerely, 

(Sd.)  Yankatarao  Ram  Chandra, 


From  Babu  Pramada  Dass  Hitter, 

Benares. 

Dear  Sir,  *  *  *  *  * 

Medical  works  cannot  be  interesting,  as  a  rule,  to  the  general  reader  ; 

but  the  present,  connected  as  it  is  with  days  of  India’s  past  greatness, 
must  commend  itself  to  the  earnest  attention  of  every  Hindu.  I  can  well 
appreciate  and  admire  your  efforts  to  make  known  to  the  modern  civilised 
world  the  truths  of  our  ancient  medical  system,  for  ours  is  that  abject 
and  degraded  condition  in  which  we  cannot  appreciate  the  wisdom  of  our 
own  saints  and  sages  unless  it  is  certified  by  the  white  people  of  the  west 

and  the  far  west.  *  *  *  * 

Yours  sincerely, 

(Sd.)  Pramada  Dass  Mitter. 


From  The  Western  Druggist. 


Chicago,  U.  S.  A. 

March,  1894.. 


This  ancient  medical  work  of  India  is  certainly  a  revelation.  Although 
not  particularly  a  student  of  Oriental  literature,  the  writer  has  always  had 
a  profound  respect  for  the  ancient  Hindus,  based  on  a  knowledge  of  their 
attainments  and  philosophical  development  gathered  from  general  reading. 
However,  he  could  never  have  imagined,  without  access  to  this  translation, 
how  far  advanced  in  civilization  was  that  race  so  many  centuries  ago, 
how  those  wise  men  had  observed  nature,  and  how  accurately  and  correct¬ 
ly  they  reasoned.  It  is  truly  wonderful. 


It  appeals  to  every  intelligent  person, 
medical  profession.  *  *  * 


:  it  within  or  out  of  the 


PART  X. 


CHARAKA-SAMHIT7 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


Published  by 


AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATN A, 


Editor  of  Charaka-Sam'hita  and  of  Susruta 

(  in  original )  WITH  COMMENTARIES;  BENGALI 

Hindi  translator  of  Charaka-Samhita  , 
OF  SuSRUTA-SamHITA  ;  EDITOR-  OF  GhIKITS 
Sammilani  (  Medical  Journal  in 
Bengali) ;  PRACTITIONER  OF 

the  Hindu  System 
of  Medicine, 

&c.,  &c.,  &c. 


Calcutta 


‘Corinthian  Press,”  33,  New  China  B. 


From  Dewan  Bahadur  R.  Raghu  Nath 

i  Sir,  ; 


Dated  13th  dime,  189Jf. 


r  have  received  the  9th  fasciculus  of  your  .translation  of  “Charaka-Samhita” 
ion  to  the  previous  eight  ones. 

knj  man,  who  docs  something  for  propagating,  truths,  is  entitled  to  the  gratit.i 
5  people.  Of  truths  those  concerning  the  soul,  the  body,  and  property  are  m 
1.  On  these  subjects  our  forefathers’  knowledge  was  the  highest  and  the  pure 
were  not  satisfied  with  theories  simply,  but  tried  to  demonstrate  their  trui 
it  mathematically.  Medical  science  is  one  the  truths  of  which  are  subject  to  t 
■ience  of  all.  whether  learned  or  unlearned.  Nothing  can  be  taken  on  trust,  a 
thing  required,  to  be  fully  demonstrated  and'  proved  beyond. doubt, :  unlike  me 
cs.  Any  man  could  say  that  the  remedies,  prescribed  for  certain  diseases,  were  tr 
t.  Like  all  'out  sciences,  medical  .science  ha.s. also. been  left  uncultivated,  so  mu 
it  the  remedies,  imperfect,  in" many  cases  as  they  have  been  brought  into -use 
piers,  have  been  the  subject  of  our  admiration,  and  their  religion, .medicine  a 
ave  begun  to  be  considered  superior  to  those  of  our  Risliis.  At  such  a  junctu 
lerson  who  would  show  us  what  our  Rishis  had  recorded  for  the  good  of  the  wor 
eal  benefactor.  Of  such  persons  whose  number  is  very  small, you  are  prominent 
I  wish  you  success,  arid  hope  that  our  intelligent  and  honest  brethren  of  t 
will  begin  to  trust  the  ancient  Hindu  practice  more  than  the  Allopathic  practi 
lat.we  are  wont  to  term  this  enlightened  age. 


Yours  sincerely, 

(Sd.)  R.  Raghu  Nath  Rao. 


'rom  the  IJonhle  H.  J.  S.  Cotton,  Chief  Secretary  to  the  Governnient  of  Bengal]  , 

Darjeeling,  , 

1  "th  Jv.nex  ISO.'/.  ::f‘: 

) f. a ii  Sir, 

I  ant  much  obliged  to  you  for  sending  me  a  copy  of  the  9th  fasciculus  of  Gharal 
ltd,  which  appears  to  my  ignorant  appreciation  to  be  as  cuiious  and  interest) 
predecessors,  I  trust  you  will  be  able  to  complete  the  important  Work  in  whi 

I  am,  yours  faithfully, 

(Sd.)  H.  J.  S.  Cotton. 


T  From  Dr.  G.  Lista 


of  Plombeers.  Vosaes.  France .1 


ABSTRACT 


THE  CONTENTS  OF  THE  TENTH  FASCICULUS. 

In  the  continuation  of  Lesson  XXV  occurs  the  mention  of  those  things  which  are 
regarded  the  foremost  ones  of  particular  classes  or  groups  noted  for  particular  conse¬ 
quences.  The  list  is  exceedingly  interesting  and  shows  the  wisdom  of  the  Rishis  and 
their  acute  power  of  observation.  One  hundred  and  fifty-two  things,  in  all,  have  been 
named.  The  enumeration  includes  both  physical  substances  and  immaterial  attributes 
and  conditions. 

The  different  kinds  of  Wine  are  then  enumerated,  together  with  the  sources  from 
which  they  are  manufactured.  This  enumeration,  with  classification  of  Wines,  proves  the 
degree  of  civilization  attained  by  the  people  of  India  in  the  age  when  Punarvasu's  work 
was  compiled.  The  fruit-wines  were  manufactured  from  26  kinds  of  fruit  ;  the  root- 
wines  from  1 1  kinds  of  roots  ;  the  pith-wines  from  20  kinds  of  trees  whose  piths  were 
used  ;  the  flower-wines  from  16  kinds  of  flowers  ;  the  leaf-wines  from  2  kinds  of  leaves  ; 
the  stem- wines  from  4  kinds  of  plants  whose  stems  were  used  ;  the  bark-wines  from  4 
kinds  of  barks  ;  and  sugar-wines  from  only  one  kind  of  sugar. 

The  Wines  mentioned  are  altogether  of  four  and  eighty  kinds.  They  are  stated  to 
be  beneficial  to  both  the  body  and  the  mind. 

Lesson  XXVI  treats  of  the  Tastes  (or  Savours). 

There  are  altogether  six  principal  Tastes.  They  are  Sweet,  Sour,  Saline,  Pungent, 
Bitter  and  Astringent. 

The  virtue  of  properties  of  the  tastes  are  then  laid  down  in  brief. 

Tastes  may  exist  in  infinite  varieties  of  combination,  but  their  properties  are  not 
infinite  and  they  themselves  are  not  infinite. 

The  rest  of  this  chapter  is  an  exhaustive  dissertation  on  Tastes,  the  combinations  in 
■  which  they  occur,  the  properties  they  have,  how  they  are  to  be  ascertained,  the  physical 
elements  that  occur  in  each,  the  manner  in  which  those  elements  affect  their  operation 
and  energy  and  potency,  and  the  diseases  which  each  generates  when  taken  largely 
and  exclusively.. 

Altogether,  this  exhaustive  treatment  of  the  subject  is  very  curious.  The  Hindu 
physician  must  thoroughly  understand  and  bear  in  mind  the  incidents  attaching  to  Tastes 
before  he  can  hope  to  treat  diseases  with  success.  Nothing  like  it  occurs  in  the 
Western  system  of  Medicine.  To  say  that  this  dissertation  is  not  Scientific  but  Empiric 
would  simply  be  an  assertion  of  prejudice.  Aphorism  after  aphorism  is  laid  down, 
explaining  the  use  of  Tastes  is  prescribing  remedies  for  diseases.  That  Bitters  cure 
fevers  was  well  known  to  the  Rishis. 


CIIA  RA  KA-SAMHITA 


281 


Of  all  things  that  are  astringent,  destructive  of  wind,  provo¬ 
cative  of  appetite,  and  leading  to  increase  of  semen,  the  foremost 
is  Prishniparni  ( Uraria  lagopodioides  ;  syn.  Doodia  lagopodioides, 
Roxb).  . 


Of  all  things  that  lead  to  increase  of  semen  and  that  are  des¬ 
tructive  of  all  the  faults,  the  foremost  is  Vidarigandha  (otherwise 
called  Salaparni  or  Desmodium  Gangeticum  ;  syn.  Hedysarum 
Gangeticum,  Linn).* 

Of  all  things  that  are  astringent  and  that  lead  to  increase  of 
strength  and  destroy  wind,  the  foremost  is  Bala  ( Sida  Cordifolia, 
Linn.) 

Of  all  things  that  relieve  difficulty  of  micturition  and  destroy  c 
wind,  the  foremost  is  Gokhuraka  ( Tribulus  terrestris,  Linn  ;  sytjpr 
Tribulus  lanuginosus,  Linn.)  r 

Of  all  things  that  remove  and  cause  the  discharge  of  adherent- 
phlegm  and  other  humours,  that  increase  appetite,  that  digest  the  Y 
humours  and  set  them  free  (by  promoting  excretions  and  favouring 
their  discharge),  and  that  relieve  wind  and  phlegm,  the  foremost  is 
the  exudation  of  Hingu  (. Ferula  Assafcetida,  Linn.)\ 


Of  all  things  that  promote  excretions,  increase  appetite,  digest 
the  humours  and  set  them  free,  and  relieve  wind  and  phlegm,  the 
foremost  is  Amlavetasa  {Calamus  fasciculatus,  Roxb). 

Of  all  things  that  hurry  the  chyle,  that  are  Pachaniya,  and 
that  cure  piles,  the  foremost  is  Yavatjuka  (otherwise  called  Yava- 
kshara  or  carbonate  of  potash).J 


*  ‘Vidari’  is  different  from  ‘Vidarigandha.’  The  former  is  Convolvulus pamculatus, 
Linn.  It  is  known  also  by  the  name  of  Bhumi-kushmanda. — T. 

t  “Cchedaniya  are  medicines  which  remove  by  force,  as  it  were,  and  discharge  from 
the  body  adherent  phlegm  or  other  humours.  Emetics,  expectorants,  errhines,  caustics, 
etc.,  would  probably  come  under  this  head.” — The  Materia.  Medica  of  the  Hindus  by  V. 
C.  Dutt.  “Anulomana  (or  Anulomika)  are  medicines  that  digest  the  humours  and  set 
them  free,  that  is,  promote  excretions  and  favor  their  discharge.” — The  Materia  Medica 
of  the  Hindus  by  U.  C.  Dutt. 

J  “  Virechaka  or 'purgatives  are  described  under  three  heads,  namely,  Cransana, 
Bhedana,  and  Rechaka.  Those  medicines  which  hurry  the  chyle  or  materials  for  diges- 

36 


282  CHA  RAKA-SAM  RITA. 

The  habitual  use  of  whey  is  the  foremost  of  all  remedies  that 
are  destructive  of  the  faults  of  the  Grahani,  piles,  and  such 
disorders  as  arise  from  an  excessive  consumption  of  Ghee. 

The  habitual  use  of  the  flesh  of  carnivorous  animals  is  the 
foremost  of  all  remedies  that  are  destructive  of  the  faults  of  the 
Grahani,  consumption,  and  piles.6®  The  habitual  use  of  Ghee 
raised  from  thickened  milk  is  the  foremost  of  all  Kasayanas.*' 

The  habitual  use  of  powdered  barley  and  Ghee  in  equal 
proportions  is  the  foremost  of  all  remedies  that  fall  within  the 
class  called  Vrishya  and  that  are  destructive  of  all  •  kinds  of  sup¬ 
pression  of  the  wind.f 

The  habitual  use  of  oil  in  the  form  of  gargles  is  the  foremost 
of  all  remedies  that  strengthen  the  teeth  and  produce  a  rellsli 
for  food. 

Sandal  and  Udumvara  are  the  foremost  of  all  plasters  that 
alleviate  burning  of  the  skin.J 

RasnS  and  Aguru  are  the  foremost  of  all  plasters  that  are 
destructive  of  cold.1T 


tion,  without  allowing  them  to  be  properly  digested,  are  called  Cransana,  as  for  example 
the  pulp  of  Cassia  fistula.  Those  medicines  which  set  free  scybalse  or  other  contents  of 
the  intestines,  and  discharge  them  from  the  bowels,  without  producing  watery  stools,  are 
called  Bhedana,  as  for  exampla  Hatuki.  ( Picorrhiza  kurroa).  Those  medicines  which 
cause  the  discharge  of  the  digested  or  undigested  Contents  of  the  intestines  in  a  liquid  form 
are  called  Rechaka,  as  for  example,  Trivrit  (Ipomoea  TUrpethum).  These  last,  again,  are 
subdivided  into  three  orders,  namely,  mridu,  or  mild,  madhyama  or  intermediate,  and 
krura  or  drastic.” — The  Mat.  Med.  of  the  Hindus  by  V.  C.  Dutt. 

*  “  Yajjardvyddhi-vidhwansi  Vayastambhakaram  talhd,  Chakshuhyam  Vrittghanam 
Vrishyam  Bheshajam  tad-Rasayanam,”  i.  e.,  such  drugs  as  are  destructive  of  decrepitude 
as  prevent  the  marks  of  age,  as  increase  vision,  as  promote  nutrition  and  increase 
the  semen,  are  called  Rasayanas. — T. 

t  ‘  Vrishya’  ^anything  that  increases  the  semen.  ‘  Udavarta’  is  no  particular  disease, 
but  implies  all  kinds  of  suppression  of  the  wind. — T. 

t  ‘  Udumvara  is  the  Ficus  glomerata,  Willd. 

VRasna’  is  the  Vanda  Roxburghii ;  syn.  Cymbidium  tessaloides,  Roxb ;  Aguru 
is  Aquilaria  Agaliocha,  Roxb. 


0 


0  haraka-samhitA. 


283 


LSmajjaka  and  Usliira  are  the  foremost  of  all  plasters  that  are 
destructive  of  or  alleviate  burning  ( of  the  skin ),  faults  of  tha 
skin,  and  perspiration.* 

Kushtha  is  the  foremost  of  all  remedies,  in  the  form  of  powders 
for  rubbing  or  of  plasters,  that  are  destructive  of  the  Wind.®1 

Liquorice  is  the  foremost  of  all  articles  that  are  used  for 
strengthening  vision,  increasing  the  semen  and  hair,  improving  the 
voice  and  complexion,  purifying  the  blood,  healing  sores  and 
killing  worms. 

Wind  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  contribute  to  life 
and  consciousness. 

Fire  is  the  foremost  of  all  agents  that  ripen  things  that- are 
raw  soften  what  is  tough  and  immobile,  dispel  cold,  and  alleviate 
pain  and  tremours.f 

Water  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  coagulate  or  solidify, 
or  harden,  or  increase  density. 

That  water  in  which  a  heated  clod  of  earth  has  been  dipped 
and  its  heat  extinguished,  is  the  foremost  of  all  remedies  for 
alleviating  excessive  thirst. 

Excessive  eating  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  that  lead  to  the 
evils  of  indigestion.  Eating  in  accordance  with  the  strength  of 
the  digestive  fire  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to  the 
stirring  up  and  strengthening  of  the  digestive  fire. 

Indulgence  in  exercises  and  exertions  in  harmonious  corres¬ 
pondence  with  the  physical  system  is  the  foremost  of  all  indulgences. 


*  Lamajjaka  is  the  Andropogon  Iwarancusa ;  Linn.  Ushira  are  the  roots  of  the 
A  udropogon  Muricatum. 

t  Anything  that  is  solidified,  or  rendered  rigid  and  hard,  or  coagulated,  or  made 
immobile,  is  said  to  be  ‘  Stambhita.’  Heat  is  the  foremost  of  all  agents  that  destroy 
or  alleviate  such  a  state  or  condition.  Wind  is  sometimes  collected  and  suppressed  in  a 
particular  spot.  Heat  frees  it  and  renders  it  mobile.— T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MhlTA . 


Eating  at  regular  hours  is  the  foremost  of  all  acts  that  lead 
to  health. 

Suppression  of  the  urgings  of  nature  is  the  foremost  of  all 
acts  that  lead  to  disease. 

Gratification  is  the  foremost  of  all  merits  that  attach  to  eating. 

Wine  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to  cheerfulness. 

Abuse  of  wine  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  that  lead  to  loss 
of  intelligence  and  memory.53 

The  eating  of  heavy  food  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  that  lead 
to  indigestion. 

cEating  only  once  in  course  of  a  day  is  the  foremost  of  all 
causes  that  lead  to  the  happiness  of  good  digestion. 

Sexual  intercourse  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to 
attacks  of  consumption. 

Suppressing  the  emission  of  the  vital  seed  is  the  foremost 
of  all  things  that  lead  to  impotency. 

Stale  food  ( viz.,  such  as  has  been  prepared  the  day  before  ) 
is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to  disgust  for  food. 

Abstention  from  food  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead 
to  reduction  of  the  period  of  life. 

Abstemiousness  in  diet  ( viz.,  eating  without  fully  gratifying 
hunger )  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to  thinness  of  the 
body.  Eating  before  the  food  previously  taken  has  been  digested 
is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to  diseases  of  the  Grahani. 

Irregularity  of  diet  (  viz.,  eating  excessively  at  one  time  and 
abstemiously  at  another )  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead 
to  loss  of  the  digestive  fire. 

Eating  food  made  up  of  inharmonious  ingredients  ( such  as 
^P'T^tW/faiilk^  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to  digusting  and 
/  repuisive  diseases. 


charara-samhitA. 


285 


Abstention  from  desire  and  other  impulses  of  the  mind  is  the 
foremost  of  all  regimens  for  the  physical  system. 

Exertion  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  are  baneful  to 
the  system.53 

Injudicious  correlation  (of  objects  and  the  senses)  is  the 
foremost  of  all  causes  of  disease. 

Sexual  intercourse  with  a  woman  in  her  season  of  impurity 
is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  that  bring  about  adversity  and  distress. 

The  observance  of  the  Brahmacharyya  mode  of  life  is  the 
foremost  of  all  things  that  induce  longevity.* 

The  thought  of  sexual  congress  is  the  foremost  of  all  remedies 
for  increasing  virility. 

Cheerlessness  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  are  destruc¬ 
tive  of  virility. 

Exertion  requiring  the  injudicious  exercise  of  strength  is  the 
foremost  of  all  things  that  induce  shortness  of  life. 

Continued  melancholy  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  in¬ 
crease  the  violence  of  disease. 

Bath  (  in  cool  and  pure  water  )  is  the  foremost  of  all  things 
that  dispel  fatigue. 

Cheerfulness  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  gladden 
the  mind. 

Sorrow  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  waste  or  dry  up 
the  body. 


*  By  1  Brahmacharyya’  is  meant  the  celebate  life  a  youth  leads  while  living  in 
the  abode  of  his  preceptor  for  study.  The  word,  however,  is  used  also  to  signify 
celebate  existence  or  abstention  from  sexual  congress  in  thought,  word,  and  deed, 
with  the  observance  of  certain  acts  of  piety.  In  some  places,  the  mere  abstention  from 
sexual  congress  during  the  season  of  impurity  is  implied  by  Brahmacharyya.— T. 


280 


CHA  RA  RA-SA  MH1 TA . 


Contentment  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  contribute  to 
nourishment  or  growth  of  the  physical  system.  Nourishment  or 
growth  of  the  sytem  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  induce  sleep. 

Sleep  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  make  the  system 
drowsy.64 

The  enjoyment  of  all  the  tastes  is  the  Foremost  of  all  things 
that  contribute  to  increase  of  strength. 

The  enjoyment  of  only  one  kind  of  taste  is  the  foremost  of 
all  things  that  weaken  the  system. 

Obstetric  obstruction  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  deserve 
to  be  got  rid  of. 

Indigested  food  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  deserve  to 
be  expelled  out. 

Infants  are  the  foremost  of  those  that  should  be  treated  with 
medicines  that  are  mild  (  in  respect  of  both  dose  and  kind.) 

Old  men  are  the  foremost  of  those  whose  diseases  deserve  to 
be  suppressed  (without  being  cured  if  incurable  or  very  difficult 
of  cure).* 

A  woman  during  the  period  of  gestation  is  the  foremost  of  all 
persons  for  whom  virulent  remedies  and  physical  exercises  should 
never  be  prescribed. 

Cheerfulness  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  that  lead  to  concep¬ 
tion  (by  women  ). 

The  excitement  or  provocation  of  all  the  faults  together  is  the 
foremost  of  all  diseases  that  are  difficult  of  cure. 


*  Certain  diseases  are  called  ‘  Yapya’  (vide  note  in  p.  109).  What  is  stated  here 
is  this  :  When  an  old  man  falls  ill,  what  is  necessary  for  the  physician  to  do  is  any 
how  to  give  relief  by  suppressing  the  strength  of  the  disease  without  seeking  to  accomplish 
a  radical  cure  which  may  be  difficult,  or  impossible,  or  which  may  be  unnecessary  in 
consequence  of  the  long  period  that  it  is  likely  to  take.— T. 


CHA  RAllA-SA  MHITA . 


287 


Indigestion  and  other  faults  in  the  stomach  are  the  foremost 
of  all  diseases  that  require  inharmonious  treatment,* 

Fever  is  the  foremost  of  all  diseases.  Leprosy  is  the  fore¬ 
most  of  all  long-continuing  diseases. 

Phthisis  ( with  cavity  in  the  lungs )  is  the  foremost  of  all 
complicated  diseases. 

Diabetes  is  the  foremost  of  all  obstinate  diseases.f 

Leeches  are  the  foremost  of  all  things  used  as  subsidiary 
intruments  for  surgical  operation.* 

The  application  of  the  enema  or  administration  of  enemata 
is  the  foremost  of  the  five  operations  or  administrations  resorted 
to  for  corrective  treatment. 

The  Himavat  mountains  are  the  foremost  of  all  places  from 
which  drugs  are  gathered. 

A  dry  and  arid  province  is  the  foremost  of  all  sanitaria. 

The  Soma  is  the  foremost  of  all  medicinal  herbs. 

A  marshy  tract  is  the  foremost  of  all  unhealthy  places. 

Obedience  to  the  injunctions  of  the  physican  is  the.  foremost 
of  the  patient’s  merits. 

The  physician  is  the  foremost  of  all  the  necessaries  of  treatment. 

The  atheist  is  the  foremost  of  all  persons  that  deserve  to 
be  avoided. 

Cupidity  or  covetousness  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that 
cause  distress. 


*  What  is  meant  by  inharmonious  treatment  is  the  administration  of  warm  or  heat- 
producing  medicines  when  the  system  apparently  wants  coolness.  This  has  been  made 
clear  later  on.— T. 

t  ‘  Anushangin’  diseases  are  those  that  are  very  obstinate. 

t  ‘  Anu5astra’  implies  a  subsidiary  intrument  for  surgical  operations.  It  may  also 
mean  a  substitute  for  an  instrument. 


288 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  refusal  of  the  patient  to  obey  the  directions  of  the 
physician  is  the  foremost  of  all  evil  symptoms  ( or  indications 
of  death  ). 

Absence  of  indifference  to  what  comes  upon  oneself  is  the 
foremost  of  all  symptoms  of  impatience.*56  Combinations  ( in 
respect  of  time,  place,  patient,  disease,  and  drugs  )  are  'the  fore¬ 
most  of  all  the  merits  of  a  physician. 

An  assemblage  of  physicians  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that 
contribute  to  certitude  of  diagnosis. 

A  knowledge  of  the  (  medical )  scriptures  is  the  foremost  of 
all  medicines  ( that  a  physician  can  possess  ). 

Reasoning  based  upon  the  (  medical )  scriptures  is  the  fore¬ 
most  of  all  means  (for  diagnosing  disease  and  treating  it  for  cure). 
Proficiency  of  knowledge  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  necessary 
for  arriving  at  a  correct  conception  of  the  reasonableness  of 
treatment. 

Absence  of  exertion  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to 
loss  of  purpose  and  time.67 

Experience  possessed  by  the  physician  is  the  foremost  of 
things  leading  to  certitude  of  conclusions.  Incompetence  of  the 
physician  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  of  fear. 

Conversation  and  discussion  with  professors  of  the  same 
science  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to  vigor  of  the 
understanding. 

Superior  knowledge  ( in  the  physician  )  is  the  foremost  of  all 
things  needed  for  ascertainment  of  time  or  opportuneness. 

Irresolution  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  that  lead  to  the 
slipping  away  of  opportunities. 


*  By  ‘  Nirveda’  is  meant  a  disregard  of  worldly  objects,  arising  from  a  convic¬ 
tion  of  their  uselessness.  The  reverse  of  this  •  is  ‘  Anirveda.’  What  is  stated  here  is' 
that  the  foremost  of  all  indications  of  impatience  is  a  spirit  of  restlessness,  i.  e. ,  the 
inability  to  bear  contentedly  what  comes  upon  oneself.— T. 


OH  A  KA  KA  A  M  HI  TA . 


289 


Incompetence  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  of  fear. 

The  preceptor  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  that  aid  one  in 
the  acquisition  of  a  science. 

The  Science  of  Life  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  are 
regarded  as  nectar.* 

Actual  experience  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  lead  to 
certitude  of  conclusions. 

Good  counsels  are  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  deserve  to 
be  accomplished.  The  utterance  of  incoherent  words  is  the  fore¬ 
most  of  all  things  that  are  baneful. 

Renunciation  of  all  things  is  the  foremost  of  all  causes  that 
contribute  to  happiness.68 

[  Here  are  some  Verses  ] . 

Thus  are  indicated  the  one  hundred  and  fifty-two  things 
which  are  regarded  as  the  foremost  of  their  respective  kinds.  It 
has  been  laid  down  that  these  are  sufficient  for  the  cure  or  allevia¬ 
tion  of  the  diverse  diseases  that  afflict  mankind.1 

Amongst  those  things  that  are  productive  of  the  same  or 
similar  consequences,  those  which  are  regarded  as  the  foremost  and 
which  are  superior  in  efficacy,  and  those  again  that  are  inferior  in 
point  of  efficacy,  have  all  been  pointed  out.2 

Whatever  things  are  beneficial  in  allaying  or  curing  (  excited  ) 
wind  and  bile  and  phlegm,  have  been,  principally,  laid  down,  as  also 
all  those  which  are  of  superior  efficacy  iri  the  matter  of  mitigating 
or  curing  disease.3 

Mastering  these  properly,  the  physician  that  is  endued  with 
skill,  should  administer  the  treatment  that  is  beneficial.  Verily,  the 
physician,  by  conducting  himself  in  this  way,  succeeds  in  earning 
both  righteousness  and  wealth  .4 

*  Nectar  is  a  celestial  drink  that  bestows  immortality, —  T. 

37 


290 


CfJARAKA-SAMHl  TA. 


All  that  is  suitable  to  the  way  ( of  life  )  and  that  is  agreeable 
to  the  mind  is  said  to  constitute  what  is  called  Pathya  ( or  regi- 
men ).  What,  however,  is  the  reverse  of  Pathya  and  is  not 
agreeable  to  the  mind,  should  never  be  attended  to." 

Combined  with  measure,  time  or  season,  the  nature  of  the 
operation,  place,  the  constitution  of  the  body,  the  faults  that  have 
been  provoked,  and  the  other  attributes,  both  what  is  Pathya  and 
what  is  its  reverse  are  seen  to  be  this  or  that  (  i.  e,,  baneful  or' 
beneficial  )8 

Hence,  although  the  nature  ( beneficial  or  otherwise )  has  been 
assigned  ( of  the  diverse  articles  mentioned  above  )  it  should  be 
remembered  that  that  nature  depends  upon  ( the  considerations 
of )  measure  and  the  rest.  The  physician  who  desires  success- 
should,  therefore,  administer  curative  operations,  relying  upon  the 
nature  of  these  articles  ( as  assigned  above).*7 

Having  listened  to  these  words  of  the  illustrious  son  of  Atrr, 
Agnive^a  once  more  asked  that  holy  Rishi,  saying. — Thy  illustrious 
self  has  explained  only  this  matter  just  according  to  our  question, 
(without  referring  to  other  topics  connected  with  it.)  We  now 
desire  to  hear  thy  holy  self  expound  to  us,  without  much  brevity, 
what  the  indications  in  their  entirety  are  of  the  different  kinds 
of  wine.8 

Unto  him  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said  :  Paddy,  fruits,  roots, 
pith,  flowers,  stalks,  leaves,  and  barks,  O  Agnive9a,  are,  in  brief, 
the  eight  sources  of  wines.  The  ninth  is  sugar.® 


*  What  is  stated  here  is  this :  Red  paddy  and  other  articles  Have  been  mentioned. 
Some  have  been  declared  to  be  beneficial ;  some  injurious. '  Their  character  or  nature, 
as  such,  depends  upon  the  measure  in  which  they  are  taken  ;  the  time  when  they  are 
taken ;  &c.  Although  their  nature  thus  depends  upon  measure  and  the  rest,  yet  in 
speaking  of  them,  they  must  be  spoken  of  as  beneficial  or  otherwise.  Their  nature  has 
been  assigned,  but  that  nature,  it  should  not  be  forgotten*  depends  upon  those  well- 
known  conditions.  The  physician  in  treating  disease  should  apply  his  curativesor  regimen, 
relying  upon  their  nature  as  assigned  above  and  remembering  that  that  nature  is  not 
independent  of  the  considerations  of  measure  and  the  rest. —  T. 


CBa  ra  rasa  m  hit a  . 


591 

IFrom  these,  by  permutation  and  combination,  infinite  varieties 
©f  wine  may  be  produced.  Amongst  them,  four  and  eighty 
varieties  are  regarded  beneficial  ■(  or,  as  regimen  ).  They  are  as 
follows, — Sura,  Souvira,  Tushodaka,  Maireya,  Medaka,  and  Dha- 
«yamla  are  from  paddy.*10 

Mridvika  (< a ),  Kharjjura  (i),  Kagmaryya  (c),  Dhanwana  (d), 
Raja  dan  a  (e\  Trinagunya  (/),  Parusha  (g),  Abhaya  ( h ),  Amlaka  (i), 
Mrigalandika  (/),  Jamvava(£),  Kapithwa  (/),  Kuvala  (m),  Vadara(«), 
Karkandhu  (a),  Pilu(^),  Piyala  (y),  Panasa  ( r ),  Nyagrodha  ( s ), 
Agwathwa  (?),  Plaksha  (»),  Kapitana  ( v ),  Udumvara  ( w ),  Ajamo- 
■da  (x),  ^ringataka  (y\  and  £ankhini  {z), — these  are  the  six  and 
twenty  fonts  from  which  fruit-wines  are  manufactured.11 

*  It  is  difficult  to  distinguish  these-  varieties  of  wine  manufactured  from  paddy. 
Nor  are  the  processes  now  known. —  T. 

•a.  Raisins.  Called  also  Draksha.  Tiiis  vinifera,\Linn.  The  fruits  are  ordinarily  called 
Kismissin  India. 

i.  The  wild  date  palm.  Phtenix  Sylvestris,  Roxb. 

■e.  G militia  arborea,  Linn. 

S.  Called  also  Dharmana.  Dhamani  in  Hindi  and  Bengali.  Grewia  elaslica,  Royle. 

*•  Mimttsops  Indica,  D.  C.;  syn.  Mimusops  hexandra,  Roxb. 

/.  Called  also  Ketaki.  Pandanus  odoratissimus,  Linn, 
g.  Grewia  Asiatkus,  Linn, 
di.  Chebulic  Myrobalans. 

Phyllanthu-s  emblica,  Linn. 

Called  also  Vibhitaki.  Ttrminalia  Belhrica,  Roxb. 
k.  Eugenia  Jambolana ,  Lamb, 
i.  Feronia  elephantum.  The  wood  apple. 
m.  A  large  variety  of  Vadara  or  Zizypkus  Jujuba,  Lamb, 

u.  Zizypkus  Jujuba,  Lamk. 

o.  Called  also  rigalakoli.'  Zizyphus  atnoplia,  Mill. 

p.  Salvadora  Persica,  Linn. 

f .  Buchanania  lalifolia ,  Roxb. 

r.  Artocarpus  integrifolia,  Linn. 

s.  Called  also  Vata.  Ficus  Bengalensis,  Linn. 

t.  Ficus  religiosa ,  Linn. 

u.  Called  also  Parkati.  Ficus  injecloria.,  Willd. 

v.  Called  also  Amrataka.  Spondias  mangifera  ;  Peri. 

w.  Ficus  glomerata ,  Willd. 

x.  Pimpinella  involucrala ;  syn.  Apiurn  involucrala,  Roxb. 

y.  Called  in  Bengali  Paniphala.  Trapa  bishinosa,  Roxb. 
x.  Called  also  Chorepushpi.  Andropogon  dcicularis,  Roxb . 


292 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Vidarigandha  ( a ),  Afwagandha  ( b ),  Krishnagandha  ( c ),  £ata- 
vari  (d),  £yama  ( e ),  Trivrit  ( f ),  Danti  ( g ),  Dravariti  (A),  Vilwa  (?')k 
Uruvuka  (J  ),  and  Chitra  (k),  are  the  eleven  from  whose  roots  root- 
wines  are  manufactured.12 

Cala  (/),  Priyaka  ( m ),  Aswakarna  ( n ),  Chandana  (o),  Syanda- 
na(/>),  Khadira  ( q ),  Kadara  (r),  Saptaparna  (s),  Arjjuna  (7), 
Asana  ( u ),  Arimeda  (v),  Tinduka  (w),  Kinihi  ( x ),  Cami  (y),  Cukti- 


a.  Called  also  Calaparni.  Desmodiuvi  Gangeticum ;  syn.  Hedy sar um  Gangeticum ; 

Linn. 

b.  Withania  somnifera,  Don  ;  syn.  Physaiis  flexuosa,  Roxb. 

c.  Called  also  Sobbanjana ;  Moringa  pterygospenna,  Gaerln ;  syn.  Hyperanth^ra 

moringa,  Willd. 

d.  Called  also  Catamuli.  Asparagus  racemosus,  Willd. 

e.  Iclmocarpus  frutescens  ;  syn.  Echites  frutescens,  Roxb. 

f.  Ipomaeti  Turpethum  ;  syn.  Convovlulus  Turpethum,  Linn. 

g.  Baliospermum  montanum ;  syn.  Croton  polyandrum,  Roxb.  The  Commentator 

Gangadhara  takes  Danti  here  to  mean  Hastidanti  or  Nagadanti.  Ordinarily, 
Hastidanti  or  Nagadanti  means  the  garden  raddish.  In  medical  science,  it  implies 
the  plant  commonly  called  “Cherapata  Danti”  in  Bengali,  which  is  a  variety 
of  Baliospermum  montanum. 

h.  Dravanti  is  a  variety  of  Danti  whose  roots  are  smaller. 

i.  AEgle  marmelos. 

j.  Called  also  Eranda.  Ricinus  communis,  Linn. 

k.  Plumbago  zeylanica,  Linn. 

l.  Shorea  robusta,  Gaerln. 

m.  Called  also  Priyangu.  Aglaia  Roxburgliiana. 

n.  It  is  a  variety  of  Shorea  robusta,  Gaertn. 

o.  The  red  variety  is  nsed.  Pterocarpus  santalinus. 

p.  Otherwise  called  Tinisa.  Ougenia  dalbergioides,  Benth ;  syn.  Dalbergia  Oojeinensis, 

Roxb. 

q.  Acacia  catechu.  Unit ;  syn.  Mimosa  catechu,  Linn. 

r.  A  variety  of  the  above. 

s.  Called  also  Saptachcchada.  Alslonia  scholaris ;  syn.  Echites  scholaris,  Roxb. 

t.  Terminalia  Arjuna,  Bedd ;  syn.  Pentaptera,  Arjuna,  Roxb. 

u.  Called  Piyasala  in  the  Indian  vernaculars.  Terminalia  tomentosa ,  Roxb. 

v.  Acacia  Farnesiana,  Willd ;  syn.  Mimosa  Farnesiana,  Roxb. 

w.  Diospyros  Embryopteris,  Pers. 

x.  The  Commentator  Gangadhara  thinks  that  this  does  not  mean  Apamarga  or 

Achyranthes  aspera,  Linn.,  but  some  other  plant  known  by  that  name. 

y.  Acacia  Suma,  Ham  ;  syn.  Mimosa  Suma  Roxb. 


charaka-samhitA. 


293- 


patia  {a),  Cingtjapa  (3),  Cirisha  ( c ),  Vanjula  (d),  Dhanwana  ( e ), 
and  Madhuka  {/), — these  twenty  are  trees  from  whose  pith  pith- 
wines  are  manufactured.13 

Padma  (g),  Utpala  ( h ),  Nalina  (i),  Kumuda  (/),  Saugandhika  (/c), 
Pundarika  ( /),  Catapatra  ( m ),  Madhuka  ( n ),  Priyangu  ( o ),  and 
Dhataki  (/), — these  are  the  ten  flowers  from  which  flower-wines 
are  manufactured.14 

Patola  (q),  and  Tadaka  ( r ),  are  the  two  plants  from  whose 
leaves  leaf-wines  are  manufactured.15 

Ikshu  (j),  Kandekshu  ( t ),  Ikshuvalika  (m),  and  Pundraka  ( v ), 
are  the  four  plants  from  whose  stems  stem-wines  are  mnufactured.18 


a.  ‘  Cukapatra’  is  the  correct  reading ;  and  not  1  Cuka’,  as  observed  by  Gangadhara. 

Culcapatra  is  a  variety  of  Vadara  or  Zizyplms  Jujuba,  Lamk. 

b.  Dablergia  Sissoo,  Roxb. 

c.  Mimossa  Sirissa,  Roxb,  syn ;  Albezzia  Lebbek,  Bentham. 

d.  Saraca  Indica,  Linn  ;  syn.  Jonesia  Asoka,  Roxb. 

e.  Called  also  Dharmana.  Gretoia  elastica,  Royle. 

/.  Russia  lalifolia,  Roxb. 

g.  It  has  various  names.  Nelumbium  speciosuin,  Linn. 

h.  Otherwise  called  Nilotpala.  Nymphaa  stellata,  Linn. 

i.  It  is  a  variety  of  Padma  with  fewer  petals. 

/.  Nymphaa  Lotus,  Linn. 

k.  Otherwise  called  Kalhara.  A  variety  of  g. 

l.  It  is  white  Padma  having  a  large  number  (hundreds)  of  petals. 

m.  A  red  variety  of  the  above. 

n.  Russia  latifolia,  Roxb. 

o.  Agalia  Roxburghina,  W.  A. 

p.  Woodfordia  floribunda,  Salisb.j  syn.  Grislea  tomentosa,  Roxb. 

q.  Trichosanthes  diocia,  Roxb. 

r.  Otherwise  called  Tadasa;  The  Commentator  Gangadhara  takes  it  to  be  the  well- 

known  tree  which  is  regarded  as  a  variety  of  the  Palmyra  palm  or  Borassus 
flabelliformis,  Linn. 

s.  Sacharum  Ojjicinarum,  Linn.  The  ordinary  sugar-cane.  The  dark  variety  is  im¬ 

plied  here. 

t.  Called  Khalia  in  the  Indian  vernaculars.  A  variety  of  the  sugar-cane  that  yields 

less  juice  and  is  much  harder. 

u.  Commonly  called  Lata.  A  variety  of  s. 

v.  A  white  variety  of  r. 


294 


CHAR  AKA -SA  MHI TA . 


Tilvaka(a),  Lodhra  (6),  Elavaluka  ( c ),  and  Kramuka,  (d), — these 
are  the  four  from  whose  barks  bark-wines  are  manufactured.17 

Sugar  is  the  only  thing  from  which  sugar-wine  is  manu¬ 
factured.18 

These  are  called  Asava  (distilled  spirits)  in  consequence  of 
their  being  got  by  distillation.* 

Even  these  are  the  four  and  eighty  varieties  of  distilled  spirits. 

I  have  thus  explained  the  four  and  eighty  kinds  of  wines  as  existing 
separately  from  one  another.19 

These  (four  and  eighty  kinds  of)  wines  are  capable  of  being  , 
mixed  with  a  large  number  of  other  objects.  These  latter,  again, 
may  be  used  in  a  large  variety  of  proportions.  Hence  wines  may 
be  of  diverse  kinds.  There  may  also  be  diverse  ways  of 
dressing  them.  Then,  again,  these  distilled  spirits,  though  mixed 
with  other  objects  and  dressed  by  means  of  such  objects  as  are 
used  in  dressing  them,  yet  exhibit  the  virtues  of  those  things  from 
which  they  are  originally  manufactured.f20 

Examining  (  with  the  aid  of  actual  experience  )  the  effects 
produced  by  the  large  variety  of  wines  thus  manufactured,  intelli¬ 
gent  physicians  (  in  prescribing  wines  for  use)  prescribe  the  articles 

a  A  white  variety  of  Symflocos  racemosa,  Roxb 

b.  Symflocos  racemosa ,  Roxb. 

c.  A  fragrant  powder  of  a  bark  sold  under  that  name.  It  is  believed  to  come  from  the 

Spice  islands. 

d.  Called  also  Guvaka.  Areca  catechu.,  Linn. 

*  *  Asava’  from  the  root  ‘  As’  which  implies  distilling.  The  etymology  of  the  word 
is  explained  by  the  Rishi. —  T. 

+  The  sense  seems  be  this  :  distilled  spirits,  originally  of  four  and  eighty  kinds, 
are  mixed  with  other  things ;  or,  rather,  things  other  than  those  from  which  they  are 
manufactured,  are  soaked  in  them.  They  are,  again,  dressed  with  the  aid  of  various 
other  objects,  for  adding  to  their  flavour  or  properties.  Now,  in  consequence  of  such 
soaking  and  such  dressing,  distilled  spirits  are  of  infinite  variety.  What  is  next  said 
is  that  though  mixed  with  other  objects  and  dressed  with  the  aid  of  others,  yet  they 
retain  the  virtues  of  their  original  sources.  They  may  take  new  virtues  in  consequence 
of  things  being  soaked  in  them  and  their  being  dressed  with  other  articles,  yet  the 
virtues  of  the  original  objects  are  never  lost — T. 


CHAR  A  KA-Sa  MlilTA . 


295 


that  should  be  mixed  with  them,  the  articles  with  which  they  should 
be  dressed,  the  places  for  which  which  of  them  are  suited,  as  also 
the  seasons,  measures,  &c,  that  are  adapted  to  particular  varieties.21 

(  Here  occurs  a  summary  in  verse.  ) 

The  four  and  eighty  kinds  of  principal  wines  that  contribute 
strength  to  mind,  body,  and  the  digestive  fire,  that  destroy  insomnia, 
grief,  and  disgust  for  food,  and  that  produce  cheerfulness  and  joy, 
have  been  spoken  of.  In  this  Lesson,  called  “  Ya}jah-Purushiyam’, 
the  Rishi  has  laid  down,  with  details,  the  foremost  theories  on  the 
subject  of  the  birth  or  origin  of  body  and  diseases,  the  certain  con¬ 
clusions  with  respect  to  food,  as  also  the  principal  wines.!.-11 

Thus  ends  the  twentyfifth  Lesson,  called  Yajjah-Purushiyam, 
in  Agnivega’s  treatise  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  XXVI. 

We  shall  next  expound  the  Lesson  called  Atreya-Bhadrakapya. 
Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.*1 

Once  on  a  time,  the  son  of  Atri,  and  Bhadrakapya,  and 
£akunteya,  and  the  full-eyed  Maudgalya,  and  the  golden-eyed 
Kaugika^  the  sinless  Bharadwaja  otherwise  called  Kumaragiras,  the 
blessed  king  Varyovida,  that  foremost  of  all  intelligent  men,  Nimi 
the  ruler  of  the  Videhas,  Vadiga  of  high  intelligence,  and 
Kankayana-valhika,  that  foremost  of  all  physicians  of  the  Valhika 
country, — these  Rishis,  all  of  whom  were  old  in  years  and  learning 
and  all  of  whom  had  subjugated  their  souls,  came  together  to  the 
delightful  Chaitraratha  woods,  desirous  of  passing  a  few  days  in  en¬ 
joyment  and  pleasure.  As  those  Rishis  conversant  with  every 
topic  were  seated  there,  the  following  discourse  of  grave  import 

•  « Atreya-Bhadrakapyy’  implies  *  that  relating  to  the  son  of  Atri  and  to  Bhadrakapya’; 
hence  that  Lesson  so  called  represents  a  conversation  or  discourse  between  Atri’s  son 
Punarvasu  and  some  other  Rishis  amongst  whom  was  Bhadrakapya.—  T. 


296 


CH  A  RA  KA-SAMHl  TA . 


took  place  among  them  on  the  subject  of  the  proper  ascertainment 
of  the  (  different)  tastes  and  food.*2-5 

There  is  one  kind  of  taste,  said  Bharakapya;  which  persons 
skilled  in  the  subject  regard  as  one  of  the  five  objects  of  the 
senses,  viz.,  that  which  relates  to  the  tongue.  That,  again,  is  not 
different  from  water.8 

The  Brahmana  ^akunteya  said  that  there  are  two  tastes,  their 
virtues  being  that  one  of  them  cuts  or  removes  from  the  body  all  bad 
humours  or  ingredients,  and  the  other  only  checks  or  curbs  them.7 

There  are  three  tastes,  said  the  full-eyed  Maudgalya.  Their 
virtues  are  cutting,  curbing,  and  both.8 

There  are  four  tastes,  said  the  golden-eyed  KauQika.  They 
are  agreeable  and  beneficial,  agreeable  and  not  beneficial,  dis¬ 
agreeable  and  not  beneficial,  and  disagreeable  and  beneficial.9 

There  are  five  tastes,  said  KumaraQiras-Bharadwaja.  They 
appertain  to  Earth,  Water,  Fire,  Wind,  and  Ether  ( or  Space).10 

There  are  six  tastes,  said  the  royal  sage  Varyovida.  They  are 
heavy,  light,  cold,  hot,  oily,  and  dry.11 

There  are  seven  tastes,  said  Nimi  the  ruler  of  the  Videhas. 
They  are  sweet,  sour,  saltish,  pungent,  bitter,  astringent  and 
(strained)  ashes.12 

There  are  eight  tastes,  said  Vadiga-Dhamargava.  They  are 
sweet,  sour,  saltish,  pungent,  bitter,  astringent,  (strained) 
ashes,  and  that  which  remains  in  an  unmanifest  form.13 

The  tastes  are  infinite  in  number,  said  KanSyana,  that  refuge 
of  all  the  physicians  of  the  Valhika  country,  in  consequence  of 
the  infinite  .variety  of  their  virtues,  operations  or  effects,  and 
methods  of  correction  (  or  mixture  for  adding  to  their  virtues,  &c.).1* 

The  illustrious  son  of-  Atri,  viz'.,  Punarvasu,  said  that  the 
number  of  tastes  is  truly  six.  They"  are  sweet,  sour,  saltish, 

*  It  seems  that  the  Rishis  and  royal  sages  named  here  are  altogether  ten  in  number, 
‘  Purnaksha’  and  ‘  Hiranyaksha’  are  adjectives.  The  reading  ‘  Sachanaghah’  is  better 
than  ‘  Cathanaghah’  as  ‘  Catha’  would  make  the  number  eleven.— T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MB  1 TA . 


297 


pungent,  bitter,  and  astringent.  The  source  from  which  these 
six  flow,  i.  e.,  their  origin,  is  Water.  Their  operations  or 
effects  are  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  cutting  and  curbing.  In  con¬ 
sequence,  again,  of  admixture  or  combination,  they  become 
both  cutting  and  curbing  at  the  same  time.  Agreeable  and 
Disagreeable  are  their  divisions  that  depend  upon  the  likes  and  dis¬ 
likes  of  men.  Beneficial  and  Not-beneficial  are  their  powers.  The 
refuge  of  the  Tastes  are  the  modifications  of  the  five  primal  ele¬ 
ments  (  of  Earth,  Water,  Fire,  Wind,  and  Ether  or  Space  ).  The 
Tastes,  again,  depend  upon  the  ( original )  nature  of  their  refuge, 
the  modifications  of  that  refuge,  combinations  of  the  substances 
that  form  their  refuge,  as  also  place,  and  time.*15 

The  virtues  or  properties  (attaching  to  the  Tastes)  occur  in 
those  which  constitute  the  refuge  (of  the  Tastes),  called  objects. 
Those  virtues  are  heavy,  light,  cold,  warm,  oily,  dry,  and  others.14 


*  The  modifications  of  the  five  primal  elements  constitute  the  refuge  of  the  Tastes. 
Every  substance  is  formed  by  modification  of  those  elements.  What  is  said,  therefore, 
is  that  material  substances  are  the  refuge  of  the  tastes,  i.e.,  the  Tastes  inhere  in  them, 
‘  Bhakti  ’  implies  like  or  desire.  The  agreeable  or  disagreeable  character  of  the  Tastes 
arises  not  from  anything  in  the  Tastes  themselves  but  from  the  likes  or  dislikes  of  men, 
so  that  what  is  sweet  to  one  man  may  not  be  so  to  another.  ‘  Prakritivikriti  .  .  . 
vacah’ Chakrapani  explains  that  ‘vacah’  is  to  be  taken  with  each  of  the 
words  preceding  it.  Hence,  what  is  said  is  that  the  Tastes  depend  upon  ‘  Prakriti,’ 
‘  vikriti,’  ‘  vichara,’  ‘  de9a,’  and  ‘  kala.’  Thus  Mudga  (  Phaseolus  Mungo)  is  astringent- 
sweet.  Its  nature,  however,  is  light.  This  lightness  depends  upon  the  *  prakriti’  or 
nature  of  Mudga,  and  not  upon  the  astringency  and  sweetness  of  its  taste.  Indeed,  if 
taste  were  to  determine  the  property,  in  this  case  the  astringency  and  sweetness  would 
have  produced  the  property  of  heaviness.  ‘Vikriti,’  as  fried  paddy,  which  is  light ;  but 
cakes  of  rice  are  heavy.  ‘  Vicharah’  is  a  technical  term  in  medicine,  implying  admixture 
or  combination.  Chakrapani  cites  the  instance  of  honey  mixed  with  ghee.  This  is 
as  baneful  as  poison,  regardless  of  the  taste  that  inheres  to  the  combination.  ‘  Deea’ 
stands  both  for  places  on  the  Earth  as  marshy  tracts,  mountainous  countries,  &c.,  and 
limbs  of  the  body  also.  Certain  objects  growing  in  marshy  tracts  have  one  kind  of  taste. 
The  same  objects,  when  growing  on  mountains,  have  different  tastes  with  different  virtues. 
Then,  again,  different  tastes  inhere  to  different  parts  of  the  body.  The  bones  of  a  deer 
have  one  kind  of  taste  ;  its  flesh  again  has  another  kind,  &c.  ‘  Kala’  similarly  implies 

both  seasons  of  the  year  and  periods  of  life.  An  object  of  a  certain  taste  is  beneficial 
at  a  certain  season  but  not  so  in  another  ;  or,  it  may  be  beneficial  to  a  child  but  not  so 
to  an  old  man.—  T. 


38 


CHARAKA-SAMHi  TA. 


Kshara  (strained  ashes)  are  so  called  from  their  being  produced 
by  ksharana  (dropping  down  or  straining),  This  is  not  a  taste. 
It  is,  on  the  other  hand,  an  object.  It  is,  in  fact,  produced  from 
many  kinds  of  taste.  Hence,  it  has  many  tastes.  Among  them, 
pungent  and  saline  predominate.  It  is  composed  of  many  objects 
of  the  senses.  It  is  manufactured  with  the  aid  of  different 
processes.*1  f 

Without  doubt,  in  their  original  refuge  tA  unm^fest  ex- 
istence  (or  presence)  of  the  Tastes.  So  also  in  their  combinations 
where  particular  ones  predominate.  So  too  in  objects  in  which  are 
combinations  (of  the  Tastes)  with  particular  ones  predominating.f18 

In  consequence,  again,  of  the  diversity  of  such  conditions  of 
their  existence  as  the  refuge  in  which  they  inhere,  (their  properties, 
operations,  &c.),  the  quality  of  innumerableness  does  not  attach 


*  The  reasoning  in  this  passage  is  thus  explained  by  Chakrapani.  Vadifa- 
Dhamargava  had  included  Kshara  in  his  enumeration  of  Tastes.  Punarvasu  remarks  that 
Khara  is  not  a  taste  and  assigns  his  reasons  for  it.  First,  Khara  is  produced  by  the  visible 
process  of  straining.  (The  root  kshara  implies  dropping  down  or  straining).  It  is  an 
object,  capable  of  being  seen,  touched,  and  smelt.  It  is  thus  a  combination  of  many 
objects  of  the  senses,  whereas'  taste  appertains  to  only  one  sense  and  cannot  be  seen  or 
touched,  and  smelt.  Being  produced  from  diverse  objects,  Kshara  must  have  diverse 
tastes,  for  effects  must  correspond  with  causes.  Tastes,  again,  are  never  produced  by 
visible  or  artificial  processes  ;  but  Kshara  is  ‘  karanabhinirvrittam,  ’  which,  as  Chakrapani 
explains,  means  ‘karanena  bhasmacravadina  abhinirvrittam  kritam,’  i.e.,  produced  or 
manufactured  with  the  aid  of  artificial  processes. — T. 

t  The  language  of  the  original  is  exceedingly  terse.  What  is  stated  here  is  this  : 
the  1  prakriti  ’  or  original  source  of  the  tastes  is  water.  Water,  however,  is  apparently 
tasteless.  How  then  can  the  six  tastes  be  said  to  belong  to  it  or  as  existing  in  it  ?  The 
Rishi  explains  that  the  tastes  do  exist  in  their  ‘prakriti’  or  water,  but  that  existence  is 
unmanifest.  This,  as  Chakrapani  points  out,  implies  that  whatever  the  taste  one  feels 
when  water  is  brought  in  contact  with  the  tongue,  that  taste  is  really  nothing  else 
than  sweet,  sour,  &c.,  in  an  unmanifest  state.  Similary,  when  the  tastes  exist  in  a 
combined  state  with  particular  ones  predominating,  the  others  must  be  held  to  be  existing 
in  an  unmanifest  state.  In  objects  also  in  which  the  tastes  exist  in  a  combined  state  with 
particular  ones  predominating,  the  subordinate  ones  must  be  taken  as  occurring  in  an 
unmanifest  state.  The  mention,  in  the  text,  of  ‘Anurasa-samanvite  dravye’  after  that 
of  ‘  Anurase  ’  seems  to  be  superfluous,  unless  it  be  the  intention  of  the  Rishi  to  refer  to 
the  abstract  and  the  concrete  separately. — T. 


CHARAKA  SAMH1TA.  299 

to  the  Tastes.  Nor  are  Tastes  different  from  the  substances  in 
which  they  inhere.*19 

The  source  or  origin  of  the  Tastes  is  due  to  the  exceedingly 
diverse  varieties  of  combination  in  which  they  exist.  Notwithstand¬ 
ing  this,  innumerableness  does  not  arise  in  respect  of  their  properties 
and  nature.  Hence,  intelligent  physicians  never  lay  down 
that  the  effects  are  infinite  of  the  Tastes  which  exist  in  infinite 
varieties  of  combination.f20 

Depending  upon  these  reasons,  we  shall  lay  down  instructions 
about  the  separate  indications  of  the  six  Tastes  when  they  exist 
not  in  a  combined  but  separate  state. 

At  the  outset,  however,  we  shall  say  something  referring  to 
the  diversity  of  objects  (which  are  the  refuge  of  the  Tastes).  All 
objects  are  the  result  of  the  combinations  of  five  primal  elements, 
{viz.,  Earth,  Water,  Fire,  Wind,  and  Ether  or  Space).  As  regards 
Medical  Science,  objects  are  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  those  endued  with 
animation  and  those  that  are  inanimate.  The  attributes  which 
inhere  in  objects  are  Sound,  &c.,  heaviness,  &c.,  ending  with 
solubility.  The  operations  performed  with  their  aid  are  five, 
beginning  with  vomiting,  as  has  been  already  said.f21 

*  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  one  of  the  previous  speakers  has  said  that  the  Tastes 
are  innumerable  in  consequence  of  their  refuge  properties,  &c.,  being  innumerable. 
The  Rishi  contradicts  that  assertion.  He  says  that  although  the  refuge,  properties, 
operations,  &c.  of  the  tastes  an  innumerable,  yet  innumerableness  cannot  be  predicated 
of  them.  The  Tastes  inhere  in  diverse  refuges,  have  diverse  properties  and  operations, 
&c.  But  they  do  not,  on  that  account,  change  their  own  essential  nature.  They  still 
remain  as  tastes,  without  being  anything  else.  Sweetness  may  attach  to  a  hundred 
different  things  without  changing  its  character  or  nature  as  sweetness.  It  is  sweetness  in 
every  case.  Then,  again,  the  tastes,  as  ‘  afrayi,  ’  are  not  different  from  their  ‘afraya;’  that, 
is,  sweetness  is  not  something  different  from  sugar,  sugar  and  sweetness  are  the  same. —  T. 

*  Tastes  exist  in  a  state  of  union.  The  varieties  of  combination  or  union  are  in¬ 
finite.  Although  the  ‘  abhinirvritti  ’  or  origin  of  taste  is  in  such  infinite  varieties  of  com¬ 
bination,  yet  infinity  or  innumerableness  does  not  attach  to  its  ‘gunaprakriti,’  i.  e'.,  'to  the 
‘  prakriti  ’  of  its  ‘  guna,  ’  or  *  guna  ’  and  *  prakriti  ’  (for  the  compound  may  be  taken 
both  ways. —  T. 

$  ‘  Asminnevarthe,’  i.  e,,  as  regards  the  purposes  of  the  Science  of  Life.  Chakra- 
pani  explains  that  this  is  said  ‘atiprasanga-doshat,’  i.  e.,  for  avoiding  the  fault  of  need- 


300 


CHA  RAKA  -SA  MHITA. 


Amongst  objects  those  that  are  principally  heavy,  sharp  or 
pungent,  hard,  mild,  immobile,  clear,  thick,  gross,  and  possessed 
of  scent,  are  regarded  as  appertaining  to  Earth. 

These  objects  promote  the  growth,  hardness,  heaviness,  and 

consistency  of  the  body.22 

Those  that  are  principally  liquid,  oily,  cold,  mild,  soft,  unctious, 
and  mobile,  are  regarded  as  appertaining  to  Water. 

These  objects  promote  impurities,  oiliness,  numbness,  stoppage 
of  secretions,  and  cheerfulness  and  joy  (in  both  body  and  mind).23 

Those  that  are  principally  hot,  keen,  subtile,  light,  dry,  and  clear, 
and  largely  endued  with  the  attribute  of  form,  are  regarded  as 
appertaining  to  Fire.24 

Those  that  are  principally  light,  cold,  dry,  sharp,  clear,  subtile, 
and  largely  endued  with  the  attribute  of  touch,  are  regarded  as 
appertaining  to  Wind.26 

Those  that  are  mild,  light,  subtile,  smooth,  and  largely  endued 
with  the  property  of  sound,  are  regarded  as  having  Ether  for  their 
essence.26 

In  consequence  of  such  instructions,  it  will  be  apparent  that 
there  is  no  object  in  the  world  that  is  not  capable  of  being  used  as 
medicine,  depending  upon  the  diverse  reasons  and  the  diverse 
purposes  set  forth  in  the  previous  Lessons. 

Then,  again,  objects  do  not  become  (efficacious)  medicines 
simply  in  consequence  of  the  puissance  of  their  attributes.*27 

Objects,  in  consequence  of  their  own  puissance,  or  that  of 
their  attributes,  or  that  of  both  themselves  and  their  attributes,  in 
different  seasons  and  coming  in  contact  with  diverse  substrata, 
and  depending  upon  different  kinds  of  combination,  produce  results 
on  the  system. 

less  elaboration  which  is  irrelevancy.  The  attributes  have  been  spoken  of  in  Lesson  j, 
aphorism  48  (ante).  As  to  ‘chetanavat’  and  ‘  achetana,’  see  Lesson  I,  adhorism 
47.  The  five  operations  have  been  frequently  referred  to  in  the  previous  Lessons.— T. 

*  To  become  efficacious  medicines  it  is  necessary  that  the  considerations  of  measure, 
time,  place,  &c.,  should  also  be  attended  to, — T, 


CHA  RA  RA-SA  M  HIT  A . 


301 


The  results  produced  are  called  their  Action. 

The  virtue  or  puissance  by  which  they  produce  these  results  is 
called  their  Energy. 

The  occasion  when  these  results  are  produced  is  called  Season 
or  Time. 

That  by  which  they  are  produced  is  called  the  Means;  and  that 
which  is  finally  accomplished  is  said  to  be  the  Purpose.*28 

Depending  upon  the  virtue  (or  puissance)  of  objects,  place, 
and  season  or  time,  there  are  three  and  sixty  varieties  of  Taste. 
We  shall  presently  lay  them  down.29 

Sweet  combined  with  sour  and  the  rest,  and  sour  and  the  rest 
combined  separately  with  what  remains, — these  groups  each  con¬ 
sisting  of  two  tastes, — come  up  to  five  and  ten  in  number.f30 

Sweet  with  sour  and  the  rest,  combined  with  what  remains, 
and  so  sour  (with  salt  and  the  rest,  combined  with  what  remains), 
and  so  salt  (with  pungent  and  the  rest,  combined  with  what  remains), 
and  so  pungent  (with  bitter  and  the  rest,  combined  with  what 
remains), — these  groups  each  consisting  of  three  tastes, — come  up  to 
twenty  in  number. {  31 


*  These  are  all  technical  terms  which  the  Rishi  explains  here.  The  immediate  and 
actual  results  produced  on  the  system  are  called  the  Action  or  Operation  of  the  drugs. 
That  by  which  those  results  are  produced  is  called  Means.  This  implies  measure,  manner 
of  combination,  &c.  —  T. 

t  Taking  the  latters  M,  A,  L,  K,  T,  and  K, ,  for  the  six  tastes  Madhura,  Amla, 
Lavana,  Katu,  Tikta,  and  Kashaya,  by  first  combining  M,  with  the  five  others,  we  get 
MA,  ML,  MK,  MT,  and  M K,  =5. 

Then  combining  A  with  those  that  follow,  we  get  A  L,  A  K,  A  T,  and  AJT,=4. 

(If  A  be  combined  with  what  precedes,  viz.,  M,  it  would  be  the  same  as  M  combined 
with  A,  for  MA=AM.)  Thus  L  combined  with  those  that  follow  it,  would  give  3; 
K  with  those  that  follow  it,  would  give  2  ;  and  T,  with  what  follows  it,  would  give  1. 
Adding  these,  5  +  4  +  3  +  2  +  1  =  15.—  T. 

t  Sweet  with  sour,  combined  with  what  remains,  would  give  M  A  L,  M  A  K,  MAT, 
M  A  A",  =  4.  So  sweet  with  salt,  combined  with  the  rest,  would  giveMLK,MLT,  and 
MLJ,=3.  Sweet  with  pungent  combined  with  what  remains  would  be  MKT  and 


302 


CIIARAKA-SAMH/TA. 


The  combination  of  the  Tastes  taken  four  at  a  time  would 
produce  five  and  ten  in  number, as  explained  below.32 

Sweet  united  with  sour,  combined  with  salt  and  the  rest,  taking 
each  separately,  and  then  combined  with  each  of  what  remains, 
taking  each  separately,  would  give  groups  of  four  in  respect  of 
the  Tastes.  3  3 

Sweet  united  with  salt,  combined  as  before  with  pungent  and 
the  rest,  taking  each  separately,  and  then  combined  with  each  of 
what  remains,  (would  give  groups  of  four). 

So  sweet  united  with  pungent,  (combined  as  before  with  bitter 
and  the  rest  taking  each  separately,  and  then  combined  with  each 
of  what  remains,  would  give  groups  of  four).31 

Sour  united  with  salt,  combined  with  pungent  and  the  rest 
taking  each  separately,  and  then  combined  with  each  of  what  re¬ 
mains,  would  give  groups  of  four. 

So  sour  united  with  pungent,  combined  with  the  rest,  would 
give  a  group  of  four.33 

Sour  and  pungent,  united  with  bitter,  combined  with  as¬ 
tringent  (gives  a  group  of  four). 


M  K  AT=2.  Sweet  with  bitter,  combined  with  what  remains,  would  give  MTf,  or  I. 
The  total,  therefore,  comes  up  to  io. 

Similarly,  sour,  with  salt,  combined  with  what  remains  .would  give  A  L  K,  ALT, 
and  A  LA',  =3. 

Sour,  with  pungent,  combined  with  what  remains,  would  give  A  K  T,  and  KKK—2 
so  sour  with  bitter,  combined  with  what  remains,  would  give  only  A  T  K,  or  I.  The  total, 
therefore,  comes  up  to  6. 

Similarly,  salt  with  pungent,  combined  with  what  remains,  would  give  L  K  T,  and 
LK  A', =2. 

Similarly,  salt  with  bitter,  combined  with  what  remains,  would  give  L  T  K,  or  I. 

So  pungent  with  bitter,  combined  with  what  remains,  would  give  KT  K,  or  I. 

The  grand  total  comes  up  to  20.  Algebraically  stated,  the  combination  of  6  things 
taken  3  at  or  time  would  give 

— _ i _ =  .6x5*4*3x2xi  _20_t 

]^x|_6-3  3x2xix;P<2xi 


CH  A  RA  KA  -SA  ME  I TA . 


By  leaving  out  one  (out  of  six)  every  time,  groups  of  five  would 
come  up  to  six  in  number.36 

Taken  one  at  a  time,  the  Tastes  would  come  up  to  six  in  number. 

All  six  taken  together,  would  give  one  as  the  number.  Thus 
objects,  grouped  according  to  the  number  of  Tastes,  come  up  to 
three  and  sixty.*37 

These  three  and  sixty  kinds  would  become  infinite  if  the  tastes 
(as  they  exist  in  their  predominating  forms)  and  those  that  exist 
with  them  in  unmanifest  forms,  be  taken  into  consideration. 

Indeed,  the  Tastes,  as  they  are  perceived,  again,  in  degrees, 
exceed  all  calculation  in  respect  of  number.-)*38 

There  are  seven  and  fifty  kinds  of  combinations.  (With  the 
six  original  or  independent  ones),  the  Tastes  are  held  to  be  of  three 
and  sixty  kinds. 

In  consequence  of  the  fitness  of  the  Tastes  in  this  matter  (viz., 
in  that  of  preventing  the  hale  from  contracting  diseases  and  curing 
disease  when  it  has  set  in),  physicians  conversant  with  the  Tastes 
have  thus  classified  them. J3  8 

The  physician,  desirous  of  success,  after  reflecting  upon  the 
faults  and  Jhe  drugs  required  (and  place,  time,  &c.)  should  some- 


*  The  algebraical  formula;  about  combinations  were  not  known  to  the  Rishis  or  their 
disciples.  Hence  the  need  of  such  elaborate  explanations  as  are  contained  in  Verses 
32  to  37  for  bringing  out  the  number  of  tastes  depending  upon  combinations  of  four  of 
them  taken  at  a  time,  or  five,  or  six.  The  total  number  is  63  including  the  six  separate 
and  independent  Tastes.  —  T. 

t  As  regards  sweet  alone,  there  are  infinite  degrees  of  sweetness.  The  second  line 
of  Verse  38  may  be  taken  independently,  or  taking  the  particle  ‘hi’  as  equivalent  to 
‘  since,’  it  may  be  taken  as  furnishing  the  reasons  of  the  infinity  of  Tastes  in  respect  of 
number,  as  dependent  upon  considerations  of  Tastes  existing  in  their  predominating 
forms  with  those  that  exist  in  their  unmanifest  forms,  those  predominating  and  unmani-' 
fest  forms  themselves  being  dependent  on  the  consideration  of  degrees. — T. 

}  The  sense  is  this  :  medical  science  would  have  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  question 
of  Tastes  or  their  classification  as  dependent  on  combination,  but  for  the  fitness  of  the  tastes 
in  the  matter  of  treatment,  of  treatment,  that  is,  for  strengthing  health  and  curing 
disease. — T. 


304  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

times  prescribe  only  one  Taste  and  sometimes  Tastes  that  are 
combined.*40 

Indeed,  physicians  possessed  of  wisdom,  in  respect  of  the 
medicines  they  prescribe,  use  such  objects  as  consist  of  two  Tastes, 
&c,  as  also  combined  Tastes,  or  the  (six)  original  Tastes  taken 
separately  .f  41 

That  physician,  who  is  conversant  with  the  varieties  of  Tastes 
and  their  use  also  with  the  varieties  of  manner  in  which  the 
faults  may  be  excited,  is  never  stupified  in  ascertaining  the  causes 
and  symptoms  and  the  means  of  mitigation  or  cure  of  the  diverse 
diseases  that  afflict  mankind.42 

That  taste  which  becomes  manifest,  of  a  dry  or  wet  object,  at 
the  outset  or  at  the  end,  is  called  its  (true)  taste.  That 
taste  which  becomes  perceptible  otherwise  or  in  succession  is 
called  the  subordinate  or  unmanifest  taste.  There  is,  however 
nothing  in  such  subordinate  or  unmanifest  taste  that  can  exclude 
it  from  the  six  original  or  independent  Tastes,  for  there  is  no 
seventh  taste  as  already  explained.^43 


*  ‘Tastes  that  are  combined  ’  does  not,  here  mean  any  of  the  seven  and  fifty  com¬ 
bined  tastes  mentioned  before,  but  one  object  with  many  tastes. — T. 

t  ‘  Combined  tastes  ’  here  means  objects,  each  having  one  taste,  combined  together. 
The  fact  is  what  is,  stated  in  41  is  different  from  what  is  stated  in  40.  What  is  stated 
in  40  is  that  objects  each  having  one  taste,  or  single  objects  each  having  more  than  one 
taste  are  prescribed.  In  41  it  is  •  said  that  single  objects  having  two,  three,  four,  &e., 
tastes,  or  such  admixtures  (of  objects)  as  have  many  tastes,  are  to  be  prescribed  ;  or,  it 
may  be,  that  40  represents  the  Rishi’s  own  opinion,  while  in  41  he  cites  the  authority  fo« 
his  opinion  by  referring  to  other  physicians.  —  T. 

t  This  is  a  difficult  Verse.  I  have  rendered  it,  following  Chakrapani.  The  first  ‘cha> 
implies  wet  or  soaked  or  dreched ;  the  second  ‘cha’  implies  ‘  at  the  end.’  Literally 
rendered,  the  verse,  therefore,  is  this  :  “of  a  dry  object  or  (the  same  when  wet),  at  the 
outset  or  (at  the  end),  that  taste  which  is  manifest,  is  (truly)  the  taste  :  the  taste  that  is- 
perceptible  otherwise  is  the  subordinate  taste.”  Chakrapani  goes  on  to  explain  :  take 
Piper  longum  ;  when  drenched  or  soaked  in  water,  its  taste  is  sweet ;  when  dry,  it  is 
Pungent.  The  latter  is  its  taste  ;  take  dried  grapes  ;  when  dry,  they  are  sweet  ;  when 
drenched,  they  are  sweet.  There  being  no  difference,  Sweet  is  its  taste.  Take  any  of  the 
liquids,  say,  kanjika  or  sour  gruel  of  vice.  That  taste  which  becomes  perceptible  at  the 
outset  is  its  true  taste.  That  which  is  perceived  afterwards  is  its  subordinate  taste.  The 


(JHARAKA-SA  M  HI  TA . 


305 


(Besides  the  attributes,  numbering  20,  of  heaviness  or  weight, 
&c.,  of  objects,  already  mentioned)  there  are  certain  other  attributes 
called  Para,  &c.  They  are  Paratwa,  Aparatwa,  Yukti,  Sankhya, 
Samyoga,  Vibhaga,  Prithaktwa,  Parimana,  Sanskara,  and  Abhyasa. 
These  are  regarded  as  means  for  the  success  of  treatment.  They 
are  being  explained  by  mentioning  their  indications.**^46 

In  Place,  Time,  Age,  Measure,  Preparation,  Power,  Taste,  and 
others,  occur  the  qualities  of  Paratwa  and  Aparatwa. 

That  application  of  medicines  which  is  well-suited  to  the 
circumstances  of  the  case  is  called  Yukti.t48 

By  Sankhya  is  meant  the  result  of  counting. 

Admixture  or  combination  is  Samyoga. 

Samyoga  may  be  of  three  kinds  :  the  combination  which  arises 
from  the  union  of  the  operation  or  effects  of  two  hostile  objects  ; 
that  which  arises  from  the  union  of  the  operation  or  effects  of 
many  objects  ;  and  that  which  arises  from  the  union  of  the  opera- 


verse  refers  to  2  states  and  2  states  of  an  object,  i.e.,  dry  and  at  the  outset,  dry  and  at 
the  end,  wet  and  at.  the  outset,  wet  and  at  the  end.  In  ascertaining  the  tate  of  an  object, 
this  order  is  to  be  followed.  That  which  becomes  perceptible  in  the  state  and  stage 
mentioned  first  should  have  precedence  over  the  state  and  stage  following. — T. 

*  All  these  terms,-  which  are  technical,  have  been  explained  in  the  Verses  that 
follow. — T. 

■}•  The  terms  ‘  Paratwa’  and  ‘  Aparatwa  ’  belong  to  the  Nyaya  Philosophy,  in  which 
they  mean  Remoteness  and  Proximity.  ( Vide  Dr.  Ballantyne’s  translation  of  the 
“Tarka-Sangraha.”  In  Medical  Science,  they  have  other  meanings.  ‘Para’  is  Pradhana 
or  chief,  i.  e.,  superior.  ‘Apara’  is  Apradhana  or  inferior.  Upon  this  view,  with  respect 
to  Place,  a  dry  sandy  region  is  called  Para,  because  of  its  suitability  to  health  ;  and  a 
marshy  tract  is  called  Apara  or  inferior,  because  of  its  unsuitability  to  health.  As  re¬ 
gards  Time,  the  season  that  gives  is  called  Para  or  superior  ;  the  season  that  takes  is 
Apara  or  inferior  (Vide  pp.  65-67  ante).  As  regards  age,  youth  is  Para,  while  old  age 
is  Apara.  So  in  the  case  of  the  rest. 

‘Ya  yojana  yujyate  (sa)  .yuktih,’ — this  is  the  construction.  By  ‘Yukti,’  therefore, 
is  meant  the  proper  or  suitable  application  of  medicines.  This,  of  course,  is  dependent 
upon  a  correct  consideration  of  the  faults  excited. — T. 


306 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  M  HIT A. 


tion  or  effects  of  two  separate  objects  (not  particularly  related  to 
each  other).  Such  combinations  are  not  enduring.*47 

Vibhaga  (disjunction)  is  division.  It  consists  in  disjoining, 
i.e ,  the  use  or  application  of  objects  by  apportioning  or  disuni¬ 
ting  them.48+ 

Parimana  is  measure. 

Samskara  is  the  production  of  other  attributes  by  admixture. 

Abhyasa  is  habituating  oneself  in  any  thing.  It  is  in  eminent 
or  continued  practice.49 

Thus  all  the  attributes  beginning  with  Paratwa  have  been  ex¬ 
plained  by  a  reference  to  the  indication  of  each.  Without  these 
being  properly  mastered,  good  treatment  can  never  flow.50 

It  has  been  said  before  that  attributes  can  never  form  the 
refuge  of  attributes.  Hence  the  physician  should  take  the  attri¬ 
butes  of  the  Tastes  to  be  only  attributes  of  (those)  substances  in 
which  the  Tastes  inhere.  The  intentions  of  him  who  has  written 
this  treatise  on  the  Science  of  Life  are  the  same  though  expressed 
otherwise. 

Hence,  properly  understanding  the  distinctions  of  Place, 
Time,  &c.,  as  also  the  intentions  of  the  author  of  this  Science  of 

*  Mixture  or  combination  is  a  principal  feature  of  applying  medicines.  It  is  of 
three  kinds.  The  first  kind  is  that  which  consists  of  the  union  of  two  hostile  objects,  as  of 
two  rams  fighting  against  each  other.  The  second  consists  of  the  union  of  many  things, 
such  as  of  a  hundred  or  thousand  grains  of  rice  boiling  together  in  a  pot.  The  third 
kind  consists  of  the  union  of  two  such  objects  as  a  tree  and  a  crow  perching  on  it.  All 
these  unions  are  unenduring,  not  being  that  chemical  union  of  different  elements  which 
produces  a  compact  substance. — T. 

t  Prithaktwam  is  Severalty.  It  may  be  of  three  kinds.  First,  absence  of  combination, 
as  a  jar  and  a  picture ;  these  may  be  kept  together,  but  they  are  Prithak  or  several. 
Prithaktwam  may  arise,  in  the  second  place,  from  Vailakshanya  or  difference  in  kind, 
such  as  a  herd  consisting  of  buffalos  and  swine.  The  buffalos  are  different  from  the 
swine,  notwithstanding  the  fact  of  their  being  kept  together.  The  third  kind  of  severalty 
is  referred  to  as  Anekata  or  multiplicity.  Thus,  hundreds  or  thousands  of  individual 
grains  of  Phaseolus  radiatus.  Though  belonging  to  the  same  species,  they  are  Prithak, 
or  severalty  attaches  to  them, — T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  M  HIT  A . 


307 


Life,  and  the  (diverse)  means  (there  are  for  alleviation  and  cure  of 
disease),  the  physician  should  prescribe  that  which  is  neces¬ 
sary.*51-52 

After  this,  the  six  classes  of  the  Tastes  are  being  explained 
as  also  how  those  six  are  counted  as  arising  from  the  five  primal 
elements. 

The  Waters  have  their  origin  in  Space  or  Ether.  They  partake 
the  nature  of  Soma  (moon).  They  are,  by  nature,  cool,  and  light 
The  taste  residing  in  them  is  unmanifest.  Falling  from  the  sky, 
they  fall  down  (on  the  Earth)  and  become  endued  with  the  attri¬ 
butes  of  the  five  primal  elements,  and  refresh  (or  cool)  the  forms 
of  all  mobile  and  immobile  objects  in  which  forms  of  objects  the 
six  tastes  become  displayed.53 

Among  the  six  Tastes,  that  which  is  called  Sweet  arises  from 
a  preponderance  of  the  attributes  of  Soma. 

From  a  preponderance  of  the  attributes  of  Earth  and  Fire, 
arises  the  Taste  called  Sour. 

From  a  preponderance  of  the  attributes  of  Water  and  Fire 
arises  the  taste  called  Saline. 


*  What  is  stated  in  51-52  is  this  attributes  cannot  have  attributes  for  their,  refuge. 
The  Tastes  are  themselves  attributes,  pf  material  substances,  for  it  is  material  substances 
to  which  the  tastes  attach  themselves.  We  speak  of  Sugar  as  having  a  sweet  taste. 
Chillies  as  having  a  pungent  taste,  &c.  The  attributes  of  the  tastes  cannot  reside  in  the 
tastes,  for  the  tastes  are  themselves  attributes  of  material  substances.  The  correct  view, 
therefore,  would  be  to  take  the  attributes  of  sweetness,  bitterness,  &c.  of  the  tastes  as 
residing  in  material  substances  that  have  taste  for  their  attribute.  There  is  one  school  of 
Hindu  philosophy  which  does  not  affirm  the  separate  existence  of  substances  ;  substances, 
according  to  it,  being  only  a  combination  of  their  attributes,  for  substances  cannot  be 
known  except  by  their  attributes.  According  to  another  view,  substances  are  unknown 
essences  to  which  the  attributes  only  attach  themselves,  these  being  separate  from  the 
essences  to  which  they  attach.  Punarvasu  seems  to  be  a  follower  of  the  latter  doctrine. 
The  whole  discussion,  however,  seems  to  be  more  verbal  than  real.  Sweetness  is  an 
attribute  of  the  taste  called  sweet.  To  what  does  sweetness  as  an  attribute  inhere  ? 
That  is  the  question  here  raised.  Sweetness  and  the  taste  called  sweet  are  the  same  thing. 
Instead  of  saying  that  Sweetness  is  an  attribute  of  the  taste  called  sweet  and,  therefore, 
inhering  to  that  taste,  it  is  more  intelligible  to  say  that  it  inheres  to  the  material  substance 
that  has  a  sweet  taste. —  T. 


charaka-samhitA. 


From  a  preponderance  of  the  attributes  of  Wind  and  F'ire 
arises  the  taste  called  Pungent. 

From  a  preponderance  of  the  attributes  of  Wind  and  Ether 
arises  the  taste  called  Bitter. 

From  a  preponderance  of  the  attributes  of  Wind  and  Earth 
arises  the  taste  called  Astringent. 

Even  thus  arises  the  sixfold  character  of  the  Tastes  from 
the  specialities  in  respect  of  the  insufficiency  or  preponderance  of 
the  five  primal  elements,  even  as  specialities  of  color  and  form 
arise  of  all  material  objects,  mobile  and  immobile.54 

In  consequence,  again,  of  Time  being  characterised  by  six 
seasons,  specialities  of  insufficiency  and  preponderance  in  respect 
of  the  (five)  primal  elements  arise  in  the  case  of  Time  also.*55 

Amongst  these,  those  Tastes  that  have  Fire  and  Wind  for  their 
soul,  generally  act  on  the  upper  parts  of  the  body,  in  consequence 
of  the  lightness  and  mobility  of  the  Wind  and  the  upward  course 
of  Fire. 

Those  Tastes  that  have  Water  and  Earth  for  their  soul,  gener¬ 
ally  act  on  the  lower  parts  of  the  body,  in  consequence  of  the 
heaviness  of  Earth  and  the  downward  course  of  Water. 

Tastes  that  have  all  the  above  elements  in  a  combined  state  as 
their  soul,  act  both  on  the  upper  and  the  lower  parts  of  the  body.t5S 


*  In  aphorism  54,  the  origin  of  the  Tastes  is  explained.  That  origin,  the  Rishi  ex¬ 
pounds,  is  due  to  the  specialities  of  insufficiency  and  preponderance  in  respect  of  the 
five  primal  elements*  even  as  specialities  or  diversity  of  color  and  form  arise  in  material 
objects  from  the  same  reason,  for  all  material  objects,  though  composed  of  the  five  primal 
elements,  contain  those  elements  in  diverse  proportions.  In  55,  the  Rishi  explains  that 
Time,  though  apparently  uniform,  has  yet  six  seasons  which  are  different  from  one  an¬ 
other.  In  consequence  of  this  diversity  of  seasons,  in  the  case  of  Time  also,  diversities 
arise  in  material  objects,  for  in  Hemanta  the  attributes  of  Soma  preponderate  ;  in 
Winter,  the  attributes  of  Wind  and  Ether  preponderate  ;  &c. —  T. 

t  The  Pungent  taste,  for  example,  has  Fire  and  Wind  for  its  soul  or  cause.  Wind 
is  light  and  mobile.  It  has  a  tendency  to  rise  upwards.  Fire  also  has  an  upward  course. 
Hence,  all  articles  with  the  pungent  taste  are  calculated  to  act  on  the  upper  parts  of  the 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MU  I TA . 


309 


We  shall,  after  this,  expound  the  attributes  and  actions,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  substances,  of  the  six  Tastes  one  by  one. 

Among  them,  the  Taste  that  is  Sweet,  in  consequence  of  its 
being  well-adapted  to  the  body,  increases  the  juices,  blood,  flesh, 
fat,  bones,  marrow,  Ojas,  and  vital  seed. 

It  contributes  to  the  health  and  cheerfulness  of  the  six  senses 
{viz.,  the  five  organs  and  the  mind). 

It  improves  strength  and  complexion. 

It  destroys  (excited)  bile,  poisons,  and  (excited)  wind. 

It  is  beneficial  to  the  skin,  the  hair,  and  the  voice. 

It  contributes  to  cheerfulness  in  general. 

It  prolongs  life,  is  sedative  and  nutrive,  oilifies  the  system  (by 
destroying  its  dryness),  makes  the  system  consistent,  promotes  the 
strength  of  weakened  parts,  and  unites  fractured  limbs. 

It  contributes  to  the  strength  and  cheerfulness  of  the  organ 
of  scent,  mouth,  throat,  lips,  and  palate. 

It  alleviates  burning  sensation  (of  the  skin)  and  swoons. 

It  is  exceedingly  liked  by  bees  and  ants. 

It  is  oily,  cool,  and  heavy.57 

This  Taste  {viz.,  Sweet),  though  possessed  of  these  attributes, 
yet  if  used  exclusively  (and  largely),  generates  corpulency,  softness 
of  the  body,  idleness  or  aversion  to  labour,  excessive  sleep,  heavi¬ 
ness  (of  the  limbs  and  the  whole  body),  disgust  for  food,  weakness 
of  the  digestive  fire,  increase  of  the  flesh  of  the  mouth  and  throat 
asthma,  consumption,  catarrh  or  cold  in  nose  and  mouth, Tympanites, 
Fevers  in  which  the  cold  stage  predominates,  Epistasis  or  suppres- 


body,  and  hence  are  used  as  remedies  in  affections  of  phlegm.  So  the  Saline-astringent, 
having  Water  and  Earth  for  its  soul,  acts  on  the  lower  parts  of  the  body  and  is  used  as  a 
remedy  in  affections  of  the  abdomen. —  T , 


310 


charakasamhitA. 


sion  of  urine,  constant  sensation  of  sweetness  in  the  mouth,  cons¬ 
tant  vomiting,  loss  of  consciousness  and  of  the  voice,  Bronchocele, 
enlargement  of  the  lymphatic  glands,  elephantaisis,  swellings  in 
the  throat,  phlegmonous  plasters  in  the  rectum,  nerves,  and  anus, 
diseases  of  the  eye,  catarrhal  discharges  from'the  nose,  and  such 
other  diseases  as  are  born  of  (the  excitement  of)  the  Phlegm.58 

The  Sour  Taste  adds  relish  to  food  ;  excites  the  digestive  fire  ; 
gives  nutrition  to  the  body  ;  weakens  objects  by  entering  into 
them,  enlivens  the  mind  ;  invigorates  the  senses ;  increases  the 
strength  ;  makes  the  wind  flow  in  its  natural  course  ;  cools  and 
gratifies  the  heart  ;  causes  the  mouth  to  be  filled  with  saliva;  assists 
at  deglutition  ;  generates  impurities  in  the  body  ;  and  contributes 
to  general  cheerfulness. 

It  is  light,  warm,  and  oily.59 

Though  possessed  of  such  attributes,  yet  if  used  exclusively 
and  largely,  it  produces  tenderness  of  the  teeth  and  a  sensation  of 
fulness  even  when  nothinghas  been  eaten;  causes  the  eyes  to  be  closed 
and  the  hair  on  the  body  to  stand  erect  ;  melts  thick  phlegm  (and 
gradually  liquifies  it)  ;  enhances  the  bile  ;  corrupts  the  blood,  burns 
the  skin  :  relaxes  the  body  ;  causes  swellings  and  inflammations  to 
arise  in  persons  that  are  weak  or  wounded  or  emaciated  or  weaken¬ 
ed  ;  restores  the  soundness  of  such  parts  as  have  sores,  or  as  have 
been  struck  or  bitten  or  burnt  or  fractured,  or  as  have  been  torn 
in  consequence  of  one  having  been  rescued  from  impalement,  or 
as  have  been  cauterised  by  the  urine  of  some  poisonous  animal,  or  as 
have  been  touched  (as  by  a  leech  or  with  the  nails  or  teeth  of  some 
poisoned  creature),  or  as  have  been  bruised  or  cut  or  pierced  or 
crushed  ;  and  in  consequence  of  its  nature  being  fiery,  it  burns  the 
throat,  the  thoracic  region,  and  the  heart.60 

The  Saline  Taste  digests  (the  bad  humours),  generates  im¬ 
purities,  promotes  the  appetite,  expels  stools,  cuts  away  and  re¬ 
moves  by  force  (adherent  phlegm  and  other  humours),  and  purges 
the  intestines  after  making  the  stools  watery. 


CH  A  RAKA-SAM  H ITA. 


311 


It  is  keen,  and  operates  as  a  purgative.  It  cuts  away  and 
removes. 

It  expels  undigested  food  from  the  intestines. 

It  scoops  and  hollows  parts  that  are  solid. 

It  destroys  the  (excited)  wind.  It  allays  and  destroys  rigidity 
of  the  limbs  or  the  whole  body.  It  removes  the  sensation  which 
one  feels  at  times  of  this  or  that  limb  being  bound  with  cords. 

It  melts  or  softens  things  congealed  and  hardened. 

It  overwhelms  all  other  Tastes.* 

It  causes  saliva  and  other  matters  to  appear  in  the  mouth. 

It  melts  or  liquifies  thickened  phlegm.  It  cleanses  all  ducts. 
It  softens  all  the  limbs  of  the  body.  It  adds  relish  to  food.  It  is 
well  suited  to  be  mixed  with  food. 

It  is  heavy,  oily,  and  warm,  but  not  excessively  so.f01 

Although  possessed  of  these  attributes,  yet  when  used  exclu¬ 
sively  and  largely,  it  generates  the  following  diseases ;  it  pro¬ 
vokes  the  bile  ;  it  increases  the  blood  (abnormally);  it  causes  thirst  ; 
it  produces  unconsciousness  or  swoons  ;  it  causes  stupefaction  ;  it 
causes  heat  of  body  ;  it  burns  ;  it  deadens  the  flesh  ;  it  causes 
leprous  eruptions  to  ripen  and  melt  ;  it  enhances  the  power  of 
any  poison  that  has  found  its  way  into  the  system  ;  it  causes  swel¬ 
lings  to  burst  ;  it  blackens  the  teeth  ;  it  destroys  the  virile  power  ; 
it  obstructs  the  free  action  of  the  senses  ;  it  induces  wrinkles, 


*  Chakrapani  explains  ‘pratyanika’  as  implying  ‘yalra  matrarikto  lavano  bhavatt 
tatra  nanyorasa  upalahshyate'. — T. 

t  There  are  many  words  in  this  aphorism  that  are,  rather,  of  doubtful  import. 
‘Chyavana’  means  anything  that  expels.  This  probably  refers  to  the  power  of  salt  to 
expel  digested  and  undigested  matter.  ‘Bhedana’  means  that  which  expels  scybake’ 
without  liquifying  them.  ‘Vikaci’  is  explained  by  Chakrapani  as  equivalent  to 
‘cchedana’  .which  would  be  tautological,  for  ‘cchedana’  is,  as  Chakrapani  explains, 
‘vishyandanafila,’  meaning,  probably,  expelling  undigested  matter.  ‘Natyartham’  has 
reference  to  what  follows.  —  T. 


312  CH  A  RA  K A-S  AMR  IT  A. 

whiteness  of  the  hair,  and  baldness  ;  it  generates  hemorrhages, 
Amla-pitta,*  Erysipelas,  Leprosy,  Herpes,  total  baldness,  and 
other  diseases. 

The  Pungent  Taste  corrects  (the  dulness  of)  the  mouth  ;  pro¬ 
vokes  the  digestive  fire  ;  dries  up  the  food  that  has  been  eaten  ; 
causes  nasal  discharges  ;  purges  the  eye  ;  clears  all  the  senses  ; 
alleviates  and  destroys  Tympanites,  swellings  or  intumescences, 
plethoric  growth  of  the  body,  urticaria,  opthalmia,  oiliness,  sweat, 
impure  secretions,  and  all  kinds  of  impurities. 

It  adds  relish  to  all  kinds  of  food. 

It  alleviates  and  cures  Itching  of  the  skin.  It  destroys  all 
kinds  of  eruptions.  It  destroys  worms  and  parasites. 

It  furrows  the  flesh. 

It  liquifies  congealed  or  coagulated  blood.  It  separates  or 
disjoins  such  elements  of  the  body  as  coagulate  or  unite  with  one 
another.  It  cleanses  and  widens  all  ducts. 

It  is  light,  warm,  and  dry.68 

Although  possessed  of  these  attributes,  yet  when  taken  exclu¬ 
sively  and  largely,  in  consequence  of  the  strength  of  its  effects  on 
the  system,  it  destroys  the  virile  power. 

In  consequence  of  the  puissance  of  its  energy,  it  stupifies  the 
mind,  causes  pain,  produces  a  lassitude  or  enervation  of  the  system, 
leads  to  leanness  or  emaciation,  brings  about  unconsciousness  or 
swoons,  bends  the  body,  produces  great  agony,  generates  errors, 
burns  the  throat,  causes  great  heat  of  the  body,  and  diminishes  the 
strength. 

In  consequence  of  the  preponderance  in  it  of  Wind  and  Fire, 
it  generates  mental  wanderings  (erroneous  impressions  due  to 

#  “By  ‘Amla-pitta’  is  meant  dyspepsia  with  vomiting  or  purging,  including  hsema- 
temesis,  perhaps,  of  cancer,  pyrosis,  and  acidity.” — {7,  C.  Dult's  Mat.  Med.  of  the 
Hindus.— T. 


It  is  very  much  to  be  desired  that  the  translation  of  Snsruta  should  be  done  with 
as  nine’ll  regularity  as  yours.  You  will  have  rendered  to  Science  a  service  for  which 
all  the  Orientalists  will  be  grateful. 

[FrontMos.  A.  Barth,o/  Columbia,  Paris.  ] 

Dea'ik  Sir, 

Accept  ray  best  thanks  for  Part  IX- just  received,  of  your  translation  of  “Charaka- 
Samhita.”  The  discussion  about  the  origin  of  disease  and  the  various  statisticsOibouf 
food  and  diet  are  very  interesting.  They  are  just  the  sort  of  doctrine  and  observation 
as  is  to  be  expected  from  the  ancient  Hindu  practice.  Here  all  is  genuine,  be  it 
either  experience  or  prej  udice. 

[  From  the  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association.  ] 

Chicago,  April  21,  1894. 

In  our  issue  of  September  23,  we  commented  editorially  on  the  character  of  this 
work,  its  great  antiquity,  and  its  interest  to  all  physicians. 

[  From  the  Indian  Mirror,  of  May,  18,  1894.] 
“Sip.  Chap.lf,s  Elliott,  in  the  course  of  his  Presidental  address  at  the  Asiatic  Society 
of  Bengal,  noticed  Pandit  Avinash  Chunde'r  Kaviratna’s  English  translation  of 
“Charaka”  in  terms  of  deserving  praise.  Here  is.  what  His  Honour  said  : — 

(  Already  quoted  on  the  wrapper  of  the  9th  fasciculus.  ) 

The  Pandit  is  an  enthusiast  in  the  cause. Of  Hindu  Medical  Science.  Much  credit 
is  due  to  him  for  his  efforts  in  diffusing  a  knowledge  of  the  ancient  medical  scriptures 
of  India.  Locked  in  a  difficult  toiigue,  many  valuable  truths  seem  to  have  been  well 
known  to. the  Bisliis. 

\From  the  American  Druggist  and  Pharmaceutical  Record,  New  York ,  May  24,  1894.] 
It  contains  many  curious  and  valuable  facts  pertaining  to  the  ancient  practice  of 
medicine  by  Hindu  sages,  and  must  be  regarded  as  a  valuable  contribution  to  the 
native  literature  of  India. 

[  From  Popular  Science  News,  of  New  York,  May,  1894.] 
The  eighth  part  of  the  English  translation  of  this  very  remarkable  medical  work 
has  just  been  published.  If  any  one  has  imagined  that  all  ancient  medicine  was 
mummery  or  superstition,  nothing  could  more  quickly  undeceive  them  than  this.  It 
was  composed  six  hundred  years  before  the  Christian  era,  and  yet  it,  in  many  ways, 
puts  to  shame.  European  medical  lore  prior  to  the  great  advances  of  the  present  century. 
The  translator  is  a  Hindoo  physician  and  medical  editor  well  qualified  for  his  task,  as  is 
manifest  in  the  fact  that  Prof.  Max  Muller  and  other  eminent  Orientalists  have  com¬ 
mended  it.  He  is  rendering  a  truly  valuable  service  to  medical  history  and  human 
progress.  .  , 


[  From  Meyer  Brothers’  Druggist  of  St.  Louis ,  May,  ,15.94. 1 
This  is  a  work  which  should  be  a  part  of  every'  medical  and  pharmaceutical  library 
in  the  world.  It  is  of  importance  as  well  as  interest  to  read  the  facts  carefully. 


[  From,  the  Western  Druggist,  of  Chicago,  June,  J594-] 

Charaka-Samhita.  Part  VIII  of  this  great  work  of  ancient  Hindu  medicine,  so 
excellently  translated  into  English  by  Dr.  Avinash  Chundra  Kaviratna  of  Calcutta,  now 
lies  before  us.  Its  contents  are  extremely  interesting.  The  true  nature  of  wind,  bile 
and  phlegm,  the  evils  brought  oh  by  .obesity  and  leanness,  and  the  means  by  which, 
these  may  be  got  rid  of,  and  the  purposes  served  by  sleep  in  the  economy  of  the  human 
constitution  are  subjects  discussed  in  this  fascicule.  They  demand  attention  from  every 
thoughtful  person.  It  may  be  well  bo  recall  to  mind  the  fact  that  this  arduous  work 
has  not  been  undertaken  by  the  indefatigable  translator  from  motives  of  pecuniary 
profit.  This  task  and  the  risk  of  publication  has  been  undertaken  solely  from  a 
desire  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  modern  world  to  the  truths  that,  iie  buried  in  this 
interesting  relic  of  the  Eishis  of  ancient  India.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  he  will  meet  . 
with  sufficient  encouragement  to  bring  the  work  to  a  successful  finish. 


[  From  the  Behar  Times,  of  July,' 20,  liS9Jt.  ] 

The  Charaka-Samhita.  Kaviraj  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna  is  a  well-known 
Ayurvedic  practitioner  of  Calcutta  and  Translator  and  Editor  of  several  Ayurvedic 
books  and  journals.  The  Kaviraj  is  at  present  engaged  on  an  English  translation  of 
Charaka  -Samhita,  the  best  authority  bn  Hindu  Medicine  and  Hygiene,  described  by  him-) 
as  “the  greatest  scientific  work  of  ancient  Indian  wisdom.”  The  translation  is  being 
issued  in  monthly  parts,  of  which  several  have  already  appeared  ;  and  the  Translator 
has  earned  the  approbation  and  the  gratitude  of  the  world  of  learning  as  well  for  the 
manner  as  the  matter  of  his  translation.  Charaka-Samhita  is  undoubtedly  a  work  of 
which  any  nation  may  be  proud  ;  and  Kaviraj  Avinash  Chandra,  by  placing  it  before 
the  Western  world  iii  an  English  garb,  has  not  only  enriched  the  Western  world,  but 
has  done  a  service  to  his  own  country,  by  attracting  to  it  the  admiration  of  foreign 
savants  and  scientists.  Some  of  the  most  eminent  men  of  Europe  and  America  have 
written  appreciatingly  of  the  work  undertaken  by  Kaviraj  Avinash  Chander,  and  the 
parts  already,  issued  have  been  favourably  reviewed  by  the  leading  papers  in  England, : 
and  India.  Kaviratna’s  enterprise  deserves  success  and  ought  to  command  ready 
support  in  India. 


PART  XI. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


PUBLISHED  BY 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita 

(in  original)  WITH  COMMENTARIES;  BENGALI  AND 

Hindi  translator  of  Charaka-Samhita  and 
of  Susruta-Samhita;  editor  of  Chikitsa- 
Sammilani  (  Medical  Journal  in 
Bengali) ;  PRACTITIONER  OF 

the  Hindu  System 
of  Medicine, 

&c.,  &c.,  &c. 


Calcutta; 

Printed  by  D.  C.  Dass  &  Co., 
“Corinthian  Press,”  33,  New  China  Bazar 
and 

Published  at 
soo,  Cornwallis  Street. 


(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved. ) 


ABSTRACT 


OF 

THE  CONTENTS  OF  THE  ELEVENTH  FASCICULUS. 


The  contents  of  this  fascicule  are  varied  and  extremely  interesting. 

In  continuation  of  Lesson  XXVI,  the  properties  are  shown  of  the  Bitter  and 
the  Astringent  tastes,  and  their  evil  consequences  when  taken  in  excess. 

The  Energy  of  objects  Sweet  in  taste  and  assimilation  ;  and  of  those  that  are 
Pungent  in  taste  and  assimilation. 

The  virtues  of  objects  are  gatherable  from  their  Tastes. 

There  are  exceptions  to  this  general  law. 

Those  exceptions  are  noted  here.  These  discover  considerable  powers  of 
observation. 

Particular  tastes  are  foremost  in  particular  attributes. 

The  indications  of  tastes,  as  they  appear  on  assimilation. 

Explanation  of  what  is  meant  by  the  Energy  of  an  object. 

Objects  having  no  Energy  have  no  Action  ;  for  Action  proceeds  from  Energy. 

Taste,  Assimilation  and  Energy  differentiated. 

The  Potency  of  objects  explained,  and  illustrated  by  examples. 

The  relative  force  of  Taste,  Assimilation,  Energy,  and  Potency,  in  the  action 

of  objects  upon  the  human  system. 

The  sensations  produced  by  the  different  Tastes. 

The  unsuitability  of  particular  dietary  modifications  to  the  human  system. 

Observations  on  different  kinds  of  articles  or  food  that  become  injurious  if 
combined  together  and  the  diseases  they  produce. 

The  remedies  for  allaying  such  diseases. 

Lesson  XXVII  is  begun.  The  importance  of  food  and  drink  to  Life. 

The  ordinances  in  detail  respecting  food  and  drink. 

Observations  on  the  several  articles  that  constitute  the  first  dietary  group,  vis., 
cuka-dhanya  or  grain. 

Observations  on  the  articles  composing  the  second  group,  viz.,  cami-dhanya 
or  seeds  growing  within  pods. 

Observations  on  the  different  kinds  of  animal  meat,  composing  the  third 
group,  distributed  into  Prasahas,  Bhumifayas,  Anupa,  Jalaja,  Jalachara,  Jangala, 
Vishkira,  and  Pratuda. 

Observations  on  the  fourth  dietary  group,  consisting  of  Potherbs. 

[IV.  B. — It  may  be  remarked  that  as  yet  European  Medical  Science  has 
sanctioned  the  use  of  only  one  of  the  six  tastes,  viz.,  the  Bitter,  as  a  curative 
agency  in  Fevers.  Quinine  has  come  to  be  used  extensively.  The  presumption 
is  certainly  powerful  in  favor  of  the  theory  that  the  five  other  tastes  are  equally 
operative  in  other  diseases.  The  Rishis  assert  so  without  expressing  any  doubt. 
If  Bitters  cure  fevers,  why  should  not  other  tastes  have  curative  effects  in  respect 
to  other  diseases  ?  ] 


V 

C&jtRjkfTA^AMHITA.  313 

delirium),  sensation  of  intSjifcation,  mental  anxiety,  tremours, 
sharp  shooting  pains,  piercing  pains,  and  other  diseases,  due  to  the 
wind,  in  the  feet,  the  arms,  the  flanks  or  sides  of  the  chest,  the 
back,  and  other  parts  of  the  body.*84 

The  Bitter  taste  is  so  disagreeable  as  to  produce  a  disgust  for 
itself,  but  nevertheless  it  cures  disgust  for  food. 

It  destroys  the  action  of  poisons. 

It  is  anthelmintic. 

It  alleviates  swoons,  burning  sensation  of  the  skin,  itching, 
leprosy,  and  thirst. 

It  causes  the  skin  and  the  flesh  to  become  tough. 

It  is  destructive  of  fevers. 

It  promotes  or  sharpens  the  appetite. 

It  assists  the  digestion  of  undigested  food.f 

It  improves  the  qualities  of  the  milk  in  the  breast. 

It  removes  bad  humours  and  altered  constituents  of  the  body 
by  thinning  them  gradually  and  thus  clearing  the  system  of  them. 

It  dries  up  phlegmonous  secretions,  fat,  serum  (or  marrow  of 
the  fleshj,  marrow  of  the  bones,  saliva,  puss,  sweat,  urine,  stools,  bile, , 
and  phlegm. 

Its  attributes  are  dry,  cool,  and  light.85 

Although  possessed  of  these  qualities,  yet,  if  taken  exclusive¬ 
ly  and  abundantly,  in  consequence  of  its  nature  being  dry  and 
rough  and  clear,  it  dries  up  the  juices  (of  the  body),  blood,  flesh, 
fat,  bones,  the  marrow  of  the  bones,  and  vital  seed. 

*  ‘Davathu’  implies  inflammation  of  the  eye,  or  mental  anxiety.  Here,  I  think,  it 
signifies  anxiety,  for  it  stands  with  ‘Bhrama’  ahd  ‘Mada’  both  of  which  are  mental 
diseases.  Gangadhara  reads  ‘Vamatha,’  meaning  vomiting.  This  is  very  probably 
correct.  —  T. 

f  The  difference  between  ‘Dipana’  and  ‘Pachana’  is  this  :  the  first  is  a  mere  appetiser  • 
the  last  is  a  digestive,  —  T. 

40 


314. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MH1 TA . 


It  causes  a  roughness  in  all  the  ducts  of  the  body. 

It  takes  away  strength,  causes  emaciation,  produces  swoons, 
and  generates  delirium. 

It  causes  the  mouth  to  become  dry,  and  generates  many  other 
diseases  brought  about  by  excitement  of  the  Wind.* * * § 

The  Astringent  Taste  restores  harmony  among  the  faults. 

It  restrains  (the  stools,  urine,  and  other  secretions).+ 

It  draws  in  and  contracts  the  limbs  of  the  body.J 

It  causes  sores  and  parts  eaten  away  to  heal  or  fill  up.^f 

It  dries  up  the  fluids  of  the  body. 

It  retains  or  restrains  all  scretions.f 

It  alleviates  phlegm  and  hemorrhages  caused  by  excitement  of 
the  bile. 

It  sucks  up  all  phlegmonous  and  other  secretions  of  the  system. 

It  is  dry,  cool,  and  heavy.67 

Although  possessed  of  these  qualities,  yet,  if  taken  exclusively 
and  in  copious  measure,  it  makes  the  mouth  dry. 

It  produces  pain  in  the  heart  (by  contracting  it). 


*  ‘Ruksha’  is  dry,  being  the  reverse  of  oily.  ‘Khara’  is  sharp  or,  rather,  rough, 
being  the  reverse  of  smooth.  ‘  Vicada’  is  clear. — T. 

f  Generally  speaking,  ‘Grahi’  or  inspissants  are  medicines  which  dry  up  the  fluids  of 
the  body.  A  particular  drug  is  called  ‘Samgrahi’  when  it  either  dries  up  the  fluids  or 
restrains  their  escape  from  the  body  or  the  particular  parts  of  the  body  where  they  are 
generated. — T. 

$  ‘Pidana’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  ‘akrishya-sankocha-kara.’ — T. 

‘Ropana’  is  explained  by  the  same  Commentator  as  ‘Vranasya  mangsadi- 
purana.’ — T. 

§  “Stambhana  or  constipators  are  medicines  which,  from  their  drying,  astringent, 
and  cooling  qualities,  and  from  their  easy  digestibility,  increase  the  air  and  retain  the 
secretions.” — U.  C.  Dutt’s  Mat.  Med.  of  the  Hindus. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


,315 


It  causes  abdominal  flatulence. 

It  restrains  the  free  utterance  of  speech. 

It  obstructs  the  ducts  of  the  system. 

It  produces  darkness  of  complexion. 

It  destroys  virility. 

Restraining  the  secretions  (constipating  them),  it  brings  about 
untimely  decrepitude. 

It  restrains  the  wind,  urine,  and  stools. 

It  produces  emaciation. 

It  brings  about  heaviness  and  pain  in  the  body. 

It  produces  thirst. 

It  retains  fluids  and  secretions  and  prevents  them  from  flowing 
or  escaping  out  of  the  body. 

In  consequence  of  its  being  rough,  clear,  and  dry,  it  brings  about 
Hemiplegia,  Paralysis,  Spasmodic  contractions,  facial  paralysis,  and 
other  diseases  of  the  kind  that  spring  from  excited  wind.68 

Even  thus  the  six  Tastes,  separately  or  (in  admixture),  taken 
or  administered  properly  and  in  due  measure,  prove  beneficial  unto 
all  creatures  endued  with  life.  If  administered  otherwise,  they 
produce  evil  consequences.  Hence,  the  physician  possessed  of 
learning  should  administer  them  properly  and  in  due  measure,  with 
the  view  of  producing  only  beneficial  consequences.*69 

Here  occur  some  verses. 

That  object  which  is  sweet  in  Taste  and  Assimilation,  should 
be  known  as  cooling  in  Energy.  That  which  is  sour  in  Taste 
and  Assimilation,  should  be  known  as  heating  in  Energy.  So  also 


The  particle  ‘va,’  following  ‘Prithaktwena,’  means,  by  implication,  admixture. —  T. 


316 


CHA  RA  KA -SAM  RITA . 


that  object  which  is  pungent  in  Taste  and  Assimilation,  should  be 
known  as  heating  in  energy.1 

The  virtues  of  objects,  in  brief,  are  gatherable  from  instructions 
as  regards  their  Tastes.  Presently,  instructions  are  being  laid  down 
respecting  those  objects  that  are  otherwise  in  energy  or  that  be¬ 
come  otherwise  upon  Assimilation.*2 

Of  such  as  Milk,  as  Ghee,  as  Ghavya  and  Chitraka,  and  others 
of  the  kind,  the  physician  should  indicate  the  properties  by  (a 
reference  to)  their  Taste.3 

There  are  some  sweet  things  that  are,  however,  of  heating 
energy,  as  also  some  astringent  things  and  some  that  are  bitter, 
and  some  that  are  bitter-astringents  as  the  compound  called  Mahat 
Panchamula,  and  the  meat  of  some  animals  living  in  marshy 
regions  (that  are  so).4t 

Rock-salt,  though  saline  in  taste,  is  not  of  heating  energy  ; 
so  Amalaka  (. Phyllanthus  Emblica ,  Linn.),  though  possessed  of  a 
sour  taste,  is  not  of  heating  energy.  Arka  (a),  Aguru  (5),  and 
Guduchi  (c),  amongst  things  that  are  bitter,  are  endued  with  heat¬ 
ing  properties.6 

Some  objects  possessed  of  a  sour  taste  are  of  constipating 
effects  ;  while  some,  of  the  same  taste,  produce  purging  effects  ;  of 
the  former,  Kapithwa  (d),  is  an  example  ;  of  the  latter  Amalaka  (e), 8 1 


*  The  sense  seems  to  be  this  :  generally  speaking,  the  properties  of  objects  are 
gatherable  from  taste  and  assimilation.  There  are  certain  objects,  however,  whose  pro¬ 
perties  do  not  obey  this  rule  or  law.  What  they  are,  will  be  enumerated  below. — T. 

j-  ‘Mahat-Panchamula’  consists  of  Aigle  marmelos,  Echites  frutescens,  Roxb.,  Gmelina 
arborea,  Linn.,  Bignonia  suaveolens,  Roxb.,  and  Premna  serratifolia,  Linn. — T’ 

a.  Calatropis  gigantea  or  procera  ;  syn.  Asclepias  gigantea  ;  Willd. 

b.  Aquilaria  Agallocha,  Roxb. 

c.  Tinospora  Cordifolia,  Miers  ;  syn.  Menispermum  Cordifolium,  Willd. 

d.  Kapithwa  is  Feronia  elephantum  ;  (the  wood-apple  tree.) 

e.  Amalaka  is  Phyllanthus  Etnblica,,  Linn  : 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA . 


317 


Although  things  possessed  of  a  pungent  taste  do  not  lead  to 
increase  of  semen,  yet  Pippali  (/),  and  Nagara  ( g ),  do  lead  to  such 
increase.  Things  possessed  of  an  astringent  taste  generally  in¬ 
crease  the  wind  and  retain  the  secretions,  and  are,  besides,  cooling 
in  respect  of  their  properties,  yet  Abhaya  ( h ),  is  held  to  be  different.7 

For  these  reasons,  by  laying  down  instructions  in  respect  of 
Taste  alone,  the  properties  of  all  objects  are  incapable  of  being 
indicated.  Even  such  difference  of  properties  is  seen  in  objects  and 
objects,  though  all  of  them  may  be  possessed  of  even  the  same 
taste.*8 

In  consequence  of  its  dryness,  the  Astringent  Taste  is,  of  all 
things  that  are  dry,  the  foremost  ;  the  Pungent  is  middling  ;  the 
Bitter  is  inferior. 

In  consequence  of  its  heating  properties,  the  Saline,  among  all 
things  heating,  is  the  foremost  ;  the  Sour  is  middling  ;  and  the 
Pungent  is  inferior. 

In  consequence  of  its  oilness,  among  all  things  oily  the  Sweet 
taste  is  the  foremost  ;  the  Sour  taste  is  middling;  and  the  Saline 
taste  is  inferior.9-10 

As  regards  cooling  properties,  the  Sweet  taste  is  the  foremost  ; 
the  Astringent  taste  is  middling  ;  and  the  Bitter  taste  is  inferior. 

As  regards  the  property  of  heaviness,  the  Sweet  taste  is  the 
foremost  ;  the  Astringent  taste  is  middling  ;  and  the  Bitter  taste  is 
inferior.11 

As  regards  the  property  of  lightness,  the  Bitter  taste  is  the 
foremost  ;  the  Pungent  taste  is  middling  ;  and  the  Sour  taste  is 


f  Piper  longum,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Chavica  Roxburghii. 

g.  Dry  ginger. 

h.  Terminalia  Chebula,  Relz. 

*  The  repetition  ‘objects  and  objects’  simply  means  different  objects. —  T 


318 


CHAR  AKA -SA  \1  HI  TA . 


inferior.  Some  are  of  opinion  that  the  Saline  taste  is  the  most  in¬ 
ferior  in  respect  of  all  things  that  are  light.*1  2 

It  has  been  said  that  the  Saline  taste  is  inferior  as  regards  the 
property  of  heaviness.  It  is  inferior  also  as  regards  the  property 
of  lightness/}" 

After  this,  the  indications  are  being  laid  down  of  the  tastes  as 
they  appear  upon  assimilation.13 

Of  the  Pungent,  the  Bitter,  and  the  Astringent,  the  change, 
upon  assimilation,  is  generally  Pungent.  The  Sour  taste  changes 
into  the  Sour.  The  Sweet  and  the  Saline  change  into  the  Sweet.14 

The  Sweet,  the  Saline,  and  the  Sour  are  the  three  tastes  that 
have  the  property  of  oiliness.  Hence,  they  are  regarded  as  very 
beneficial  in  causing  evacuations  of  wind,  urine,  and  faeces.15 

The  Pungent,  the  Bitter,  and  the  Astringent  are  the  three  tastes 
that  have  the  property  of  dryness.  Hence,  these  are  seen  to  be 
productive  of  pain  in  the  matter  of  expelling  wind,  faeces,  urine, 
and  semen.13 

•  The  Pungent  taste,  in  respect  of  its  after  effects,  is  destructive 
of  the  semen  ;  leads  to  retention  of  faeces  and  urine,  and  to 
increase  of  wind. 

The  Sweet  tate,  in  respect  of  its  after  effects,  leads  to  easy 
and  copious  discharges  of  urine  and  stools,  and  increases  phlegm 
and  semen.17 


*  The  phraseology  of  these  Verses  is  very  terse.  The  first  line  of  12,  literally 
rendered,  runs  thus  :  ‘above  sour  is  pungent  ;  thence  bitter,  in  consequence  of  lightness 
is  regarded  the  first.’  Hence,  to  make  the  Verses  easily  intelligible,  I  expand  them 
slightly. — T. 

+  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  as  regards  he  aviness,  the  saline  taste  is  inferior  {vide  1 1 ) 
meaning  that  it  is  not  so  heavy  as  the  two  others  mentioned  in  Verse  II.  In  Verse  12, 
it  is  said  that  the  saline  taste  is  inferior  to  the  others  in  lightness  ;  i.e.,  it  is  not  so  light 
as  the  others.  Not  being,  again,  so  heavy  as  the  others,  it  is  inferior  both  in  view  of 
heaviness  apd  lightness. —  T, 


CM  A  RA  KA-Sa  MhlTA. 


319 


The  assimilation  of  the  Sour  taste  leads  to  increase  of  the 
bile,  evacuation  of  stools  and  urine,  and  destruction  of  semen. 

Among  them  all,  the  assimilation  of  the  Sweet  taste  produces 
the  properties  of  heaviness,  while  those  of  the  Pungent  and  the 
Sour  tastes  are  otherwise.18 

The  inferiority,  middling  character,  or  superiority  of  the  indi¬ 
cations  of  assimilation  (of  particular  objects),  is  ascertained  from 
the  differences  in  respect  of  properties  of  those  objects.19* 

Some  say  that  mild  and  keen,  heavy  and  light,  oily  and  dry, 
and  hot  and  cooling,  are  the  eight  kinds  of  Energy  which  objects 
may  have.  Others  are  of  opinion  that  objects  have  only  two  kinds 
of  Energy,  viz.,  cooling  and  hot. 

That  is  called  the  Energy  of  an  object  in  consequence  of  which 
the  object  acts  or  operates  on  the  system. 

An  object  which  has  no  Energy  can  have  no  action  (upon  the 
system.) 

Every  action  proceeds  from  Energy.90-21 

'That  is  called  the  Taste  of  objects  which  is  perceived  as  soon 
as  the  objects  are  brought  into  contact  (with  the  tongue.) 

That  is  called  Assimilation  which  is  ascertained  from  the 
completion  of  the  action. 

That  is  called  Energy  which  is  ascertained  from  the  retention 
of  the  object  within  the  body  and  its  first  contact  with  the  tongue.f22 


*  As  explained  by  Chakrapani,  what  is  stated  here  is  this  :  objects  may  be  stweet, 
sweeter,  or  sweetest.  The  indications  of  assimilation,  therefore,  must  be  inferior,  or 
middling,  or  superior,  according  to  the  measure  or  degree  of  sweetness.  So,  with  respect 
to  the  other  tastes.  Different  degrees  would  produce  those  indications  in  different 
measure. — T. 

+  ‘Vipaka’  and  ‘Virya’  are  here  defined.  ‘Vipaka’  literally  means  cooking.  The 
‘vipaka’  of  an  object,  therefore,  indicates  its  cooking  or  digestion  in  the  stomach.  In¬ 
stead  of  digestion,  which  is  a  common  word,  I  have  adopted  the  word  assimilation  as 
more  consistent  with  scientific  dignity.  ‘Adhivasa’  means,  as  explained  by  Chakrapani, 


320 


CH  A  RA  RA-SA  MH I TA . 


Where  uniformity  is  observed  (between  two  objects)  in  respect 
of  taste,  energy,  and  assimilation,  but  a  difference  or  distinction 
occurs  in  their  operation  or  effect,  such  distinction  is  said  to  arise 
from  what  is  called  the  potency  of  the  objects.23* 

Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica,  Linn.)  is  pungent  in  taste, 
and  pungent  in  assimilation,  and  hot  in  energy.  So  is  Danti 
(Baliospermum  montanum  ;  syn.  Groton  polyandrum,  Roxb.)  But 
Danti  operates  as  a  purgative  (while  Chitiaka  does  not).  This 
occurs  through  the  potency  of  Danti.2  4f 

Poison  is  said  to  destroy  poison.  This  is  due  to  potency  (of 
the  poison  used  to  destroy  another  previously  administered). 

Certain  objects  act  upwards  (as  fruits  of  Randia  dumetorum)  ; 
while  others,  (as  Trivrit  or  Ipomcea  Turpethuni)  act  downwards. 
This  difference  of  action  is  brought  about  by  difference  of 
potency.25 

The  diverse  kinds  of  acts  which  result  from  gems  and  other 
articles  worn  on  the  body  are  all  due  to  the  potency  of  those 
objects.  Potency  is  said  to  be  inconceivable.26! 

Some  object  produces  the  intended  action  through  taste  ;  some 
through  energy  ;  some  through  the  properties  ;  some  through 
assimilation  ;  and  some  through  potency.27 


‘Sahavasthana,’  i.e.,  lying  of  the  object  within  the  body,  implying  its  retention  within 
the  system.  Energy  is  ascertained  from  the  symptoms  that  manifest  themselves  after  con¬ 
tact  and  before  assimilation.  Thus,  pepper  is  pungent,  judged  by  what  appears  from  its 
contact  with  the  tongue.  It  is  keen  and  hot  ;  these  constitute  its  energy  ;  whether  it  is 
constipating  or  otherwise,  whether  it  increases  semen,  &c.,  are  results  depending  upon 
assimilation  or  digestion.  Those  results  are  technically  called  assimilation — T. 

*  This  is  illustrated  in  the  next  Verse, — T. 

f  That  operation  or  effect  of  an  object  which  is  not  due  to  taste,  energy,  and  assimi¬ 
lation,  is  said  to  be  due  to  potency.  Potency  is  said  to  be  inconceivable,  being  incapable 
of  ascertainment  by  mere  knowledge  of  taste,  energy,  and  assimilation. — T. 

I  Gems  are  commonly  worn,  as  also  roots  and  barks,  &c.,  enclosed  within  little 
drums  of  gold,  in  the  belief  that  these  ward  off  evil  and  particular  diseases.  The  diverse 
kinds  of  action  manifested  by  these  is  due  to  what  must  be  called  their  potency. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  321 

In  cases  where  there  is  uniformity  of  attributes  in  Taste  and 
the  others  (viz.,  in  Energy,  Assimilation,  and  Potency),  Tasteis  sub¬ 
jugated  by  Assimilation  ;  both  of  them,  again,  are  subjugated  by 
Eenergy  ;  and  all  three  are  subjugated  by  Potency.  Even  such  is 
the  natural  force  of  each  of  these.*28 

By  what  has  been  said  above,  Assimilation  and  Energy  and 
Potency  have  been  sufficiently  explained. 

We  shall,  after  this,  lay  down  instructions  respecting  the  modes 
by  which  the  (six)  Tastes  may  be  ascertained.29 

An  object  having  a  sweet  taste,  when  placed  in  the  mouth, 
olifies  it  (i.e.,  dispels  all  sensation  of  dryness),  produces  pleasure 
and  joy,  and  also  a  sensation  of  softness.  By  these  is  Sweetness 
ascertained.  Besides,  the  whole  mouth  seems  to  be  filled  with  it 
and  a  sensation  of  adhesion  results  from  it.30 

From  tenderness  of  the  teeth,  the  appearance  of  saliva,  of 
perspiration  (on  the  body),  awakening  of  the  mouth,  and  a  burning 
sensation  of  both  the  mouth  and  the  throat,  as  soon  as  the  object 
is  placed  in  the  mouth,  one  should  say  that  its  taste  is  Sour.31 

That  object  which,  when  placed  in  the  mouth,  produces  a  tem¬ 
porary  sensation  of  pleasure  and,  causing  the  appearance  of  saliva 
and  other  secretions  from  the  glands  of  the  mouth,  fills  it  with  a 
sensation  of  softness  and  soon  after  with  a  sensation  of  burning, 
should  be  known  as  Saline  in  taste.32 

That  object  which,  as  soon  as  it  is  brought  into  contact  with 
the  tongue,  produces  a  sense  of  pain  and  pinches  it  and,  causing 
also  a  sensation  of  burning,  leads  to  a  discharge  of  secretions  from 
the  mouth,  nose,  and  eyes,  is  said  to  be  Pungent.33 

That  object  which,  on  coming  into  contact  with  the  tongue, 
pains  it  much  and  destroys  its  relish,  and  which,  producingthesensa- 


*  Vide  note  at  the  end  of  this  Lesson. 


41 


322 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMEITA. 


tfon  of  dryness  and  the  reverse  of  sliminess,  makes  us  cheerless, 
should  be  known  as  Bitter.34 

That  object  which  brings  upon  the  tongue  a  sensation  that  is 
the  very  reverse  of  sliminess,  as  also  of  contraction  and  rigidity, 
and  which  seems  to  contract  the  throat  also  and  stretch  the  heart, 
is  to  be  known  as  possessing  the  Astringent  taste.35 

Unto  the  illustrious  Punarvasu  the  son  of  Atri,  Agnive^a  said, 
— O  illustrious  one,  we  have  heard  duly  thy  words  fraught  with 
truth  and  wealth  of  meaning  on  the  subject  of  drugs  and  their 
action.  We  desire  now  to  listen  to  thy  instructions  in  detail  on 
the  indications  of  the  unsuitability  of  dietary  modifications.1* 

Unto  him  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said  that  certain  things 
being  hostile  to  the  elements  or  ingredients  of  the  body,  (if  taken) 
produce  hostile  effects  on  those  elements  or  ingredients. 

Of  these,  some  (though  suitable  to  the  ingredients  of  the  body) 
become  hostile  to  those  ingredients  in  consequence  of  their  being 
mixed  with  others  that  are  hostile. 

Some  become  hostile  in  consequence  of  dressing  or  of  ad¬ 
mixtures  made  for  giving  them  relish.  Some  become  so  through 
considerations  of  place,  time,  measure,  &c. 

And  lastly,  some  become  so  in  consequence  of  their  nature.2 

On  this  subject,  of  those  things  which  are  very  generally  used 
as  food,  we  shall  lay  down  instructions  on  only  a  portion,  selecting 
only  those  that  are  hostile.3 

Fish  should  never  be  taken  with  milk.  Both  of  these  are 
^weet  in  taste.  They  are,  again,  sweet  in  assimilation.  Being 
highly  emollient,  they  retain  the  secretions  (without  allowing  them 
to  escape)  and  thus  cause  a  heaviness  or  fulness  of  the  body. 
One  of  them  (milk)  is  of  cooling  energy  ;  the  other  (fish)  of  heating 
energy  ;  they  are  thus  of  opposite  energies.  In  consequence  of 

*  This  and  the  following  aphorisms  are  in  prose.  Hence  I  number  them  anew, 
beginning  with  i,—  T. 


vharaka-samhita. 


32S 


their  being  thus  of  opposite  energies,  they  corrupt  or  defile  the 
blood.  In  consequence,  again,  of  their  being  highly  emollient, 
they  stop  the  pores  and  passages  through  which  all  impurities 
escape.4 

Having  heard  these  words  of  Atri’s  son,  Bhadrakapya,  address¬ 
ing  Agnivega,  said, — All  varieties  of  fish  may  be  taken  with  milk, 
with  the  single  exception  of  Chilichima*  This  variety  of  fish  has 
scales.  All  over  its  body  there  are  lines  of  red.  In  shape  ijt 
resembles  the  Rohitaka  ( Cyprinus  Rohita).  It  generally  disports 
on  mire  (marshy  regions  having  little  water).  If  this  fish  is  eaten 
with  milk,  without  doubt  some  disease  arising  either  from  (defiled) 
blood  or  suppression  of  impurities  would  arise  ;  or,  the.  eater  may 
even  meet  with  death,5 

It  is  not  so, — said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  The  prohibition 
extends  to  all  fishes,  for  none  of  them  are  to  be  taken  with  milk. 
The  Chilichima  is  particularly  interdicted.  In  consequence  of  its 
emollient  character  in  excess,  it  generates  such  diseases  (ue.,  those 
born  of  blood  and  those  due  to  suppression  of  secretions)  as  are 
characterised  by  aggravated  symptoms.  It  is  capable  also  of 
generating  poisonous  juices  in  the  stomach.6 

The  meat  of  domesticated  animals,  of  those  that  live  in  marshy 
regions,  and  of  those  that  are  aquatic,  should  never  be  taken  in  con^ 
junction  with  such  things  as  honey,  sesame  oil,  molasses,  milk,  Masha 
Phaseolus  radiatus),  Mulaka  ( Raphanus  sativus,  Linn.,  i.e.,  garden 
radish),  lotus  stalks,  and  such  paddy  as  have  put  forth  sprouts. 

If  these  be  taken,  such  diseases  may  be  generated  as  Deafness. 
Blindness,  Paralyses  Agitans,  Rigidity  (of  the  body),  Lassitude, 
dumbness  (or  partial  suppression  of  the  voice),  and  nasal  voice. 
Or,  such  food  may  bring  about  death  itself.7 

The  potherbs  called  Paushkara,  and  those  called  Rohinika,  as 
also  pigeons  fried  in  oil,  should  not  be  taken  with  honey  and  milk. 

*  Spelt  variously.  It  is  a  kind  of  sprat  ;  probably,  Clufca  Cult  rata.— T. 


CHAR  A  RA-SA  MH  /  TA . 


324 

If  these  be  thus  taken,  then  corruption  (through  excess  of  impuri¬ 
ties)  of  blood,  exhaustion  (or  lassitude)  of  the  nerves,  Delusions, 
pain  and  heat  with  a  puffiness  in  the  temples  and  forehead,  Bron- 
chocele,  and  the  red  eruptions  called  Rohinika,  may  be  generated. 
Such  food  may  even  bring  about  death.8* 

Having  taken  Mulaka,  (a),  Laguna,  ( b ),  Krishnagandha,  (c), 
Arjjaka  ( d ),  Sumukha  ( e ),  Surasa  (/),  and  such  other  things,  one 
should  not  take  milk,  through  fear  of  Leprosy.8 

Bamboo  leaves  and  ripe  Lakucbas  (g)  should  never  be  taken 
with  honey  and  milk.  If  taken,  it  may  bring  about  death,  or  loss 
of  strength,  of  complexion,  of  energy,  and  of  vital  seed.  Indeed, 
such  food  may  bring  about  various  diseases  with  violent  symptoms, 
or  even  impotence.10! 

Ripe  Lakuchas  should  not  be  taken  with  the  juice  (or  broth) 
of  Phaseolus  radiatus ,  or  molasses,  or  ghee,  in  consequence  of 
these  being  hostile  to  the  former  in  properties. 

Amrataka  (/»),  Matulunga  (z),  Lakucha  (j),  Karamardda  (7s), 


*  ‘Paushkara’  implies  the  leaves  of  Pushkara  or  the  lotus.  ‘Rohini’  is  ‘Katurohiui,’ 

i.e.,  Picrorrkiza  Kurroa,  Royle. —  T. 

a.  Raphanus  sativus,  Linn. 

b.  Garlics. 

.  c.  Moringa  Plerygosperma, 

d.  A  variety  of  Ocimnm  sanctum. 

c.  Ditto. 

f.  Ditto. 

g.  Artocarpass  Lakoocha,  Roxb. 

t  ‘Jatu’  is  not,  here,  the  well  known  Sanskrit  particle.  ‘Jatu  Caka’  is,  as  explained 
by  Chakrapani,  ‘Vanca-patrika’  or  Bamboo  leaves.  At  some  seasons,  these  leaves  are 
eaten  by  the  poorer  classes  in  India. — T. 

h.  Spondias  mangifera,  Pers. 

i.  Citrus  tnedica,  Linn. 

j.  Artocarpus  Lakoocha,  Roxb. 

k.  Carissd  Carandas,  Linn ;  syn.  Carissa  congesta,  Wight. 


CHA RA  KA-Sa MH1TA. 


825 


Mocha  (a),  Danta9atha  ( b ),  Vadara  ( c ),  Kafamra  ( d ),  Bhavya 
( e ),  Jamvava  ( f ),  Kapittha  ( g ),  Tintidika  (A),  Paravata  (i),  Akshota  ij), 
Panasa  (A),  Narikela  (/),  Dadima  ( m ),  Amlaka  («),  and  such  other 
sour  things,  liquid  or  solid,  are  hostile  to  milk.  12. 

So  Kangu  ( 0 ),  Varaka  ( p ),  Mukushthaka  ( q ),  Kulattha  {r), 
Masha  (j),  and  Nishpava  (t),  are  hostile  if  taken  with  milk.  The 
potherb  called  Padmottarika  ( u ),  Sugar-Maireya  (v),  and  honey, 
if  taken  together,  become  hostile  (owing  to  their  incompatibility), 
and  excite  or  provoke  the  wind  exceedingly.13 

The  drinking  of  Mantha*  after  taking  frumenty  ( Payasa ) 
exceedingly  provokes  the  phlegm.  Such  drink  is  hostile  to  the 

a.  This  word  is  used  for  various  things.  Here  it  probably  implies  the  fruits  o  f 
Moringa  pterygosperma. 

b.  This  also  is  a  word  that  is  used  for  Kapittha  ( Feronia  elephantwn),  or 
Karamardda  ( Carissa  Caretndas)  or  a  variety  of  citrus. 

c.  Zizyphtis  Jujuba,  Larnk. 

d.  Mangifera  sylvatica ,  Rxb. 

e.  Dillenia  Indica,  Linn. 

f.  Eugenia  Jambolana,  Larnk, 

g.  Feronia  elephantum. 

h.  Tamarindus  Indica,  Linn. 

i.  A  variety  of  citrus. 

7.  Juglans  regia,  Linn . 

k.  Artocarpus  Integrijolia,  Linn. 

l.  Cocos  nucifera ,  Linn. 

m.  Punica  granalvm,  Linn. 

n.  Phyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn. 

o.  Setaria  Italica,  Kunth. 

p.  Some  texts  read  ‘Vanaka’.  Chakrapani  notices  ‘vanaka’  and  comments  upon 
it,  saying,  ‘vanaka  vanako-dravah’  which  does  not  seem  to  be  very  intelligible.  If 
‘varaka’  be  accepted,  it  would  mean  ‘van-mudga’  which,  however,  is  the  same 
as  ‘Mukushtaka’.  Vide  note  q  below.  Probably  it  means  ‘Kshetpapra’  or  Oldenlandia 
herbacea,  D.  C. 

q.  Called  also  ‘Vana-mudga  ;  Pkaseolus  aconili/olus,  Jacq. 

r.  Dolichos  uniflorus,  Larnk  ;  syn.  Dolichos  biflorus,  Roxb. 

s.  Pkaseolus  radiatus,  Roxb. 

t.  Vigna  catjang-,  syn.  Dolichos  sinensis,  Linn. 

u.  Called  also  ‘  Kusumbha  9aka.’  Carthamus  tinctorius,  Linn. 

v.  ‘Sarkara’  is  an  adjective  of  ‘Maireya,  which  is  a  kind  of  wine. 

*  ‘Mantha’  is  a  dish  of  barley  meal  with  Ghee  and  water.  It  is  a  kind  of  gruel 
porridge,  ‘Payasa’  is  rice  boiled  in  sugar  and  milk ;  a  kind  of  frumenty. — T, 


326 


CH  A  RA  RA-SA  MH  /  TA . 


food  mentioned.  Upodika  ( Basella  rubra ,  Linn)  boiled  with 
pounded  sesame,  induces  diarrhoea.14 

The  meat  of  cranes  is  hostile  to  the  wine  called  Varuni  and 
Kulmasha.  That  meat,  if  fried  in  the  fat  of  the  boar,  is  capable 
of  bringing  about  death  in  course  of  the  very  day.*15 

The  flesh  of  the  peacock,  if  taken  with  castor-oil  and  roasted 
on  fire  made  of  the  castor-oil  plant,  is  capable  of  bringing  about 
death  the  very  day.16 

The  flesh  of  the  bird  called  Haritaka  (the  green  or  wood 
pigeon),  roasted  on  a  fire  made  of  the  wood  of  Kadamba  ( Nauclea 
Gadamba,  Roxb.)  brings  about  death  the  very  day.  If  taken,  with 
the  ashes  of  such  fire  or  dust  on  it,  mixed  with  the  wine  called 
Kshaudra,  it  induces  death.f 

Pippali  boiled  in  oil  obtained  from  frying  fish,  as  also  Kaka- 
machi  (boiled  similarly),  if  taken  with  honey,  induces  death.J18 

Honey  taken  in  a  heated  state,  or  taken  by  a  person  afflicted 
with  heat,  induces  death.19 

Honey  and  Ghee  in  equal  portions,  honey  and  rain  water 
mingled  in  equal  measures,  honey  and  Pushkara  seeds,  warm 
water  drink  after  the  taking  of  honey,  Bhallataka  and  warm  water, 
Kampillaka  boiled  in  whey,  stale  Kakamachi,  the  flesh  of  Bhasa 
roasted  on  a  spit,  are  incompatible  combinations.  (Hence,  if  these 
be  taken,  disease  and  even  death  may  be  produced). 

We  have  thus  laid  down  (what  kinds  of  food  are  incompatible) 
agreeably  to  your  questiori.il2  0 

*  ‘Valaka’  is  a  small  kind  of  crane.  ‘Varuni’  is  a  kind  of  wine.  ‘Kulmasha’  is 
sour  gruel  that  is  prepared  by  the  spontaneous  fermentation  of  rice  boiled  in  water.  It 
is  commonly  called  ‘Kanji’. — T. 

-j-  ‘Haridra’  or  ‘Haridra’  is  another  name  of  Nauclea  Cadamba,  Roxb. — T. 

j  Pippali  is  Piper  longum,  Linn.  Kakamachi  is  Solanum  nigrum,  Linn. 

Pushkara-vija  are  seeds  of  the  lotus. 

Bhallataka  is  Semccarpus  Anacardium,  Linn.  The  poison  of  the  fruit  is  eliminated 
by  an  artificial  process. 

Kampillaka  is  Mallotux  Philippensis  ;  syn,  Roiteleria  tinctoria,  Roxb. 

Kakamachi  (as  already  explained)  is  Solanum  nigrum,  Linn.  Bhasa  is  a  species 
of  aquatic  fowl. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  Mill  TA .  327 

{Here  occurs  a  verse.) 

Whatever  diet  excites  the  faults  without  being  able  to  dispel 
or  drive  them  out  of  the  system,  becomes  a  source  of  affliction  or 
disease.21 

Diet  that  is  incompatible  is  said  to  be  the  cause  of  the  follow¬ 
ing  diseases,  viz..  Impotence,  Blindness,  Erysipelas,  abdominal 
dropsy,  malignant  Boils,  Lunacy,  Fistula-in-ano,  Swoons,  Vertigo, 
Flatulence,  choaking  of  the  throat  (with  suppression  of  the 
voice),  chlorosis  and  anaemia,  acidity  of  the  stomach  (such  that  no 
food  is  capable  of  being  retained),  Leprous  blotches,  Leprosy, 
diseases  that  affect  the  Grahani,  Pulmonary  consumption,  Bilious 
hemorrhage,  Fever,  Inflammation  of  the  schneidenian  membrane, 
with  loss  of  the  sense  of  smell,  incapacity  to  beget  healthy 
offspring,  as  also. death  itself.23 

The  following  causes  or  operations  are  the  remedies  of  these 
diseases  and  of  others  that  are  generated  by  incompatible  diet. 

They  are  vomiting,  purging,  and  all  such  means  as  are  fitted 
for  neutralising  the  several  kinds  of  incompatible  food  that 
have  been  taken,  as  also  ( previous )  correction  cf  the  body  by 
use  or  administration  of  such  food  or  articles  as  are  capable 
of  neutralising  the  several  kinds  of  incompatible  food  if  they 
are  taken.*23 

{Here  occurs  a  verse.) 

All  diseases  that  are  generated  by  the  taking  of  incompatible 
food  are  destroyed  by  purging,  and  vomitting,  and  neutralising 
agents,  and  by  the  previous  administration  or  use  of  such  articles  as 
are  beneficial.2  4 


*  The  concluding  portion  of  this  aphorism  refers  (as  pointed  out  by  Chakrapani)  to 
.the  prevention  of  diseases  due  to  incompatible  food.  The  sense  is  that  if  such  neutral¬ 
ising  food  or  articles  are  previously  taken,  then  the  several  kinds  of  incompatible  food 
•taken  do  not  succeed  in  generating  the  diseases  they  are-  otherwise  capable  of  gener- 
ting. — T- 


328  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

( Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary .) 

The  different  opinions  of  the  great  Rishis  in  the  matter  of 
ascertaining  (the  number  of)  Tastes,  the  classification  of  objects, 
with  their  properties  and  operations,  enumeration  of  objects  as 
dependent  on  tastes,1  the  reasons  for  enumerating  the  Tastes,  the 
indications  of  manifest  and- unmanifest  Tastes,  the  indications  of 
the  attributes  of  Para ,  &c.,  laid  down  separately  for  each,2  the 
reason  for  which  the  Tastes  are  numbered  six  though  each  of  them 
consists  of  the  five  primal  elements  in  different  proportions,  the 
preponderance  of  those  elements  in  consequence  of  which  some 
Tastes  act  upwards  and  some  act  downwards,3  particular  ex¬ 
position  of  each  of  the  six  Tastes  according  to  their  respective 
properties  or  attributes  and  operations,  how  the  attributes  and 
operations  of  objects  are  ascertainable  from  their  Tastes  and  what 
the  exceptions  are  of  the  rules  laid  down  for  that  purpose,4  what 
are  foremost,  what  inferior,  and  what  middling  among  the  Tastes 
in  the  matter  of  their  heaviness  and  lightness,  the  indications  of 
Assimilation  as  also  of  Potency,  the  several  kinds  of  Potency,5  the 
respective  indications  of  the  six  Tastes,  (*.  e .,  those  by  which  they 
are  capable  of  being  discriminated),  the  several  objects  that  are 
incompatible  with  each  other  or  one  another,  and  the  effects  they 
produce  when  taken  together,6  the  diseases  that  are  generated 
by  taking  food  consisting  of  incompatible  ingredients,  and  the 
remedies  prescribable  for  those  diseases,  have  all  been  laid  down 
in  this  Lesson  called  Atreya-Bhadrakapya.7 

Thus  ends  the  Twenty-sixth  Lesson,  called  Atreya  Bhadra- 
kapya,  in  Agniveqa’s  treatise  as  revised  by  Charaka.* 


*  Verse  28  of  the  Lesson  which  concludes  the  observations  of  the  Rishi  on  Taste, 
Assimilation,  Energy,  and  Potency,  is  important.  What  is  stated  there  is  that  so  far 
as  the  operation  of  drugs  in  concerned,  Assimilation  overpowers  Taste  ;  Energy  over¬ 
powers  both  ;  and  Potency  overpowers  all  three.  A  certain  object  may  be  pungent  in 
Taste  but  sweet  in  Assimilation.  The  physician,  in  selecting  it,  should  be  guided  by  its 
nature  as  observable  on  Assimilation.  Where,  again,  the  Energy  of  the  object  is  different, 
that  should  guide  the  selection.  Finally,  Potency  would  claim  consideration  above  the 
three  others.  —  T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHITA . 


LESSON  XXVII. 

We  shall,  after  this,  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  ordinances 
relating  to  food  and  drink.  Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of 
Atri.1 

Physicians  skilled  in  the  science  of  Life  say  that  food  and 
drink  that  are  agreeable  in  point  of  color,  scent,  taste,  and  touch, 
and  consistent  with  the  ordinances  laid  down,  are  the  very  Life  of 
those  living  creatures  that  are  said  to  be  animated.  This  appears 
from  the  visible  effects  thereof.  In  consequence,  again,  of  the 
fuel  of  food  and  drink  is  the  existence  of  the  (digestive)  fire; 
Food  and  drink  develop  strength  of  both  body  and  mind. 

If  taken  according  to  the  measure  that  is  directed,  food  and 
drink  lead  to  the  growth  of  the  several  ingredients  of  the  body, 
©f  strength  and  complexion,  and  contribute  to  the  cheerfulness  of 
the  senses.  If  taken  otherwise,  they  become  injurious.*®.. 

Hence,  O  Agnive§a  we  shall  expound  in  detail  what  the 
ordinances  in  detail  are  of  food  and  drink  for  explaining  ( to  men  ) 
what  is  beneficial  and  what  injurious.3 

From  its  nature,  water  forces  out  impurities ;  salt  assists  at 
the  flow  of  all  liquid  substances ;  strained  ashes  assist  at  digestion  ; 
honey  unites  dislocated  or  dissociated  parts ;  Ghee  produces  lu¬ 
bricity  and  unctiousness  ;  milk  makes  us  vigorous ;  meat  adds  to 
©ur  growth;  the  juice  (of  meat)  leads  to  gratification  ;  alcohol 
perforates  and  renders  infirm  ;  the  wine  called  Sidhu  furrows  the 
body  ;  the  juice  of  the  Drakha  (  Uvse  pass#)  excites  or  increases 
the  appetite  ;  the  inspissated  juice  of  the  sugar-cane  stores  up 
many  faults ;  curds  produce  intumescences ;  dry  oil-cakes  cause 
depression  and  sorrow ;  the  soup  of  Masha  [Phaseolus  radiatus) 
increases  the  quantity  of  faeces;  strained  (saline)  ashes  are  des- 

*  ‘Praninam  Pranisamjakanam’  means,  as  pointed  out  by  the  Commentator,  ‘those 
among  living  creatures  that  are  animate.’  Under  living  creatures  are  included  both  men 
and  trees.  Animate  existence,  it  would  seem,  would,  according  to  the  author,  exclude 
tress.— T. 


42 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


tructive  of  vision  and  vital  seed ;  save  Dadima  (  Pumca  Granatum, 
Linn.)  Amalaka  ( Phyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn.)  and  all  other  sour 
things  are  provocative  of  bile ;  save  honey  that  is  old,  and 
£ali  rice  and  barley  and  wheat,  all  sweets  are  provocative  of 
phlegm  ;  save  the  sprouts  of  Vetra  (  Calamus  Rotang,  Linn  ).  and 
the  leaves  of  Patola  l  Tricosanthes  dioica,  Roxb. ),  almost  all 
bitters  are  provocative  of  the  wind  and  destructive  of  virile  power; 
save  Pippali  (  Piper  longitm ,  Linn.  )  and  dry  ginger,  all  pungents 
are  provocative  of  wind  and  destructive  of  the  virile  power.4 

After  this  we  shall  expound  the  diverse  articles  of  food  accord¬ 
ing  to,  their  respective  groups  or  classes.6  J 

£uka  paddy  {a),'£ ami  paddy,  (b),  meat,  potherbs,  and  fruits, — 
each  constitutes  a  group ;  these  with  Harita  (c),  Wines,  Water, 
Milk,  and  Sugar-cane,  and  the  modifications  of  Milk  and  those  of 
sugar-cane,  constitute  the  ten  and  two  groups  of  food  prepared 
(  cooked)  and  unprepared  (  uncooked ). 

They  are  being  explained  with  reference  to  their  tastes, 
potency,  and  assimilation.6-* 

The  red  £ali,  the  Maha^ali,  Kalama,  £akulakrita,  Churnaka, 
Dirghatjuka,  Gaura,  Panduka,  Langula,  Sugandhika,  Lauhavala, 
£arika,  Pramodaka,  Patanga,  Tapaniya,  and  all  other  varieties  of 
<^ali  that  are  beneficial,  are  cooling  in  potency  ;  in  taste  and  assi¬ 
milation,  they  are  sweet,  capable  of  exciting  the  wind  a  little,  a  little 
constipating,  oily,  nutritive,  and  increasing  semen  and  wine.*8-10 


a  Cuka  paddy,  as  a  group,  includes  all  varieties  of  paddy  or  rice. 

b.  Cami  paddy,  as  a  group,  includes  all  varieties  of  Phaseoli  and  pease.  Grains 
generated  within  cods  are  so  called.  They  are  called  paddy  or  Dhanya  in  consequence 
of  their  being  seeds. 

c.  All  birds  and  fowls  are  included  in  this. 

*  The  several  varieties  of  paddy  here  mentioned  belong,  as  observed  by  Chakrapani, 
to  various  parts  of  India.  They  have  many  local  names.  Chakrapani  remarks  that  he 
would  confine  himself  to  such  names  as  were  current  in  Gauda  or  Bengal.  The  red  Cali 
is,  of  course,  well  known.  The  Maha9ali  or  great  Cali  used  in  those  days  to  be  grown 
in  Behara  (the  Magadha  country).  Kalama  is  spoken  of  Chakrapani  as  grown  in 


CHA  RAKA  -54  MtllTA . 


331 


Amongst  these,  that  which  has  been  mentioned  first,  vis,  the 
red  £ali,  is  the  foremost. 

The  red  £ali  allays  thirst,  and  subjugates  all  the  three  faults 
when  they  are  excited. 

Mahafali  is  next  to  red  £ali  in  virtues.  Kalama  is  next  to 
Mahagali  (and  each  of  those  coming  after  is  lesser,  and  lesser  in 
the  possession  of  virtues  ).  1 2 

Yavaka,  Hayana,  Pantju,  Vapya,  Naishadhalca,  and  others, 
included  within  the  class  called  £ali,  resemble  the  red  £ali  and 
others  mentioned  before,  in  respect  of  their  merits  and  demerits.*13 

That  variety  of  paddy  which  is  called  Shashtika  is  cooling, 
oily,  heavy,  agreeable,  destructive  of  all  the  three  faults,  and  in¬ 
vigorates  the  body  and  makes  it  hard. 

In  all  these  respects,  Shashtika  is  the  foremost;  its  two  species 
which  are  white  and  dark  are  possessed  of  the  same  virtues  in  a 
lesser  and  lesser  degree.14 

Baraka,  Uddalaka  China,  £arada,  Ujjwala,  Darddura,  Gandh- 
ana,  and  Ivuruviddha,  are  like  Shashtika.  They  differ,  indeed,  from 
it,  very  little  in  virtues.f15 

Vedagrahara.  The  Ayuveddrtha  Ckantlrikd  speaks  of  it  as  grown  in  Kashmiaa.  Cakula- 
krita,  or  as  some  manuscripts  have  it,  Kuyalakrita,  was  grown  in  Cravanti.  One  of  the 
latest  Commentators  reads  ‘Cakunarhita,  ’  ‘  brought  by  birds  ’  from  a  distant  country. 

The  other  varieties  have  not  been  commented  upon. — T. 

*  Yavaka  is  not  Yava  or  wheat,  but  a  kind  of  small  grain  which  the  Rishis  included 
in  the  class  called  paddy. 

Hayana  is  a  variety  of  paddy  difficult  to  identity. 

Panqu  is  equally  difficult  to  identity. 

Vapya  is  a  species  of  paddy  that  grows  in  deep  water. 

Naishadhaka  was  grown  in  the  country  of  the  Nishadhas. 

All  these  seem  to  be  local  names. 

The  medical  lexicons  mention  them  merely  as  ‘varieties  of  paddy’. — T. 

+  These  are  different  varieties  of  paddy.  The  names  appear  to  be  local.  Carada 
is  that  which  is  reaped  in  autumn.  Gandhana  is  a  fragrant  variety.  Probably,  it  is  what 
in  Bengal  is  known  under  the  name  Samati  or  Manibhoga  or  Randhanipagla,  China 
probably  came  from  China  or  further  Asia,— T, 


332 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


That  variety  of  paddy  which  is  called  Vrihi  is  sweet,  sour  in 
assimilation,  provocative  of  the  bile,  and  heavy.18 

The  paddy  called  Patala  (  called  also  A<ju  in  consequence  of 
its  being  reaped  very  quickly,  for  it  is  gathered  in  the  month  of 
A§win  ),  increases  faeces  and  urine,  enhances  the  heat  of  the  body, 
and  provokes  all  the  three  faults.17 

The  paddy  called  Koradusha,  and  that  called  £yamaka,  are 
astringent,  sweet,  and  light.  They  provoke  the  wind,  destroy 
phlegm  and  bile,  are  cooling  and  constipating,  and  dry  up  the 
fluids  of  the  body.*1* 

Those  varieties  of  paddy  which  go  by  the  names  of  Hasti¬ 
ly  amaka,  Nivara,  Toyaparni,  Gavedhuka,  Pragatika,  aquatic - 
(^ySmaka,  Lohityanu,  Priyangu,  Mukunda,  Jhlntiga,  Muti,  Charuka, 
Baraka,  £ivira,  Utkata,  and  Jurnabha,,  all  resemble  the  £yamaka 
in  their  virtues.-f- 19-20 

Yava  (  Hordeum  kexastichum,  Linn.)  or  barley,  is  dry,  cool¬ 
ing,  heavy,  agreeable,  and  enhances  the  wind  and  the  faeces.  It 
makes  the  body  consistent  and  hard,  is  of  astringent  taste,  in¬ 
vigorating,  and  destructive  of  all  affections  due  to  phlegm.21 

Venuyava  (a  variety  of  the  above)  is  regarded  as  dry, 
astringent  as  regards  its  principal  taste  and  sweet  as  regards  its 
secondary  taste,  destructive  of  phlegm  and  bile,  as  also  of  abdo¬ 
minal  fat,  worms,  and  poisons,  and  invigorating.22 

Godhuma  (wheat)  unites  fractures,  is  destructive  of  wind, 
agreeable  in  taste,  cooling,  prolongs  life,  promotes  nutrition  and 
increases  corpulency,  enhances  the  semen,  is  oily,  makes  the  body 
consistent  and  hard,  and  is  heavy.23 


*  Cyamaka  is  Pftnicum  frumcntaceum,  Eoxb. 

t  The  varieties  here  mentioned  are  very  small  kinds  of  paddy.  Most  of  them  grow 
wild  and  are  gathered  when  ripe,  by  special  processes.  Many  of  these  do  not  really 
fall  within  the  genus  Oryza  Saliva,  but  the  Ris’nis  followed  the  popular  phraseology  in 
calling  them  all  as  paddy. — T. 


CHARAKA-S-AMHITA. 


333 


Nandimukhi  and  Madhuni  are  sweet,  oily,  and  cooling. 

Thus  ends  the  first  group  consisting  of  the  diverse  varieties  of 
the  grain  called  £uka-dhanya.*24 

Here  ends  the  Cuka-Dhanya  group. 

Mudga  ( Phaseolus  Mungo ,  Linn. )  is  astringent  sweet  in 
taste,  dry  and  cooling  ;  in  assimilation  it  is  pungent ;  it  is,  besides, 
light,  clear,  and  destructive  of  both  phlegm  and  bile.  It  is  the 
foremost  of  all  things  whose  soup  or  boiled  juice  is  taken.25 

Masha  ( Phaseolus  radiatus  Roxb.)  increases  the  semen,  is 
greatly  destructive  of  wind,  oily,  warm,  sweet,  heavy,  invigorating, 
increases  the  quantity  of  faeces,  and  if  weakness  or  loss  of  virile 
power  takes  place,  it  restores  that  power  quickly.28 

That  variety  of  this  article  which  is  called  Rajamasha  (  Vigna 
sinensis,  Savi,  syn.  Dolichos  sinensis,  Linn.)  has  consistency, 
creates  a  relish  for  food,  causes  phlegm,  semen,  acidity,  and  bile. 
It  is  agreeable,  provocative  of  wind,  dry,  astringent  in  taste,  is, 
clear,  and  heavy.27 

That  variety  of  Masha  which  is  known  by  the  name  of  Kulattha 
(. Dolichos  biflorus,  Roxb.)  is  warm  and  astringent;  in  assimilation  it 
is  sour;  isdestructive  of  phlegm,  semen,  and  wind.  It  isan inspissant, 
and  is  beneficial  in  consumption,  hiccup,  asthma,  and  piles.28 

Makushtaka  (  called  also  Van-Mudga,  Phaseolus  lobatus, )  is 
sweet  in  taste  and  assimilation,  an  inspissant,  dry,  and  cooling. 
It  is  beneficial  in  haemorrhages,  Fevers,  and  other  diseases.29 

Chanaka  (  Gicer  arietinum,  Linn),  Masura  ( Cicer  lens,  Roxb; 
syn.  Vicia  lens,  Benth  ),  Khandika  {Pisum  sativum,  Linn),  and 
other  kinds  of  pulses  and  pease  are  light,  cooling,  sweet,  as¬ 
tringent,  and  dry.  They  are  beneficial  in  affections  of  bilious, 


*  Both  Nandhmukhi  and  Madhuni  are  varieties  of  wheat  (  Triticum  vulgare , 
Linn.  ).  Dhanya,  as  previously  shown,  includes  grain  of  almost  every  species.  By 
Cuka-Dhanya  is  meant  all  bearded  grains. — T. 


334  CHA  RAKA-SA  M  HI  TA . 

phlegm.  They  are  also  regarded  as  praiseworthy  in  the  prepara¬ 
tion  of  soups  and’  plasters.  Amongst  them  all,  Masura  ( Gicer  lens, 
lioxb. )  is  an  inspissant  for  it  dries  up  the  fluids  of  the  body  ; 
while  Kalaya  ( or  Khandira,  Pisum  sativum,  Linn. ),  is  highly 
provocative  of  wind.30-31 

Tila  ( Sesatnum  Indicum,  Linn.)  is  oily,  heating,  sweet,  keen, 
astringent,  and  bitter.  It  keeps  the  skin  soft,  promotes  the  growth 
of  hair,  increases  strength,  is  destructive  of  wind,  and  creates 
phlegm  and  bile.32 

The  different  varieties  of  beans  are  heavy,  sweet,  cooling, 
destructive  of  strength,  and  possessed  of  drying  qualities.  When 
oilified,  they  are  fit  to  be  eaten  by  men  endued  with  strength.33 

The  particular  variety  of  beans  called  Cimvi  (  several  species 
of  Dolichos  are  known  by  it )  is  dry  and  astringent.  It  provokes 
the  wind  within  the  stomach.  It  does  not  benefit  the  semen.  It  is 
not  beneficial  to  the  eyes  also.  It  takes  a  longtime  for  digestion.34 

Adhaki(  Cytisus  Cajan,  Linn  ;  syn.  Cajanus  Indicus,  Spreng. ) 
is  destructive  of  phlegm  and  bile ;  provokes  wind ;  and  allays 
phlegm  and  wind  when  both  are  excited  together. 

Avalguja  (called  also  Somraja,  Vernonia anthelmintica,  Willd ; 
syn.  Senatula  anthelmintica,  Roxb.),  Edagaja  ( called  also  Chakra- 
mardda,  Cassia  Tora,  Linn.)  and  Nishpava  (called  in  Bengali, 
Barbati,  Vigna  catjang),  are  provocative  of  wind  and  bile. 

Kakanda  (  a  black  variety  of  the  beans  called  Cimvi ),  Uma 
(  called  also  Atasi,  Linum  usitatissimum,  Linn.),  and  Atmagupta 
(  called  also  Alkusi,  Mucuna  pruriens) produce  effects  similar  to 
those  of  Masha  ( Phaseolus  radiatus.) 

Thus  ends  the  second  group,  called  £ami  Dbanya;  as  expounded 
by  the  Rishi.38-38 

Here  ends  the  Cami-Dkdnya  Group. 

The  cow,  ass,  mule,  camel,  horse,  leopard,  lion,  bear,  ape,  wolf, 
tiger,  hyena,  the  hairy  dog  called  Babhru,  cat,  mouse,  fox,  jackal, 


CHARA  K4-SA  A/H  l  TA . 


335 


liavvk,  dog,  Chasha  (a),  crow,  Ca9aghjii  (b),  Madhuhan  (c),  Bhasa  (d), 
vulture,  owl,  Kulingalca  ( e ),  Dhunika  (/),  and  the  ospreys, — 
these  beasts  and  birds  are  called  Prasahas.* 

£weta  (g),  £yama  (h),  Chitra-pushta  (*),  Kalaka  (/),  Kakuni- 
mriga  ( k ),  Kurchika  (/),  Chillita  ( m ),  frogs,  Iguana,  £alwaka  (»), 
Gandaka  ( o ),  Kadali  (/>),  Nakula  (q),  and  £vvavit  (r),  these  animals 
are  classed  as  Bhumi^aya  (or  living  in  holes).37-10 


a.  Ordinarily  applied  to  the  blue  jay  (  Coradas  Indica)  ;  sometimes,  it  is  applied 
to  the  kingfisher. — T. 

b.  Literally,  the  animal  that  kills  rabbits.  It  is  applied  to  a  bird  of  prey.  The 
Commentator  is  content  with  telling  us  only  this, 

c.  Gangadhara  says  that  this  bird  is  commonly  called  Mahua  in  Bengal. 

d.  Bhasa  is  the  fish-eating  kite. 

e.  Otherwise  called  Vana-Chataka.  A  variety  of  the  sparrow, 

f.  Otherwise  called  Chataka.  The  ordinary  sparrow. 

*  Lower  down  in  this  Lesson  the  Rishi  explains  that  the  name  *  Prasaha  ’  is  applied 
to  those  beasts  and  birds  in  consequence  of  the  suddenness  and  force  with  which  they 
seize  their  food  and  devour  it. — T. 

g.  The  Commentator  Gangadhara,  without  explaining  what  is  implied  by  it,  con¬ 
tents  himself  with  observing  that  it  is  a  well-known  animal.  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether 
the  word  is  used  for  a  bird  or  a  beast. 

h.  Cyama  is  identified  by  Gangadhara  with  a  bird  of  a  darkish  hue. 

i.  “A  well-known  bird  known  by  this  name  in  a  particular  province”  observes 
Gangadhara.  Difficult  to  identify. 

j.  Some  texts  read  ‘  Kilaka  ’  and  some  ‘  Kanaka  ’.  It  is  believed  to  be  a  small 
variety  of  ‘chataka’  or  sparrow. 

k.  Some  texts  read  ‘  Kakuli-mriga  ’.  Gangadhara  observes  that  among  common 
people  it  is  known  by  the  name  of  ‘  Kauni-mriga  what  that  is,  is  not  well-known. 

l.  Some  texts  incorrectly  read'  ‘Kuchika’.  It  is  the  well-known  fish  called 
« Kunehia  ’  in  Bengal.  It  is  a  variety  of  eel. 

m.  Some  texts  incorrectly  read  ‘  Chillaka’.  It  is  commonly  called  ‘  Chiada,  ’ 
observes  Gangadhara.  It  is  probably  a  provincial  name. 

n.  Commonly  called  ‘  Sejada  ’  observes  Gangadhara.  Difficult  to  identify. 

o.  Otherwise  called  ‘  Swarna-Godha  \  A  variety  of  iguana,  of  golden  color. 

f.  A  small  variety  of  deer,  called  ‘  Kadali-patta 

q.  Mungoose. 

Literally,  ‘one  that  knows  the  dog.’  It  is  used  to  imply  the  porcupine. 


336 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA . 


Srimara  («),  Chamara,  (b),  Rhinoceros,  Buffalo,  Gavaya,  (c), 
Elephant,  Nanku  ( d ),  Boar,  and  Ruru  ( e ),  are  regarded  as  amphi¬ 
bious  animals. 

Tortoise,  crab,  fish,  porpoise,  whale,  oysters,  conchs,  otter, 
crocodile,  Chaluki  (large  variety  of  porpoise),  Makara  (/)  and 
others,  have  been  said  to  be  aquatic  animals. 

Those  that  live  and  move  on  the  surface  of  the  waters  are  now 
being  said.  They  are  swans  and  geese,  Krauncha  ( g ),  Valaka  ( h ), 
cranes,  Karandava(t),  Plava(/),  £arari  (£),  Pushkarari  (l),  Ke?ari  (m), 
Manatundika  («),  Mrinalakantha,  (o),Madgu  (/),  Kadamva^.Kaka- 
tundika  ( r ),  Utkro$a(.y),  Pundarikaksha  ( t ),  Megharava  ( u ),  Amvu- 

a.  The  Commentator  explains  that  Srimara  is  a  large  species  of  boar.  The  lexi¬ 
cons  also  give  ‘  Srimaro-mahacukarah  ’. 

b.  An  animal  of  the  deer  species,  having  a  fine  tail.  The  Yak  or  Bos  Gruniens. 

c.  A  species  of  ox  ;  the  Gayal ;  erroneously  classed  by  Hindu  writers  among  deer. 

d.  Any  ordinary  deer  of  two  horns. 

e.  A  large  species  of  deer,  having  many  horns. 

f.  Sharks  and  other  animals  of  the  kind  are  implied  by  it.  The  word  ‘  Makara  ’ 
as  used  in  Sanskrit  literature  is  a  fictitious  animal  like  the  griffin  and  others  of  the 

g.  The  Commentator  observes  that  it  is  a  kind  of  large  crane. 

Wilson  thinks  it  is  a  variety  of  the  heron,  viz.,  Ardea  jaculator. 

h.  Otherwise  called,  as  observed  by  the  Commentator,  ‘  Kanavaki  ’.  A  small  variety 
of  crane. 

i.  A  variety  of  duck. 

j.  Literally,  anything  that  goes  by  leaps  and  bounds.  A  small  species  of  water- 
fowl  is  implied.  The  word,  however,  sometimes  means  a  frog. 

k.  Spelt  variously.  Written  sometimes  as  1  Carali.  ’  A  species  of  water  fowl  that 
is  supposed  to  drive  away  all  other  fowl  from  the  tank  in  which  it  lives  and  to  eat  up  all 
the  fish  in  it. 

l.  The  Commentator  says  that  it  is  otherwise  called  ‘  Naralipaksha  ’ ;  evidently  a 
provincial  name. 

m.  Otherwise  called  *  Dirghali  ’  as  observed  by  the  Commentator. 

«.  Otherwise  called  *  Matundi  ’  as  observed  by  the  Commentator. 

o.  Difficult  to  identify. 

p.  The  shag. 

r.  A  gallinule  of  the  white  variety. 

s.  A  variety  of  osprey. 

t.  An  aquatic  fowl  with  large  red  eyes. 

u.  Otherwise  called  ‘Meghanada  ’. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


337 


Kukkuti  (a),  Ara  (6),  Nandimukhi  ( c ),  Vati  (d),  Sumukha  ( e ), 
Sahacharin  (_/),  Rohini  ( g ),  Kamakali  (k),  Sarasa  (z),  Raktafirshaka 
( j  ),  Chakravaka  (  k),  and  other  fowl. 

Prishata  (/),  Sarabha  ( m ),  Rama  (n),  Cwadangshtra  (o),  Mriga- 
matrika  (p),  Catja  (y),  Urana  (r),  Kuranga  (s),  Gokarna  (t ),  Kotta- 
karaka  (u),  Charushka  (v),  Harina  ( w ),  Ena  ( n ),  Camvara  (jy),  Kala- 
puchcchaka  (z),  Rishya  (a),  and  Tarapota  (b),  should  be  known 
as  animals  of  the  wilderness.47-48 


а.  Difficult  to  identify. 

б.  Ditto. 

c.  Ditto. 

d.  Ditto. 

e.  Ditto. 

/.  Ditto. 

g.  Ditto. 

h.  Ditto. 

i.  The  Indian  crane.  Ardea  Sibirica. 

j.  A  variety  of  the  above  with  a  red  head. 

k.  The  ruddy  goose,  commonly  called  in  India  the  Brahmani  duck  or  goose. 
Anas  casarca. 

l.  The  porcine  deer. 

m.  Not  the- fabulous  animal  that  is  stronger  than  the  lion,  but  a  species  of  deer. 
The  Commentator  describes  it  to  be  as  large  as  the  camel  and  having  large  horns  also. 

n.  A  variety  of  deer.  Probably,  the  large  wild  goat  of  the  Himalayas. 

o.  A  variety  of  deer  having  four  horns.  The  Commentator  describes  it  as  occurring 
at  Kartikapore 

p.  The  Commentator  describes  it  as  a  big-bellied  deer  of  the  vaccine  shape. 

q.  The  hare.  .The  name,  however,  is  sometimes  applied  to  a  species  of  deer. 

r.  A  species  of  hare. 

s.  The  antelope. 

t.  A  variety  of  deer.  Wilson  thinks  it  probably  means  the  Nilgau  which  abounds 
in  the  Himalayas.  The  Commentator  says  it  is  otherwise  called  the  Gomva  deer. 

u.  The  Commentator  describes  it  as  a  kind  of  deer. 

v.  A  variety  of  deer. 

w.  It  is  a  generic  name  applied  to  all  animals  of  the  deer  species.  Here  it  implies 
the  spotted  deer  of  the  N.  W.  Provinces. 

x.  Otherwise  called  ‘  Krishnashara.  ’  The  belack  antelope. 

y.  Otherwise  called  Gavaya.  A  variety  of  deer. 

z.  A  species  of  antelope  having  a  black  and  hairy  tail. 

a.  The  painted  or  white-footed  antelope. 

b.  A  variety  of  deer. 

43 


charaka-samhitA. 


Lava  (a),  Varttiraka  ( b ),  Vatika  (c),  Kapinjala  (</),  Chakora  (J% 
Upachakra  {/),  the  crimson  Kukkubha  (g)  ;19 

These,  beginning  with  Lava,  are  called  Vishkiras,  +  as  also 
those  named  below  and  beginning  with  Varttaka ;  viz,  Varttaka  {h), 
Varttika  (z‘),  Varhf  (/),  Tittiri  (k),  Kukkuta  (/),  Kanka  (wz),  Cara- 
padendrabha  (n),  Gonardda  (o),  Girivarttaka  (/>),  Krakara  (q),  Ava- 
kara  (r),  and  Varaha  (j). 60-51 

Catapatra  (t),  Bhingaraja  {u),  Koyashthi  (v),  Jivajivaka  (w), 


a.  A  sort  of  quail.  Perdix  chinensis. 

b.  The  Commentators  explain  it  as  a  species  of  francoline  partridge.  The  A yur- 
vcddrtha  Chandrika  states  that  this  is  called  in  Bengal  Babui,  and  in  Northern  India, 

c.  A  variety  of  the  above.  Called  also  Vattahi. 

d.  The  francoline  partridge.  Otherwise  called  Chatuka  in  Bengal  and  Northern 
India.  Its  cry  is  regarded  by  the  commnn  people  as  a  petition  to  the  clouds  for  a  shower, 
resembling  the  sound  of  Phatik-jal.  It  is  also  called  the  white  Tittira. 

e.  The  bartevelle  or  Greek  partridge.  Perdix  rufu  or  Tetrao  ru/us. 

f.  A  variety  of  the  ruddy  goose. 

g.  The  wild  cock.  Pkasianus  gallus.  ‘  Raktavarnaka,  ’  as  remarked  by  Chakrapani, 
is  an  adjective  of  Kukkubha. — T 

t  Those  animals  that  find  out  their  food  with  the  aid  of  their  claws  and  pick  them 
up  like  the  cock. — T 

h.  A  sort  of  qjiail.  Wilson  thinks  it  implies  the  variety  known  as  Perdix  olivacea. 

i.  Chakrapani  says  that  it  is  a  variety  of  the  above. 

j.  The  peacock. 

k.  The  francoline  partridge, 

l.  The  cock. 

m.  The  heron. 

».  The  Commentators  say  that  it  implies  the  fighting  heron,  or  Malla-kanka. 

o.  The  Sarasa  or  Indian  crane. 

p.  The  mountain  Varttaka. 

q.  A  variety  of  partridge.  Wilson  thinks  it  implies  the  Perdix  sylvaticus, 

r.  A  variety  of  partridge. 

s.  The  boar. 

t.  Otherwise  called  Kashthakubarika.  The  Indian  wood-pecker, 

u.  A  variety  of  the  shrike.  Probably,  the  Lanius  malabaricus. 

v.  The  lapwing. 

hi,  A  variety  of  pheasant. 


CI1A  RA  KA-SA  M  HIT  A . 


339 


Kairata  (a),  Kokila  (6),  Atyuha  (c),  Gopaputra  (d),  Priyatmaja  ( e ), 
Latwa  (/),  Latwashaka  (g),  Vabhru  (k),  Vataha  («'),  Dindimanaka 
(/),  Jati*,  Dundubhivashkara  (k),  Loliaprishta  (/),  Kulingaka  ( m ), 
Kapota  ( n ),  Cukla9§.ranga  ( o ),  Chiratika  ( p ),  Kuyashtika  (  q  ), 
Carika  ( r ),  Kalavinka  (  ^  ),  Chataka  (I),  Angarachudaka  (u), 
Paravata  (v),  and  Panavika  (jp), — these  birds  are  included  in  the 
class  called  Pratuda.ss~54, 

The  animals  (rrtentioned  above)  have  been  called  Prasahas  in 
consequence  of  the  suddenness  and  force  with  which  they  seize 
their  food  and  eat  it. 

Those  which  have  been  called  Bhu$ayas  are  so  called  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  their  living  in  holes ;  and  those  called  Anupas  have 
been  so  styled  in  consequence  of  their  living  in  marshy  tracts. 


a.  A  species  of  Kokila. 

b.  The  Indian  Koel  or  cuckoo. 

c.  Otherwise  called  Datyuta.  The  gallinule. 

d.  The  Commentators  are  content  with  saying  that  it  is  a  well  known  bird  of  the 

e.  Not  identifiable. 

f.  A  variety  of  sparrow. 

g.  Ditto. 

h.  Not  identifiable. 

*.  Ditto. 

j.  Ditto. 

k.  All  that  the  Commentators  say  about  it  is  that  its  cry  is  very  hoarse  and  loud. 

l.  A  variety  of  Kulinga. 

m.  A  fork-tailed  shrike. 

n.  Pigeon. 

o.  A  white  variety  of  the  Chataka.  The  cuculus  melanoleucos. 

p.  Not  identifiable. 

q.  Not  identifiable. 

r.  The  Provincial  names  of  this  bird  are  Calika,  Mayana,  and  Gang9alika.  These 
are  varieties.  The  species  is  known  by  the  name  of  Turdus  salica,  Buck, 

s.  The  domestic  Chataka  or  sparrow. 

t.  The  sparrow. 

a.  Not  identifiable. 

v.  The  name  is  applied  to  a  dove  or  pigeon. 
w.  Not  identifiable. 


340 


CHA  RA  K.A-SA  MH /  TA . 


Those  called  falaja  have  derived  their  name  from  the  circum¬ 
stance  of  their  living  in  water ;  and  the  animals  (named  above) 
have  been  called  Jalachara  owing  to  their  moving  and  living  on 
the  surface  of  the  water. 

Among  animals  living  and  moving  on  land,  those  that  live  in 
the  wilderness  are  called  jangala. 

Those  animals  that  scatter  (with  their  claws  or  hoofs  or  mouth, 
earth  or  dunghills  &c)  for  finding  their,  food,  are  called  Vishkiras. 
Those  that  peck  at  their  food  are  called  PratudaA 5-56 

Thus  there  are,  it  is  said,  eight  kinds  of  sources  from  which 
meat  may  be  drawn.  Amongst  these,  Prasaha,  Bhugaya,  Anupa, 
Varija  (Jalaja),  and  Varichara  (Jalachara),  are  heavy,  hot,  oily, 
sweet ;  enhance  the  growth  of  strength ;  increase  the  semen 
largely  ;  destroy  wind  ;  excite  phlegm  and  bile ;  and  are  beneficial 
to  such  men  as  are  habituated  to  physical  exercise  and  as  have 
blazing  digestive  fires.57-58 

The  physician  should  prescribe  the  meat,  or  in  especial,  of 
those  animals  among  Prashas  that  are  carnivorous,  for  such  men 
as  are  afflicted  with  chronic  piles,. diseased  Grahani,  or  pulmonary 
consumption.50 

Lava  and  others  included  within  the  class  called  Vishkira,  as 
also  those  called  Pratuda  and  those  others  styled  Jangala,  are  light, 
cooling,  and  sweet-astringent.  These  are  beneficial  for  human 
beings  in  such  excitements  of  all  the  faults  as  are  distinguished 
by  predominance  of  bile,  a  lesser  measure  of  wind,  and  a  still 
lesser  one  of  phlegm. 

Vishkiras,  in  respect  of  their  beneficial  effects,  are  slightly 
inferior  to  Prashas.60-61 

The  flesh  of  the  goat  is  neither  very  cool,  nor  very  heavy,  nor 
very  oily.  It  does  not  excite  any  of  the  faults.  In  consequence, 
again,  of  its  capacity  for  assimilation  with  the  elements  of  the 
human  body,  it  does  not  restrain  the  secretions  and  thereby 


CHARA KA-SAM M ITA.  - 


341 


produce  heaviness  and  fulness  of  the  body.  It  is  also,  on  that 
account,  nutritive.02 

The  flesh  of  sheep  is  sweet  and  cool.  It  is,  therefore,  heavy, 
but  nutritive.68 

Individual  animals  of  both  the  species,  viz.,  goats  and  sheep, 
differ  from  one  another  in  consequence  of  the  difference  of  their 
habits  (for  while  some  live  in  marshes,  others  live  on  dry  land,  and 
others  live  sometimes  in  marshy  and  sometimes  on  dry  land).  The 
properties  of  their  flesh,  therefore,  are  not  the  same  as  those  which 
have  been  indicated  above  of  the  flesh  of  the  species  in  general.*64 

In  consequence  of  especial  properties  residing  in  some  kinds 
of  flesh,  instructions  are  laid  down  in  detail. 

The  flesh  of  the  peacock  is  exceedingly  beneficial  for  the  eye, 
the  ear,  intelligence,  the  digestive  fire,  the  consequences  of  age, 
complexion,  voice,  and  period  of  life. 

It  is,  besides,  strength-giving  and  wind-destroying.  It  in¬ 
creases  also  the  semen.06 

The  flesh  of  swans  and  geese  is  heavy,  hot,  oily,  and  sweet ; 
it  improves  the  voice,  complexion,  and  strength. 

It  is  nutritive  and  increases  the  vital  seed. 

It  is  also  destructive  of  wind.60 

The  flesh  of  those  animals  which  have  claws  for  their  weapons 
{viz.,  the  cock)  is  oily  and  hot;  it  increases  the  semen  and  improves 
the  voice.  It  promotes  strength  highly.  It  is  destructive  of  wind 
and  produces  perspiration.f67 


*  The  sense  seems  to  be  this  :  the  properties,  that  have  been  stated  in  general  of  the 
species,  do  not  belong  to  every  individual  of  the  species,  for  the  habits  of  individual  ani¬ 
mals  differ. — T. 

+  *  Swedana  ’  is  that  whieh  produces  perspiration  and  thereby  removes  stiffness 
and  heaviness  of  the  body.  See  ante,  p.  244. — T. 


•  CHA  RA  KA -SA  ME! TA . 


342 

The  flesh  of  such  animals  as  live  in  regions  scantily  supplied 
with  water  or  in  regions  of  a  marshy  character  is  neither  very 
heavy,  nor  very  hot,  nor  very  sweet.88 

The  flesh  of  the  francoline  partridge  soon  subdues  such  ex¬ 
citement  of  the  three  faults  as  is  characterised  by  a  predominance 
of  wind.69 

The  flesh  of  the  Kapinjala,  in  consequence  of  its  properties 
of  coolness,  sweetness,  and  lightness,  is  applauded  (as  a  remedy) 
in  all  diseases  due  to  excitement  of  bile,  as  also  in  those  due 
to  excitement  of  phlegm  when  both  exist  with  hemorrhage  and 
a  mild  excitement  of  wind.*70 

The  flesh  of  the  Lava  is  astringent,  sweet,  and  light ;  it  in¬ 
creases  the  strength  of  the  digestive  fire.  It  alleviates  excitement 
of  all  the  faults.  On  assimilation,  it  becomes  bitter.71 

The  flesh  of  the  Iguana  is,  on  assimilation,  sweet.  In  taste, 
it  is  astringent-pungent.  It  alleviates  both  wind  and  bile.  It 
promotes  nutrition,  and  increases  strength.72 

The  flesh  of  the  porcupine  is  sweet-sour.  On  assimilation  it 
has  been  said  to  be  pungent.  It  is  destructive  of  wind  and  bile  ; 
and  alleviates  consumption  and  asthma.73 

The  flesh  of  domestic  pigeons  is  astringent-sweet  in  taste, 
and  cooling,  and  alleviates  hemorrhage  arising  from  excitement 
of  bile.  On  assimilation  it  is  sweet.  74 

Wild  pigeons  are  slightly  lighter  than  domestic  ones.  They 
are  cooling,  drying,  and  slightly  softer.-)-75 

The  flesh  of  the  parrot  is  astringent-sour  on  assimilation.  It 
is  dry  and  cooling.  It  is  beneficial  in  pulmonary  consumption  and 


*  ‘  Pitta-9leshma-vikareshu  ’  is  explained  as  ‘  Pitta-vikareshu  ’  and  ‘cleshma-vika- 

leshu  ‘sarakteshu  ’  and  ‘manda-vateshu  ’  have  reference  to  both.  It  may  also  mean 
‘  in  the  diseases  due  to  excitement  of  bile  and  phlegm,  existing  with  a  mild  excitement 
of  wind,  &c.’ — T. 

f  ‘  Sangrahi’  or  Grahi  ’  are  those  objects  which  dry  up  the  fluids  of  the  body— T 


CRARAKA-SAMHITA.  343 

phthisis.  It  is  capable  of  drying  up  the  fluids  of  the  body. 
Besides,  it  is  light  and  increases  the  digestive  fire.76 

The  hare  is  astringent,  soft,  dry,  and  cooling;  on  assimila¬ 
tion,  it  is  pungent.  It  is,  again,  light.  Agreeable  in  taste,  it  is  a 
well-known  remedy  in  diseases  due  to  such  excitement  of  all  the 
faults  in  which  the  wind  is  excited  only  partially.77 

Chatakas  (sparrows)  are  sweet  and  oily.  They  increase  the 
strength  and  the  vital  seed.  They  alleviate  diseases  due  to  ex¬ 
citement  of  all  the  faults.  They  are,  besides,  capable  of  alleviating 
the  wind  in  especial.  They  bring  on  vigour  and  energy  and  cure 
the  loss  of  virile  power.*78 

Those  animals  of  the  deer  species  which  are  known  as  Enas 
are  sweet  in  taste,  and  sweet  on  assimilation.  They  are  capable 
of  alleviating  excitement  of  all  the  faults  together.  Beneficial  to  the 
system,  they  are  light  and  restrain  both  stools  and  urine.  They 
are,  again,  known  to  be  cooling.70 

The  Rohita  fish,  in  consequence  of  its  feeding  on  moss  and 
of  its  never  sleeping,  increases  the  digestive  fire.  It  is  digested 
soon,  and  greatly  enhances  strength.80 

Fish  in  general  are  heavy,  hot,  and  sweet.  They  promote 
strength  and  nutrition,  and  are  destructive  of  wind.  They  are  oily 
and  capable  of  increasing  the  vital  seed.  They  have  been  said 
to  be  provocative  of  various  faults. 81 

The  flesh  of  the  boar  is  Snehana.  It  promotes  nutrition.  It 
increases  the  vital  seed.  It  is  capable  of  making  one  endure 
fatigue.  It  is  destructive  of  the  wind.  It  increases  the  strength, 
being  a  tonic ;  and  has  considerable  relish.  It  is  also  a  Swedana, 
and  heavy.t82 

The  tortoise  is  said  to  be  a  tonic.  It  alleviates  the  wind.  It  in¬ 
creases  the  semen,  improves  the  vision,  and  increases  the  strength. 
It  improves  both  intelligence  aud  memory.  It  is  a  good  regimen 
for  the  weak  stomach.  It  cures  consumption.83 

*  Some  texts  add  the  third  line  beginning  *  valavirya  &c.,  ’  and  make  of  this  a 
triplet,  as  rendered  here.  Others  omit  it. — T. 

f  For  ‘  Snehana  ’  and  1  Swedana  ’  Vide  ante ,  p.  244.— T, 


344 


CH  A  R  A  RA-SA  M  HIT A . 


Beef  is  beneficial  when  the  wind  only  has  been  excited.  It  is 
also  a  remedy  in  inflamations  of  the  Schneiderian  membrane,  as 
also  in  cases  of  chronic  fever.  It  is  good  also  in  dry  consumption, 
in  exhaustion  and  fatigue,  when  the  digestive  fire  is  keen,  and  in 
cases  of  loss  of  flesh.84 

The  flesh  of  the  buffalo  is  oily,  hot,  and  sweet.  It  is,  again,  heavy 
and  promotes  nutrition  and  corpulency.  It  causes  hardness  or 
firmness  of  the  body,  increases  its  dimensions,  improves  courage 
and  perseverance,  and  produces  sleep.85 

The  eggs  of  Dhritarashtras  and  Chakoras  and  Dakshas  and 
peacocks  and  Chatakas  are  beneficial  when  the  vital  seed  becomes 
scanty,  as  also  in  consumptions,  in  all  thoracic  diseases,  and  in 
wounds  and  sores.  They  are  sweet,  aid  digestion,  and  immediately 
promote  the  strength.86-87 

In  the  matter  of  promoting  the  nutrition  of  the  body  there  is 
no  food  that  is  superior  to  flesh. 

So  is  the  third  group  or  classification  of  food,  viz.,  flesh, 
treated  of.88 

Of  the  group  relating  to  Potherbs. 

Patha  ( a ),  Susha  ( b ),  Oathi  (c),  Vastuka  ( d ),  and  Sunishannaka 
( e ),  should  be  known  as  astringents  which  dry  the  fluids  of  the 
body.  They  alleviate  the  excitement  of  the  three  faults.  As  re¬ 
gards  Vastuka,  it  operates  as  a  Bhedana.*89 

Kakamachi  (f)  is  capable  of  allaying  excitement  of  the  three 
faults.  It  increases  the  vital  seed.  It  operates  as  a  Rasayana.f 


a.  Cissampelos  hernandifolia,  Linn.,  syn.  Stephania  hernandifolia,  Walp. 

b.  Otherwise  called  Kasamardda.  Beng.  Kalkasunda.  Cassia  Sophora,  Linn; 
syn.  Senna  Sophora,  Roxb. 

c.  Cricuma  zerumbet,  Roxb. 

d.  Chenopodium  album,  Linn. 

e.  Marsilea  quadrifolia,  Linn. 

f  Those  medicines  that  set  free  the  scybalae  and  other  contents  of  the  intestines, 
and  discharge  them  without  liquifying  them  at  all,  are  called  Bhedana.— T. 

/,  Called  Gurkamai  in  Bengali ;  Solanum  nigrum,  Linn. 


PART  XII. 


- ^ 

CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


PUBLISHED  BY 

A  YIN  ASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita  (in  original)  with 
Commentaries;  Bengali  and  Hindi  Translator  of  Charaka- 
Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita  ;  Editor  of  Chikitsa- 
Sammilani  (Medical  Journal  in  Bengali)  ;  Prac¬ 
titioner  of  the  Hindu  System  of 
Medicine*  &c.,  &c.,  &c. 


CALCUTTA: 

Printed  by  Girish  Chandra  Chakravarti, 
“Dev  a  Press”,  6i  Mirzapur  Street, 
and 

Published  at 

200,  Cornwallis’  Street. 


(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved . ) 


NOTICE. 


The  English  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  will  be  issued  in  successive 
fascicules  of  four  forms,  Royal  Octavo,  each  ;  1 2  fascicules  will  be  issued 
eveiy  year.  Under  favourable  circumstances,  the  number  of  fascicules  or 
the  number  of  forms  in  each  fascicule  may  be  increased.  For  subscribers 
in  India,  paying  in  advance,  the  charge  is  Rs.  32  for  the  whole  work.  For 
subscribers  in  Europe  and  America,  the  charge  is  £$  in  advance,  post  free. 
The  price  for  each  part  is  one  Rupee.  The  arrear  rate  is  Rs.  40  (in  India) 
]  ay  able  (if  subscribers  wish)  in  instalments  of  Rs.  10  each.  Remittances 
to  be  made  to  the  Publisher,  200,  Cornwallis’  Street,  Calcutta,  by  drafts  on 
Indian  Banks  or  Postal  money-orders. 

OPINIONS. 

“As  we  become  more  familliar  with  this  work  through  the  successive 
parts,  we  are  more  than  ever  impressed  with  the  fact  that  it  should  be  in 
the  hands  of  every  person  interested  in  the  subject  of  medicine  or  pharmacy. 
The  part  before  us  deals  with  a  number  of  interesting  subjects,  one  of 
them  being  the  attribute  of  taste,  which  is  divided  into  sweet,  sour,  saline, 
pungent,  bitter  and  astringent.  To  follow  the  reasoning  of  the  author  as 
portrayed  in  an  essay  on  the  subject  is  a  teal  pleasure  as-wvell  as  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  adding  to  our  knowledge  of  medicine.  Another  instructive  as 
well  as  interesting  portion  is  a  number  of  succinet'y-  expressed  aphorisms 
showing  that  the  ancient  physicians  fully  understood  many  hygienic  laws 
which  we  are  now  learning  as  something  new.’’ — Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist , 
December,  1894. 

“This  work  goes  on  and  we  have  received  the  ninth  fasciculus.  This 
part  embraces  lesson  xxiii.,  which  explains  the  incidents  relating  to  San- 
tarpana,  or  indulgence  in  food  and  acts  that  are  both  sedative '  and 
nutritive  ;  lesson  xxiv.,  treating  of  the  nature  and  characteristics  of  the 
blood  ;  and  lesson  xxv.,  devoted  to  the  discussion  of  the  various  theories 
of  the  creation  of  man. 

The  interest  attached  to  this  really  remarkable  book  increases  as  the 
work  of  the  translator  goes  on.  Each  new  fasciculus  brings  new  surprises  at 
the  knowledge  possessed  by  those  ancient  physicians.  It  possesses  a  fasci¬ 
nation  which, makes  one  read  on,  and  fills  him  with  wonder  and  admiration. 
The  explanatory  foot-notes  by  the  translator  are  indispensable  to  a  thorough 
understanding  of  the  text.” — North  Carolina  h.edical Journal,  Sept.  1894. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS. 

The  contents  of  this  fascicule  are  exceedingly  interesting.  The  properties 
have  been  fully  set  forth  of  the  different  vatieties  of  Ciika  (Potherbs),  Fruits, 
Wine,  Water,  Milk,  the  modifications  of  the  juice  of  the  Sugar-cane,  and 
Prepared  Food. 

To  every  one  living  in  India,  the  observations  of  the  Risliis  on  these  objects 
which  still  constitute  our  daily  food,  cannot  fail  to  excite  the  keenest  interest. 
Most  of  the  Potherbs  mentioned  are  still  used.  The  wines  used  in  ancient 
India  were  of  many  kinds.  That  old  wines  are  superior  in  every  respect  to 
new  ones  well  known  to  rhe  Rishis. 

The  observations  of  water  establish  certain  valuable  truths.  The  foremost 
of  all  waters  is  that  which  falls  from  the  clouds.  The  character  of  the  soil 
through  which  water  flows  tells  on  the  water.  The  peculiarities  of  the  waters 
of  some  of  the  Indian  rivers  have  been  mentioned. 

The  properties  of  milk — of  milk,  that  is,  of  different  animals — are  fraught 
with  a  practical  interest.  The  observations  on  prepared  food  are  of  interest 
to  every  one.  Some  varieties  of  prepared  food  have  ceased  to  be  current 
among  the  people  of  India.  The  student  of  history  will  be  delighted  to  find 
what  the  kinds  of  food  were  upon  which  the  ancient  Hindns  subsisted. 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SA  M HI  TA. 


345 


In  respect  of  energy,  it  is  neither  very  hot  or  very  cold.  It  is 
also  a  Bhedana  (purges  the  intestines  without  producing  watery 
motions).  It  cures  leprosy.!0 

Rajashkaraka(zz)  is  capable  ~oi '  allaying  excitement  of  all  the 
faults.  It  is  also  light.  It  operates  as  an  inspissant  which  dries 
up  the  fluids  of  the  body,  ft  is  especially  applauded  in  diseases 
of  the  Grahani  and  in  piles.91 

Kalafaka(iJ)  is  pungent  in  taste.  It  excites  the  digestive  fire. 
It  destroys  the  effects  of  poison  and  also  dropsical  swellings.  It 
is  light  and  hot,  excites  the  wind,  and  is  dry.  It  is  otherwise 
called  Kaliya9aka." 

Amlachangeri(c)  provokes  the  digestive  fire,  is  hot  in  energy, 
operates  as  an  inspissant,  is  applauded  in  phlegm  and  wind,  and 
is  beneficial  in  diseases  of  the  Grahani  and  the  piles.93 

Upodika(</)  is  sweet  in  taste,  sweet  in  assimilation,  operates  as 
a  Bhedana  (t.e.,  discharges  the  contents  of  the  intestines  without 
producing  watery  motions),  enhances  the  phlegm,  increases  the 
vital  seed,  is  oily,  and  alleviates  vertigo  and  inebriety  of  the  head.94 

Mandukaparni(^),  Vetagra(/),  Kuchela(^),  Vanatiktaka(/z), 
Karkkotaka(z'),  Avalguja(y'),  Patola(i),  £akunadani(/), 


a.  Identified  with  DugdhikS.or  Oxystelma  esculentum  ;  syn.  Asclepias  rosea,  Roxb. 

b.  Otherwise  called  Kaliya-cjaka.  Corchorus  capsularis,  Linn. 

c.  Called  in  Bengali  Amrul.  Oxalis  corniculata,  Linn. 

d.  Bassela  Rubra,  Linn. 

e.  Otherwise  called  Thulkuri.  Hydrocotyle  Asiatica,  Linn. 

/.  The  soft  sprouts  of  the  Calamus  Rotang,  Linn. 

g.  Chakrapani  says  it  is  otherwise  called  Akarnaviddhika.  Some  think  it  is 
identifiable  with  Akn&di  or  Patha.  This  is  evidently  a  mistake. 

h.  Chakrapani  says  this  is  Pathya-sundara  or  Haritaki.  Gangadhara  mistakes 
it  for  Cwetavahala.  The  fact  is.  Vanatiktaka  is  different  from  Vanatiktika.  Pathya- 
sundara  is  its  poetic  name.  Chebulic  myrobalans. 

i.  Otherwise  called  Kakrol.  Momordica  mixta,  Roxb. 

j.  Otherwise  called  Vaguchi  or  Somraja.  Vernonia  anthelmintica,  Roxb. 

k.  Trichosanthes  dioica,  Roxb. 

l.  Otherwise  called  Katurohini.  Picrorrkiza  Kurroa,  Roxb. 


44 


346 


CHAU  AKA -SAM HIT  A. 


Vrishapushpa(tz),  (^arngashtha(^),  Kevuka(c),  Katillaka(^),  Nadl^), 
Kalaya(/),  Gojihva(g'),  Varttaku(/z),  Tilaparnika(z ),  Kulaka(/), 
Karkka^a^),,  Nimva(/),  and  Parppataka(;;«),  alleviate  excitements 
of  phlegm  and  bile.  They  are  bitter  and  cooling.  They  are  pungent 
upon  assimilation. 55-36 

All  kinds  of  f^akas  known  by  the  name  of  Supya(ra),  Phanji(o), 
Chilli(y>),  Kutumvaka(y),  all  varieties  included  under  the  class 
Aluka(r),  Katinjara  with  its  leaves(j),  the  flowers  of  £ana(/), 


a.  The  flowers  of  V3saka,  i.e.,  Justicia  Adhatnda,  syn.  Adhatoda  vasica,  Nees. 

b.  This  is  Kakatikt3,  or  Kunch  in  Bengali.  Abrus  precatorius,  Linn. 

c.  Costus  speciosus,  Linn. 

d.  Chakrapani  says  it  is  otherwise  called  Punarnav3.  Boerhavia  diffusa ,  Linn. 

e.  The  stalk  or  culm  of  any  plant.  In  Bengali,  the  word  'D3nt3'  corresponds 
with  it. 

/.  The  common  pea.  Spisum  Sativum,  Linn. 

g.  Otherwise  called  D3rvipatrik3.  It  is  the  Elephantopus  scaber ,  Linn.,  and  not 
Darvi  or  Berberis  Asiaticus.  Linn. 

h.  Solanum  Melongena,  Linn. 

i.  Gang3dhara  identifies  it  with  Edagaja  or  Chakramardda,  i.e.,  Cassia  Tora, 
Linn.  Chakrapani  observes,  its  vernacular  name  is  Hulhule;  hence,  it  is  Sury3vart3, 
i.e.,  Cleome  pentaphylla. 

j.  Chakrapani  observes  that  some  take  it  for  a  variety  of  Patola.  He 
himself  is  for  identifying  it  with  K3ravelwaka  or  Karala,  i.e.,  Momordica  charantia, 
Linn. 

k.  A  smaller  variety  of  Momordica  mixta,  Roxb. 

l.  Melia  Azadirachta ,  Linn. 

m.  Oldenlandia  herbacea,  D.  C. ;  syn.  Oldenlandia  biflora.  Roxb. 

n.  Chakrapani  says  it  implies  all  kinds  of  C3kas  such  as  M3shaparni  or 
Glycine  debilis,  Roxb. ;  syn.  Teramus  labialis,  Spreng. 

o.  Otherwise  called  Br3hmana-yashtika,  or  B3manhati  in  Bengali.  Siphonantkus 
Indica,  Lamk.  ;  syn.  Clerodendron  Siphonantkus,  R.  Brovin. 

p.  Otherwise  called  Gandav3stuka.  A  small  variety  of  Chenopodium  album, 
Linn. 

q.  Otherwise  called  Dronapushpika.  Leucus  linifolia,  Spreng.  ;  syn.  Phlomis 
Zeylanica,  Roxb. 

r.  Pindalu  and  others  of  the  species.  Dioscorea  globosa,  Roxb. 

s.  Otherwise  called  Kutheraka.  The  holy  basil  or  Ocimum  sanctum,  Ocimum 
gratissimum,  &c. 

t.  The  Indian  hemp.  Crotalaria  juncea,  Linn. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHI TA. 


347 


and  of  ^Slmali(a),  Karvud5ra(3),  Suvarchala(c),  Nlshpava(af), 
Kovidara(^),  Pattura(/),  Chuchuparnika( g),  Kumarajiva(A),  Lot- 
taka^'),  PaIankya(y),Marisha(^),  Kalamva(/))Nalika(?«))  £aurya(«), 
Kusumbha(6>),  Vrikadhumaka(  p),  Laksmana(y),  Prapunnada(r), 


а.  Bombax  Malabaricum  ;  syn.  Bombax  heptaphylla. 

б.  Otherwise  called  Kanchana.  Biuhinla  acuminaia,  Linn. 

c.  Otherwise  called  Suyrabhaktika  or  SuryabhaktS.  The  name  is  applied  to 
Linseed  or  Linum  usitatissimum.  It  also  indicates  the  flower  Pentapetes  phcenicea. 
The  great  difficulty  in  such  cases  is  that  the  same  name  often  stands  for  different 
plants. 

d.  Dolichos  Sinensis,  Linn  ;  syn.  Vigna  catjang,  Endl. 

e.  Otherwise  called  Rakta- Kanchana  or  Kanchana.la.  Bauhinia  variegata,  Linn. 

f.  Otherwise  called  Calincha.  Acheranthes  triandra,  Roxb  ;  syn.  Alternanthera 
sessilis,  R.  Br. 

g.  ChakrapSni  says  it  is  a  variety  of  Nadicha ;  (vide  note  c.  in  page  346). 
Gangadhara  reads  ‘Chunchuparnika’  which,  he  observes,  is  provincially  called 
‘Cheua.’ 

h.  Otherwise  called  JivapSka.  Ccelogyne  ovalis,  Lindl. 

i.  ChakrapSni  says  it  is  otherwise  called  ‘LodSmSvisha.’  GangSdhara  observes 
that  its  provincial  name  is  ‘Lutiya.’  If  it  is  identifiable  with  the  ‘NatiyS-pSka’  of 
Bengal,  which  is  used  extensively,  especially  when  it  is  new,  its  medicinal  name 
would  be  ‘Marisha,’  i.e.,  Amaranthus  oleraceus,  Linn. 

j.  Beta  maritima,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Beta,  Bengalensis,  Roxb. 

k.  Ameranth.es  oleraceus,  Linn.  Gangadhara  says  it  is  a  variety  of  Natiy8.-paka, 
called  ‘DantS-natiya.’ 

l.  Called  in  Bengali  Kalmi.  Ipomasa  reptans,  Poir.  ;  syn.  Convolvulus  repens, 
Willd. 

m.  Hibiscus  canabinus,  Linn. 

n.  Chakrapani  reads  ‘Cauryya’  which  he  says  is  otherwise  called  ‘Masuraka  ;* 
*  e.,  Vicia  lens,  Benth.  ;  syn.  Cicer  lens,  Roxb.  Gangadhara’s  reading  seems  to  be 
incorrect. 

o.  Safflower.  Carthamus  tinctorius,  Linn. 

p.  Chakrap&ni  says  it  is  otherwise  called  ‘Bhumipirisha.’  GangSdhara  says 
that  it  is  otherwise  called ‘Bhumi-mSrisha.’  ‘Marisha’ is  very  probably  a  misprint 
for  ‘pirisha.’  Probably  a  variety  of  Cissampelos  hexandra. 

(J.  All  that  the  Commentators  say  is  that  it  is  a  well  known  plant.  Wilson  does 
not  give  the  name.  Apparently  unidentified.  The  Ayurveddrtha  Chandrika  does  not 
give  the  word. 

r.  Otherwise  called  Edagaja,  i.e.,  Cassia  Tora,  Linn. 


348 


CHA  RA  KA  -  S  A  Mff  l  TA. 


Nalinika(«),  Kutheraka(<5),  Lolika(c),  Yavagaka(^),  Kushman- 
daka'tf),  Avalguja(/),  Yatuka(^),  ^alakalyani(A),  Triparni(z),  and 
PiIuparnika(/‘, — these  varieties  of  £aka  are  heavy  and  dry.  They 
generally  lead  to  obstruction  of  faeces  and  urine  before  digestion. 
They  are  sweet  in  taste,  cooling  in  energy,  and  (after  digestion) 
purge  the  intestines  of  their  contents  without  producing  watery 
motions.  All  these  potherbs  should  be  first  boiled.  The  juice 
should  then  be  pressed  out.  It  should  be  then  mixed  with  medicin¬ 
al  oils  or  Ghee.  To  eat  them  in  this  way  is  praised.37-103 

The  flowers  of  £ana,  of  Kavidara,  of  Karvudara,  and  £almali 
are  inspissants  and  are  much  applauded  in  cases  of  bilious  hemorr¬ 
hage  in  especial.*104 

The  leaves  of  Nyagrodha(yfc),  Udumvara(Z),  Afwattha(^), 
Plaksha(ra),  Padma(o),  and  others,  are  astringent  in  taste,  operate 


a.  The  stalk  of  the  lotus.  If  the  reading  ‘NilinikS’  be  adopted,  it  would  mean 
^'either  Jndigofera  tinctoria,  or  a  species  of  ‘Teori’  or  Turpethum. 

b.  The  holy  basil.  The  different  varieties  of  Ocimum  Sanctum. 

c.  A  variety  of  sorrel  or  Rumex  msicarius. 

d.  Chakrapani  says  it  is  otherwise  called  Kshetravastuka.  A  variety  of  Cheno- 
podium  album. 

e.  Cucurbita  Pepo ,  Roxb. 

f.  Otherwise  called  Somraji.  Vernonia  anthelmintica ,  Willd. 

g.  Chakrapani  says  it  is  a  variety  of  Calaparni ;  in  fact,  Cukla  or  white  Cala- 
parni.  It  is,  therefore,  a  variety  of  Hedysarum  gangeticum,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Desmodium 
gangeticnm,  Burm. 

h.  A  variety  of  Caiinchi.  Achyranthes  triandra,  Roxb.  ;  syn.  Alternanthera 

i.  Chakrapani  says  it  is  otherwise  called  HansapSdika.  Wilson  thinks  it  is 
probably  Clitoria  ternatea.  If  Wilson  be  correct  in  his  surmise,  the  plant  then  would 
be  the  well-known  Apar&jita  Gangalhara  thinks  that  Triparni  is  Hansapadi, 
which,  according  to  Wilson,  is  Cissus  pedatus,  Lnmk.  ;  syn.  Vitis  pedata,  Vahl. 

■  The  latter  is  the  well-known  Godhapadi,  or  Goals  lata  as  called  in  Bengali. 

j.  Otherwise  called  Morataka.  Sanseviera  Zeylanica ,  Willd. 

*  Vide  notes  t  in  p.  346,  e,  l,  and  a  in  p.  347  above. — T. 

k.  Ficus  BengalensiSj  Linn.  ;  syn.  Ficus  Indica,  Roxb. 

l.  Ficus glomerata,  Willd.  ;  syn.  Covellia  glomerata.  Miq. 

m.  Ficus  religiosa,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Urostigma  religiosum ,  Gosp. 

n.  Ficus  infectoria ,  Willd. 

o.  Nelumbium  speciosum,  Linn. 


CHAR  A  KA -SA  MBIT  A. 


349 


as  Stambhanas,  are  cooling,  and  beneficial  for  persons  suffering 
under  diarrhoea  (with  fever)  caused  by  excitement  of  bile.*108 

Vatsadani(fl)  destroys  the  wind.  Gandira(^)  and  Chitraka(c) 
destroy  phlegm,  ^reyasi(^),  Vilwaparni(<?',  and  Vilwapatra(/), 
alleviate  the  wind.  The  potherbs  Bhandi(^)  and  ^atavari(4)j  and 
Vala(z),  and  Jivantika(/),  and  Parvani(i),  and  Parvapushpi(/),  are 
regarded  as  capable  of  alleviating  both  wind  and  bile.10£“107 

The  £aka  obtained  from  Langaliki(«z).and  Uruvuka(w)  is  light 
and  purges  the  contents  of  the  intestines  without  producing  watery 
stools.  It  is  bitter  in  taste. 

The  £aka  obtained  from  Tila(o)  and  Vetasa(y>),  as  also  that 
obtained  from  Panchangula(y),  is  productive  of  wind,  pungent, 
bitter,  and  sour  in  taste,  and  acts  as  a  purgative. 

*  “Stambhana  or  Constipators  are  medicines  which,  from  their  drying,  astringent 
and  cooling  qualities,  and  their  |easy  digestibility,  increase  the  air  and  retain  the 
secretions.” — U.  C.  Dutt’s  Mat.  Med.  of  the  Hindus. 

a.  Otherwise  called  Guduchi.  Tinospora  cordifolia,  Miers.  ;  syn.  Menispermum 
cordifolium,  WiUd. 

b.  Otherwise  called  Camatha.  A  kind  of  potherb  described  as  growing  in 
watery  regions. 

c.  Plumbago  Zeylanica,  Linn. 

d.  Gangadhara  remarks  that  it  is  otherwise  called  Gaja'pippali.  Pathos  officin¬ 
alis,  Roxb.  ;  syn.  Scindapsus  officinalis ,  Schott. 

e.  Otherwise  called  Vilwarjjaka.  A  variety  of  Ocimum  or  Basil. 

/.  Vilwapatra,  the  leaves  of  the  AEgle  marnielos. 

g.  Chakrapani  reads  Shindi,  which,  he  says,  is  a  well-known  potherb.  GangS- 
dhara  reads  Bhandi,  which,  he  says,  has  the  provincial  name  of  Bhanti.  The  name 
Bhandi  is  applied  to  various  trees.  Bhindi  is,  no  doubt,  the  correct  reading.  Not 
indentified. 

h.  Called  also  Catamuli.  Asparagus  racemosus. 

i.  Sida  cordifolia,  Linn. 

j.  Ccelogyne  ovalis,  Linn. 

k.  Otherwise  called  Parva-qaka.  Not  identified. 

l.  Wilson  says  it  is  otherwise  called  ‘Ramaduti.’  Not  identified. 

m.  Gloriosa  superba,  Linn.  The  name  is  spelt  sometimes  as  ‘L&ngalikS.’ 

».  Otherwise  called  Eranda.  Ricinus  communis,  Linn. 

o.  Sesamum  Indicum ,  Linn. 

p.  Calamus  rotang,  Linn. 

q.  Chakrapani  says  it  is  otherwise  called  'Chitrairanda'  or  a  variegated  species 
of  Eranda  or  Ricimis  communis,  Linn. 


35° 


CHA  RAKA-SA  M  HIT A. 


The  £aka  of  Kausumbha(a)  is  dry,  sour,  and  hot.  It  alleviates 
phlegm  and  enhances  bile.103-103 

Trapusha(^),  and  Ervvaruka(c),  are  agreeable  to  the  taste, 
heavy,  obstructive  of  urine  and  faeces,  and  cool.  As  regards 
Trapusha,  it  is  particularly  agreeable  to  the  mouth,  and  dry,  and 
increases  the  urine.  Ripe  Ervvaruka  alleviates  the  pain  caused 
by  a  burning  sensation  of  the  skin,  thirst,  and  fatigue.110 

Alavu(r/)  purges  the  contents  of  the  intestines,  is  dry,  cooling, 
and  heavy. 

Chirbhita(ff)  and  Ervvaruka(y)  are  beneficial,  after  the  same 
manner,  as  purgatives.111 

Kushmanda  has  been  said  to  be  possessed  of  Kshara.  It  is 
sweet  and  sour  and  light.  It  assists  the  discharge  of  both  urine 
and  faeces,  and  alleviates  all  the  faults  if  excited.*110 

Keluta(^),  Kadamva(/«),  Nadimashaka(z'),  and  Ainduka(y),  are 
smooth,  heavy,  and  cooling.  They  are  possessed,  in  particular,  of 
inspissant  qualities.113 

Utpalas(i)  are  astringent  in  taste  and  alleviate  bilious  hemorhage. 


a.  Safflower.  Carthamus  tinctorius,  Linn. 

b.  Cucumis  sativus,  Linn. 

c.  Cucumis  Melo,  Linn. 

d.  Cucurbita  lagenaria,  Willd.  ;  syn.  Lagenaria  vulgaris,  Sering. 

e.  A  variety  of  Cucumis  Melo ,  Linn. 

f.  Vide  note  c  above. 

*  By  Kshara  is  meant  alkaline  ashes. — T. 

g.  Chakrapani  says  the  word  is  applied  to  any  ‘swaduvitapa,’  i.e.,  any  twig  with 
a  new  sprout,  that  is  agreeable  to  the  taste. 

h.  Nauclea  cadamba ,  Roxb.  Some  read  Kalamvika,  i.e.,  Convolvulus  repens, 
Willd. 

i.  Chakrapani  says  it  is  otherwise  called  ‘Bhangi-manavaka.’  Gangadhara  is 
of  opinion  that  what  is  implied  is  otherwise  called  Vardhamanaka.  Not  identifiable. 

j.  Gangadhara  says  its  provincial  name  is  Nikhada.  Not  identifiable.  Chakra¬ 
pani  reads  Aidaka,  called  also  Nishkara. 

k.  Nymphcea,  stellata ,  Linn. 


CH  A  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


35’ 


[Paushkara  seeds(«)  are  alleviative  of  bilious  hemorhage  and 
sores  and  wounds].114 

Tala-pralamva(^)  alleviates  the  pain  caused  by  sores  on  the 
chest.  Kharjjura(c)  and  Tala-fasya^)  are  alleviative  of  bilious 
hemorrhage  and  phthisis.115 

Tarutha(<?),  Visa(/),  ^aluka(^),  Kraunchadana(/«),  KaferukaOQ, 
£ringataka(/),  and  Ankalodya(/f:),  are  heavy,  obstruct  urine  and 
faeces,  and  are  cooling.118 

The  stalks,  flowers,  and  fruits  of  both  Kumuda  and  Utpala  are 
cooling,  agreeable  in  taste  and  astringent,  and  capable  of  exciting 
phlegm  and  wind.*117 

Paushkara  seeds  are  astringent  in  taste,  partially  obstructive 
of  urine  and  faeces,  and  alleviative  of  bilious  hemorrhages.  They 
are,  again,  sweet  in  taste  and  assimilation. t118 

Yunjataka(7)  is  highly  strength-giving  and  cooling  and  heavy 
and  oily.  It  is,  besides,  an  excellent  Tarpana,  and  has  every 

а.  The  seeds  of  the  lotus. 

б.  Both  ChakrapSni  and  Gangadhara  observe  that  what  is  meant  by'this  is  the 
sprout  of  the  palmyra  seed. 

c.  The  fruits  of  the  wild  date  palm  are  meant. 

d.  This  does  not  mean  the  kernel  of  the  palmyra  fruits  or  even  seeds,  but  the  pith 
towards  the  head  of  the  palmyra  tree.  It  is  commonly  called  Tala-m5thi  or  Tala- 

he  id. 

e.  What  is  implied  is  the  Kalhara-kanda,  or  the  bulbous  root  of  the  KalhSra 
or  Nymphcea  lotus. 

f.  The  stalk  of  the  lotus. 

g.  The  bulbous  root  of  the  lotus  and  other  plants  of  the  same  species. 

h.  The  esculent  root  commonly  called  Ghenchu. 

i.  Scirpus  Kysoor,  Roxb. 

j.  Trapa  bispinosa,  Roxb. 

k.  The  bulbous  root  of  a  small  variety  of  lotus. 

*  Kumuda  is  the  Nymphcea  lotus.  Linn.,  and  Utpala  is  the  Nymphcea  stellata, 
L  inn. 

t  This  Verse  occurs  in  many  texts.  GangSihara,  however,  adds 'Paushkarantu- 
bhavedvijam  RaktapittakshatSpaham1  to  the  line  about  Utpalas,  numbered  114 
above.  It  will  be  seen  that  here  in  118,  some  more  attributes  are  added  to  what 
are  said  of  those  seeds  in  the  line  adopted  in  Gang3ihara’s  text. — T. 

l.  The  word  is  YunjStaka  and  not  Munjataka  or  Munja-grass.  The  latter  is 


352 


CH  A  RA  KA  -SA  M  HIT  A. 


capacity  to  be  used  as  a  Vring-hana.  It  is,  again,  alleviative  of 
wind  and  bile,  is  agreeable  to  the  taste,  and  increases  the  vital 
seed.*119 


The  bulbous  root  of  the  Vidari(tz)  prolongs  life  ;  promotes  nutri¬ 
tion  and  corpulency  ;  increases  the  vital  seed  ;  improves  the  voice, 
and  is  applauded  as  a  tonic  for  removing  the  effects  of  age,  increas¬ 
ing  the  vigor  of  healthy  persons,  and  curing  the  ailments  of  the 
sick.  It  also  promotes  the  strength  in  special,  increases  the  urine, 
is  agreeable  to  the  taste,  and  cooling.190 

The  bulbous  root  of  Amvlika(i5)  is  regarded  as  beneficial  in 
ailments  of  the  Grahani  and  in  piles.  It  is  light  and  not  very  hot. 
It  alleviates  phlegm  and  wind,  and  operates  as  an  inspissant.  It 
is  applauded  as  a  remedy  in  cases  of  delirium  tremens.121 

The  potherbs  supplied  by  the  mustard  plant  excite  the  three 
faults  and  obtruct  both  faeces  and  urine. 

Pindalu(c)  should  be  known  as  endued  with  the  same 
properties.  In  consequence,  however,  of  its  possessing  a  bulbous 
root,  it  is  agreeable  to  the  mouth.122 

Excluding  Sarpacchatra(t£),  all  plants  of  the  ^chatra(^)  species 
are  cooling,  provocative  of  inflammation  of  the  Schneiderian 
membrane,  sweet  in  taste,  and  heavy.128 

The  fourth  group  (division)  is  thus  ended  of  Potherbs  including 
both  leaves  and  bulbous  roots. 

never  eaten  by  human  beings  and  does  not  yield  any  bulbous  root.  Chakrapani 
says,  it  is  an  ‘Auttarapathika  root,’  i.e.,  some  bulbous  root  brought  from  the  north, 
probably  Nepal  or  Morung.  As  regards  Tarpana  and  Vring-hana,  vide  pp.  244  45 
arid  250  ante. — T. 

*  Convolvulus  paniculatus,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Bdtatus  paniculata. 

a.  Convolvulous  paniculatus ,  Linn. 

b.  Chakrapani  says  that  Amvlika  is  a  little  shrubby  tree  growing  in  Kamrupa 
and  its  neighbourhood.  Ganga  ihara  believes  that  the  plant  implied  by  AmvliUS  is 
otherwise  called  Amiairaka,  a  sour  variety  of  Ginger.  The  plant  is  difficult  to 
identify. — T. 

c.  Called  in  Bengali  Chubri-Slu.  Dioscorea  globosa,  Rojcb. 

d.  A  particular  variety  of  mushroom. 

e.  Fennels  and  mushrooms. 


'CHAR  A  KA-  SAM  HI  TA.  353 

The  Group  about  Fruits. 

Mridvika(7z)  alleviates  thirst,  burning  sensation  -of  the  skin, 
fever,  asthma,  hemorrhages  caused  by  excitement  of  the  bile, 
sores  and  wounds,  phthisis,  excitement  of  the  wind  and  the  bile, 
Epistasis  or  suppression  of  urine,  harshness  of  voice,  delirium 
tremens,  bitterness  of  the  mouth,  dryness  of  the  mouth,  and.  con¬ 
sumption.  It  promotes  nutrition  and  increases  corpulency ;  it 
enhances  the  vital  seed ;  it  is  sweet  in  taste,  oily,  and  cooling. m-12S 

Kharj j ura(i§)  is  sweet  in  taste.  It  promotes  nutrition  and 
increases  corpulency.  It  enhances  the  .vital  seed.  It  is  heavy  and 
cooling.  It  is  beneficial  in  phthisis,  in  .wounds  caused  by  violence, 
in  burning  pains,  and  in  excitements  of  wind  and  bile.'26 

Phalgu(e)  operates  as  a  Tarpana.  It  promotes  nutrition  and 
.increases  corpulency.  It  is  heavy.  It  obstructs  the  faeces  .and 
urine.  It  is,  again,  cooling. 

Parushaka  and  Madhuka(a?)  are  applauded  in  cases  of  wind 
and  bile.127 

A-mrata(d?)  is  sweet  in  taste.  It  promotes  nutrition  and  increases 
corpulency.  It  operates  as  a  tonic  by  increasing  strength,  it  is 
a  Tarpana.  It  is  heavy.  It  is  endued  with  oily  matter.  It  provokes 
the  phlegm,  is  cooling,  increases  the  vital  seed,  and  becomes 
digested  after  causing  a  sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  stomach  and 
obstructing  faeces  and  urine.123 

The  kernel  of  the  ripe  Tala(/“)  and  the  fruits  of  the  Narikela(^) 

a.  XJvcb  passed,  syn.  Vitis  vinifera. 

5.  Phoenix  sylvestris ,  Roxb.  Wild  date  plam. 

c.  Otherwise  called  Kaka-dumvura.  Ficus  hispida,  Linn.fil  ;  syn.  Ficus  oppositi- 
folict,  Roxb. 

d.  Grewia  Asiatica,  Linn,  and  Bassia  iatifolia,  Roxb. 

e.  Spondias  mangifera ,  Pers.  The  Hog  plum. 

f.  Borassus  flabelliformis,  Linn.  By  ‘Tala-fasya’  is  not  meant  the  article 
called  in  Bengali  ‘Tala^ansa,’  i.e.,  the  soft  pulp  that  grows  into  the  hard  seed  when 
the  fruit  becomes  ripe.  Gangadhara  observes  it  means  T ala-phalani’  i.e.,  the  fruit 
itself.  ‘Siddhani’  indicates  the  ripe  fruits.  When  ripe,  a  reddish  pulp  is  afforded  by 
the  fruit  which  is  much  eaten  in  Bengal. 

g.  Cocos  nucifera,  Linn.  The  cocoa-nut  palm. 


45 


354 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


promote  nutrition  and  increase  corpulency.  They  are  oily  and 
cool,  and  operate  as  tonics  for  increasing  the  strength,  and  are 
sweet  in  taste.129 

Bhavya(flt)  is  sweet-sour-astringent  in  taste.  It  causes  a  heavi¬ 
ness  in  the  stomach  before  digestion,  and  obstructs  feces  and 
urine.  It  is  heavy  and  cooling.  It  alleviates  bile  and  phlegm. 
It  operates  as  air  inspissant  and  dries  up  the  fluids  of  the  body.  It 
corrects  the  taste  of  the  mouth  (removes  flatness  or  dulness  of  the 
tongue).180 

Such  varieties  of  Parushaka(3),  Draksha(c),  Vadara rd),  Aruka(e), 
Karkkandu(/),  and  Likucha(^),  as  are  sour,  provoke  bile  and 
phlegm.181 

ArukaVz),  when  ripe,  is  not  very  hot.  It  is  heavy  and  sweet 
and  generally  agreeable  to  the  mouth.  It  promotes  nutrition  and 
increases  corpulency.  It  is  soon  digested.  It  does  not  excite  any 
of  the  three  faults  much.182 

The  Paravata  fruit(z)  is  of  two  varieties.  One  is  hot  and  the 
other  cooling.  One  is  sweet  and  the  other  is  sour,  (The  hot 
variety  is  sour,  and  the  cooling  variety  is  sweet).  Both  varieties 
are  heavy,  produce  disgust  for  food,  and  extinguish  the  digestive 
fire.188 

The  fruits  of  Ka$maryya(/)  are  said  to  be  slightly  different  in 


a.  Dillenia  Indica,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Dillenia  speciosa,  Thunb. 

b.  Grewia  Asiatica,  Linn. 

c.  Otherwise  called  Midvika.  Vitis  vinifera. 

d.  Zizyphus  Jujiiba,  Linn. 

e.  Wilson  says  it  is  a  drug  brought  from  the  hills.  Chakrapani  observes  it  is 
a  fruit  well-known  in  Kartikapura. 

/.  Chakrapani  observes  it  is  otherwise  ealled  ‘Crigala-vadari.’  It  is  also  called 
‘Crigala-koli.’  Zizyphus  ahoplia,  Mill. 

g.  Otherwise  called  Ma  'ara.  Artocarpus  Lakuch,  Roxb. 

h.  Gangadhara  thinks  that  the  Aluvakhra  is  intended. 

i.  All  that  the  Commentator  says  is  that  this  fruit  is  well-known  in  Kamarupa. 
Wilson  thinks  it  implies  the  fruit  of  the  Annona  reticulata. 

j.  Called  also  Gambhari  Gmelina  arborea,  Linn. 


CHAR  AKA -SAM  HIT  A. 


355 


their  properties  from  Bhavya(a).  Similarly,  the  fruits  of  Tuda(3), 
which  are  sour,  are  slightly  different  in  properties  from  Paru- 
shaka.(c/34 

Tanka(af)  is  astringent-sweet,  excites  the  wind,  is  heavy  and 
cooling.  The  unripe  Kapittha(^)  is  destructive  of  poison  and  also 
of  the  voice  ;  it  is  an  inspissant  that  dries  up  the  fluids  of  the  body. 
It  excites  the  wind.  In  consequence  of  its  being  sweet,  sour,  and 
astringent  in  taste,  and  also  of  its  agreeable  smell,  it  creates  a 
relish  for  food.  If  ripe,  it  alleviates  all  the  faults,  is  destructive 
of  poison,  operates  as  an  inspissant  by  drying  the  fluids  of  the 
body,  and  is  heavy.135-36 

The  ripe  Vilwaf/")  is  difficult  of  digestion.  It  excites  all  the 
faults,  and  generates  wind  of  foul  smell. 

When  unripe,  it  is  oily,  heating,  and  keen.  It  excites  the 
appetite,  and  subdues  both  phlegm  and  wind.137 

The  l.mra(  g ),  when  undeveloped,  produces  hemorrhage  due  to 
excitement  of  the  bile,  and  enhances  the  bile. 

When  ripe,  it  subdues  the  wind,  and  conduces  to  flesh,  vital 
seed,  and  strength.138 

The  Tamvava(/z)  is  generally  astringent-sweet,  heavy,  obstructs 
the  secretions,  and  is  cooling.  It  is  obstructive  of  both  phlegm 
and  bile,  operates  as  an  inspissant  by  drying  up  the  fluids  of  the 
body,  and  creates  wind  largely.139 

Vadara(z')  is  sweet,  oily,  operates  as  a  Bhedana,  and  subdues 


a.  Dillenia  Indies,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Dillenia  speciosa,  Thunb. 

b.  Morus  Indica,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Moms  parwifolia,  Roxb. 

c.  Gre-mia  Asiatica,  Linn. 

d.  Otherwise  called  Nila-kapittha.  A  variety  of  the  elephant  or  wood  apple  ; 
the  Commentators  say  that  it  is  a  native  of  Kashmira. 

e.  The  ordinary  woods  apple.  Feronia  Elcphantum. 

f.  JEgle  Marmelos ,  Linn. 

g.  Mangifera  Indica,  Linn. 

h.  Engenia  j ambolana ,  Lanik. 

i.  Zisyphus  Ju-juba,  Lamk. 


356 


CHAR  AKA -SA  M  HIT  A. 


both' wind  and  biR.  When  dried  up;  it  is  destructive  of  phlegm  and 
wind",  and  is  not  hostile  to  bile.140 

The  fruits  of  the  Simvitika(«)  are  astringent-sweet,  and  cooling, 
and  operate  as  inspissants  by  drying  up  the  fluids  of  the  body.111 

Gangeruka(^),  Karira(c),  Vimbi  d),  Todana(e),  and  Dhanvana(/), 
are  sweet  and  astringent,  cooling,  and  destructive  of  bile  and 
phlegm.142 

Ripe  Panasa(  g),  Mocha  (/z),  and  the  fruits  of  Rajadani(z').,.  are 
agreeable  to  the  taste  though  astringent,,  and.  oily,,  cool,  and-  heavy. 

In  consequence  of  their  astringent  taste  and'  softness  and 
fragrance,  they  add  relish  to  the  taste. 

Lavani(y)  is  capable  of  being  used  as  a  sauce  for  creating 
relish.  It  is  dry  and  creates  winch145-44 

Nipa(^),  £atahvaka(/),  Pilu(»z),  Trihagunyaf^)',  Vi k ank  at  a(o) , an d 
Prachina-amlaka(/),.  alleviate  all  the  faults  and-  destroy  poison.145 


a.  Probably  grains  within  pods.  A  general  name  for  pulses. 

b.  The  fruits  of  the  Nagavala,  as  observed' by  the  Commentators.  The  A  yur- 
vedartha  Chandrikd  explains  Gangeruka  as  the  seeds  called  Goraksha-tandula ; 
while  Gangeruki  is  explained  as  Nagavala  If  it  is  the  latter  that  is  indicated,,  it  is 
then  Hedysatum  I'agopodioides,  Linn. 

c.  Capparis  appytta,  Roxb.  It  is1  described  as  a'  thorny  plant,  growing  in  deserts 
and  fed  upon  by  camels.  The  shoot  of  the  bamboo; is  not  implied’ by  the  word,  here; 

d.  Coccinea  Indica  ;  syn.  Momordica  monodelpha,  Roxb. 

e.  A  variety  of  Dharmana  or  Dhanvana,  i.e.,  Grewia  eldstica,  Roxb. 

f.  Grewia  elastica,  Roxb. 

g.  The  fruits  of  the  Artocarpus  integrifolia,  Linn. 

h.  Plantains. 

4.  Mimusops  Indica ,  D’.  C.  ;  syn.  Mimusops  hexandra ,  Roxb. 

j.  Called  also  Lavali ;  Anona  reticulata ,  Linn. 

k.  Called  also  Kadamva.  Nauclea  cadaniba,  Roxb. 

l.  Chakrapani  reads  ‘Catahva,’  meaning  that  variety  of  fennel  calTed:  Aruthum 
Sown.  Otherwise  called  Mifreya,  Sulpha,  &c. 

m.  Solvadora  Persica ,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Solvadora  Indica ,  Wight. 

n.  Otherwise  called  Ketaki.  The  fruits  of  Pandanus  odoratissimus,  Linn.  fit. 

o.  The  ordinary  Bainch.  Flacourtia  sapida,  Rox.  ;  syn.  Flacourtia  Ramoutchi , 
L’Hurt. 

p.  Otherwise  called  Pa.ii-amlaka.  Flavour tia  cataphracta ,  Roxb. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


357 


Ingudi(«)  is  bitter  and.  sweet;,  oily,  and  hot,  and  subdues  both 
phlegm  and  wind. 

Tinduka(^)  is  obstructive  of  both  phlegm  and  bile,  astringent 
and  sweet,  and'  light.146 

It  should  be  known  that  there  is  every  taste  in  Smlaka(c.). 
except  the  saline.  It  cures  perspiration,  fatty  growth,  phlegm, 
nausea,  and  bile.147 

Vibhitaki(tZ)  is  dry,  agreeable  in  taste,  astringent-sour,  and 
highly  destructive  of  phlegm  and  bile.  It  also  destroys  the’ 
diseases  born  of  the  juicy  elements  in  the  body,  of  blood,  of  flesh, 
and  of  fat.148 

Dadima(^)"is  sour-astringent-sweet,  destructive  of  wind,  operates 
as  aix  inspissant  and  dries  up  the  fluids  of  the  body,  promotes  the 
appetite,  is  oily,  heating,  promotes  cheerfulness  and  brings  about 
relish  for  food,  and;  prevents  phlegm  and  bile..149' 

That  Dadima  which  is  sour  and  dry,  excites  bil'e  and'  wind. 
Those  that  are  sweet,  are  destructive  of  bile.  The  fast  variety  is 
regarded  as  the  best.150' 

Vrikshamlaf  f)  operates  as  an  inspissant,  is  dry  and  heating, 
and  is  applauded  in  (diseases  due  to)  wind  and  phlegm. 

The  fruits  of  Amlika(^),  when  ripe,  are  slightly  different  from 
the  above  in  attributes.151 

Amlavetasa(A).  is  endued  with  similar  properties,  and  operates, 
besides,  as  a  Bhedana  .  by  purging  the  contents  of  the  intestiness 
without  producing  liquid!  stools).152 


a.  Ximenia  AZgyptiaca,  Roxb. 

b.  Diospyros  Rmbryopteris.  Pers.  ;  syn.  Diospyros  glutinosa,  Koenig. 

c.  Phyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn. 

d.  Termindlia  Bellerica,  Roxb. 

e.  Punica,  Granatwm,  Linn. 

f.  The  word  is  used  to  imply  various  things. 

g.  Tamarindus  Indica,  Linn. 

h.  Rumex  Vesica/ius,  Linn.  The  country  sorrel: 


35§ 


CHA  RA  KA  -SA  MHI TA. 


In  ^ula(a'),  disgust  for  food,  constipation  in  respect  of  both 
stools  and  urine,  weakness  of  the  digestive  fire,  delirium  tremens 
(due  to  drink),  hiccup,  consumption,  asthma,  vomiting  and  nausea, 
and  diseases  relating  to  stools,  when  these  arise  from  excitement 
of  wind  and  phlegm,  the  Ke9ara  of  Matulunga(3),  which  is  light, 
is  prescribed. 

As  regards  its  other  parts,  it  is  otherwise.*153-54 

Devoid  of  skin,  the  Karchchura  fruit(c)  creates  relish  for  food, 
promotes  the  appetite,  brings  about  cheerfulness,  and  is  endued 
with  fragrance.  It  is,  besides,  destructive  of  phlegm  and  wind, 
and  is  beneficial  in  asthma,  hiccup,  and  piles.155 

The  fruit  of  Nagaranga(af)  is  sweet  and  slightly  sour.  It 
promotes  cheerfulness  and  adds  relish  to  food.  It  is  difficult  of 
digestion,  alleviates  wind,  and  is  heavy.158 

Batama(tf',  Abhishuka(/),  Akshota'^-),  Mukulaka(A),  and 
Nikochaka(0,  are  heavy,  hot,  oily,  sweet.  Taken  with  the  fruits  of 
Urumana(/),  they  are  strength-giving  and  wind-destroying,  promote 
nutrition  and  corpulency,  enhance  the  vital  seed  and  also  phlegm 
and  bile.157 

Piyala(^)  should  be  known  to  be  similar  to  the  above  in  properties, 
except  as  regards  its  heating  quality. 


а.  Sharp,  shooting  pain  in  the  Thoracic  and  abdominal  regions. 

б.  Citrus  medico, ,  Linn.  The  Ke£ara  implies  the  filaments. 

*  ‘Ceshamatoanyatha:’  i.e.,  parts  other  than  Ke9ara  are  not  light,  being  either 
heavy  or,  applied  to  the  diseases  mentioned,  produce  opposite  consequences. — T. 

c.  Gangadhara  omits  the  verse,  for  good  reasons.  It  is  a  bulbous  root  and  not 
a  fruit.  Otherwise  called  Amraharidra,  or  Circuma  reclinata,  Roxb. 

d.  Citrus  Auranticum,  Linn. 

e.  Amygdalus  Communis ,  Linn, 
f  Called  Pesta. 

g.  Juglans  regia,  Linn. 

h.  Called  also  Danti.  Croton  polyandrum ,  Roxb.  ;  syn.  Baliosperum  montanum. 

i.  A  variety  of  e  above. 

j.  Called  also  Urumala.  Not  identified. 

k.  Buchanania  latifolia,  Roxb. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


359 


The  fruit  of  £leshmataka(«)  excites  phlegm,  is  sweet,  cooling, 
and  heavy.153 

The  fruit  of  Ankota(3),  creates  phlegm,  is  heavy,  obstructs 
urine  and  stools,  and  destroys  the  digestive  fire. 

The  fruit  of  the  (^amii<?)  is  heavy,  hot,  sweet,  dry,  and  des¬ 
tructive  of  pain.159 

Karanja(aO  obstructs  the  passage  of  urine,  and  stools,  and  is 
hostile  to  bile  and  plielgm. 

Amrataka((?),  Danta£atha(/),  Karamarddakaf  ^),  and  Airavata(72), 
should  be  known  as  productive  of  hemorrhages  in  consequence  of 
the  excitement  of  bile.160 

Vartaka(?')  is  destructive  of  wind,  promotes  appetite,  and  is 
pungent-bitter  in  taste. 

The  fruit  of  the  Parkati(y')  should  be  known  as  creative  of 
wind  and  destructive  of  phlegm  and  bile.161 

The  fruit  of  Akshiki(^)  is  destructive  of  bile  and  phlegm,  sour 
in  taste,  sweet-sour  on  assimilation,  and  destroys  also  wind  and 
bile.163 

The  fruits  of  Afwattha(Z),  Udumvara  »«),  Plaksha(ra)  and 

a.  Called  also  Selu.  Cordia  Myxa,  Linn. 

b.  Alangium.  Lamarkii,  Thwaites  ;  syn.  A.  Hexapetalum,  Roxb. 

c.  Some  texts  read  Sami.  Accacia  Suma,  Ham.  ;  syn.  Mimosa  Suma,  Roxb. 

d.  Pongamia  glabra  ;  syn.  Galedupa  Indica,  Lanik. 

e.  The  sour  variety  of  the  Hog  plum  or  Spondias  mangifera,  Pers. 

f.  Chakrapani  thinks  that  Jamvira  is  meant,  i.e.,  Citrus  medica,  Linn.  The 
“Ayurvedartha  Chandrika"  says  that  the  word  implies  both  Kapittha  (Feronia 
Elephanta  or  wood-apple),  or  Karmaranga  i.e.,  Averrhoa  Carambola,  Linn. 

g.  Carissa  Carandas,  Linn. ;  syn.  Carissa  Congesta,  Wight. 

h.  A  sour  variety  of  Nagranga.  Vide  note  d,  p.  358. 

i.  Solanum  Melongena,  Linn. 

j.  Ficus  infectoria,  Willd. 

h.  Chakrapani  observes  that  it  is  a  kind  of  creeper.  The  name,  however,  is  applied 
to  the  tree  called  Dalhergia  Oojeinensis,  Roxb. 

l.  Ficus  religiosa,  Linn. 

m.  Ficus  glomerata,  Willd. 

n.  See  note  j  above. 


360 


CHAR  AKA -SAMHITA. 


Nyagrodha(«)  are  astringent-sweet-sour,  create  wind,  and  are 
heavy.163 

The  kernel  .about  the  skin  ofithe  fruit  of  Bhallataka(i),  is  fiery. 
(In  energy)  it  is  agreeable  and  cooling. 

The  group  in  respect  of  Fruits,  numbering  the  fifth,  is  thus 
spoken  of.  Most  of  these  fruits  are  used  as  food.164 

The  Group  of  Greens. 

Ardraka(tr),  as  also  Vigwabheshaja^),  creates  relish  (for  food), 
promotes  .the  .appetite,  and  increases  the  semen.  Its  juice  is 
directed  to  be  .used  in  retention  -of  urine  and  stools  caused  by 
excitement  of  wind  and  phlegm.165 

Jamvira(^)  .corrects  relish,  promotes  the  ;appetite,  .is  keen, 
possessed  of  fragrance,  and  corrects  the  mouth.  :It  is  destructive 
of  phlegm  and  wind,  operates  as  a  vermifuge,  and  is  a  Pachana 
with  respect  to  food  previously  taken.166 

Mulaka(/),  when  young,  is  destructive  of  all  the  faults.  When 
ripe,  it  excites  all  the  faults.  When  boiled  in  oil,  it  becomes 
destructive  of  the  wind.  Dried  in  the  sun,  it  subdues  both  phlegm 
and  wind.167 


a.  Ficus  Bengelensis,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Ficus  Indica,  Roxb. 

b.  The  correct  reading  is  “Bhallatakanam  &c.”  Hence ‘phalani’  is  understood 
after  ‘Bhallatakanam.’  ‘Tangmansam’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  ‘Taggatam 
mansam,’  i.e.,  the  kernel  about  the  skin.  That  kernel  is  like  fire,  for  it  burns  the 
skin  and  flesh  of  any  one  who  touches  it.  Chakrapani  explains  'Agni-samam’  as 
indicating  ‘Sphotadi-janakatwam,’  i.e.,  capability  to  produce  inflammations  and 
boils,  &c.  'Agreeable  and  cooling’  refer  to  the  energy  or  ‘Viryya’  of  the  kernel. 
Bhallataka  is  Semecarpus  Anacardium,  Linn.  Some  texts  read  incorrectly  ‘Bhalla- 
takasthyagnicamam  &c,’  implying  .that  the  ‘Asthi’  or  seed  of  Bhallataka  is  ,&c. 
This  reading  is  incorrect. — T. 

c.  Ginger.  Zengiber  officinale,  Rose. 

d.  Dry  ginger  is  so  called  because  of  its  extensive  use  as  a  medicament.  Literally, 
the  word  implies  ‘universal  medicine.’ 

e.  Called  ‘Gonda-nebu’  in  Bengal.  Citrus  medica,  Linn. ;  syn.  Citrus  acid, 
Roxb.  Pachana  are  medicines  which  assist  in  the  digestion  of  undigested  food. 

f.  The  garden  radish.  Raphanus  Sativus,  Linn. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


361 


Surasa(«)  alleviates  hiccup,  consumption,  poison,  asthma,  and 
shooting  pains  in  the  sides,  It  excites  the  bile,  destroys  phlegm 
and  wind,  and  corrects  foetid  smell.168 

Yamani(^),  Arjjaka(r),  Sigru(^),  (^aleya(^),  and  Bhrishtaka(y) 
cause  cheerfulness,  create  relish  for  food,  and  induce  the  ejectment 
of  bile.169 

Jalapippali(^),  Gandira(^),  £ringavera(z'),  and  Tumvuru(y'),  are 
keen,  hot,  pungent,  dry,  and  destructive  of  phlegm  and  wind.170 

Bhustrina(£)  is  destructive  of  the  virile  power,  pungent,  dry, 
and  hot,  and  corrects  the  mouth.  Khara£wa(/)  is  destructive  of 
phlegm  and  wind,  and  alleviates  pain  and  diseases  of  the  anal 
duct.171 

Dhanyaka(w),  likewise  Agwagandha(^),  and  Sumukha(y)  create 
relish,  and  are  fragrant.  They  are  not  very  pungent,  and  operate 

a.  A  variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum,  Linn. 

5.  Ptychotis  Ajowan,  D.  C.  ;  syn.  Liqusticum  Ajowan,  Flem. 

c.  A  variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum ,  Linn. 

d.  Moringa  pterygosperma,  Gaertn.  ;  syn.  Hyperdnthera  moringa,  Willd.  The 
fruits,  called  Khada  in  Bengal,  are  used. 

e.  Chakrapani  observes  that  what  is  implied  is  ‘Ch§.nakya-mulam’  which  is 
evidently  the  root  of  Chanak  or  Cicer  arietinum,  Linn. 

f.  Otherwise  called  Rajika,  as  observed  by  Chakrapani.  Black  mustard,  or 
Sinapis  racemosa ,  Roxb. 

g.  Commelyna  salicifolia,  Kunth. 

h.  Chakrapani  observes  that  this  is  of  two  kinds,  vis.,  red  and  white.  The 
white  variety  is  included  in  the  group  of  potherbs.  The  red,  therefore,  is  to  be 
understood  here.  Wilson  says  it  is  a  kind  of  kidney  bean.  The  “Ayurvedartha 
Chandrika"  says  that  it  is  otherwise  known  by  the  name  of  Camatha.  'Gandira1 
implies  a  few  other  vegetables.— T 

i.  Cringavera  is  Ardraka  or  Ginger,  Cringaveri  is  a  root  resembling  the  former. 

j.  Chakrapani  observes  that  this  resembles  Kustumvuru.  It  is  called  in  Bengali 
‘Nepali  Dhaniya.’  Zanthoxylum  alatum ,  Roxb.  ;  syn.  Zanthoxylum  hostile,  Wall. 

h.  Andropogon  Schcenanthus,  Linn. 

l.  A  variety  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan  coming  from  Khorasan.  Chakrapani  says  it 
means  Krishnajiraka  or  Nigella  Sativa ,  Linn. 

m.  Coriandrum  sativum ,  Linn. 

n.  Called  also  Yamani.  Ptychotis  Ajowan,  D.  C. ;  syn.  Ligusticum  Ajowan, 
Flem. 

o.  A  variety  of  Parnasa  or  Tulasi,  i.e.,  Ocimum  sanctum,  Linn. 

46 


362 


CHA  JR  A  KA -SAM  HIT  A. 


as  expectorants,  by  causing  the  evacuation  of  the  faults  (wind, 
bile,  and  phlegm).172 

Grinjanaka(fl:)  operates  as  an  inspissant  (by  drying  up  the 
fluids  of  the  body),  is  keen,  and  beneficial  in  excitements  of  wind 
and  phlegm,  and  piles. 

It  is  also  used  in  producing  perspiration. 

It  should  be  prescribed  for  constitutions  in  which  the  element 
of  bile  is  less  than  usual.173 

Palandu(^)  excites  phlegm,  is  destructive  of  wind,  and  does  not 
alleviate  bile. 

It  is  very  suitable  for  food,  adds  strength,  is  heavy,  enhances 
the  vital  seed,  and  adds  relish  to  food.174 

La9una(c)  is  destructive  of  worms,  the  minor  varieties  of 
leprosy,  and  blotches  or  scabs. 

It  allays  also  the  wind,  and  glandular  enlargements. 

It  is  oily  and  hot,  enhances  the  vital  seed,  and  is  pungent  and 
heavy.175 

The  fruits  of  these,  when  dry,  are  destructive  of  phlegm.* 

Thus  is  completed  this,  the  sixth  Group,  consisting  of  the  Greens. 

Of  the  Group  of  Wines. 

By  nature  all  wine  is  generally  sour  (in  taste)  and  hot,  and  has 
been  said  to  be  sour  on  assimilation. 

It  has  especial  properties.  These  are  being  declared.177 

а.  The  word  is  used  to  imply  turnips  as  also  a  small  variety  of  garlics.  Here 
the  former  is  intended. 

б.  Onions.  Allium  cepa,  Linn. 

c.  Garlics.  Allium  sativum,  Linn. 

*  What  is  stated  of  the  group  called  the  Greens,  should  be  understood  as  apply¬ 
ing  to  the  green  or  fresh  fruits  of  the  same.  Those  very  fruits,  when  dried,  are 
productive  of  other  consequences.  The  words  ‘esham’  and  'et£ni’  (of  these — these) 
refer, as  some  take  them,  to  Grinjanaba.^landu,  and  Laquna.  Chakrapani  takes  them 
in  a  more  comprehensive  sense,  that  is,  as  including  all  the  ‘Haritas’  or  Greens. — T. 


CHAR  A  KA  -SA  MHITl. 


363 


Wines,  being  destructive  of  wind,  are  applauded  in  the  case 
of  persons  that  are  emaciated,  of  those  that  are  afflicted  with 
strangury  or  difficulty  of  micturition,  and  of  those  that  are  afflicted 
with  diseases  of  the  Grahani  and  piles. 

They  are  also  applauded  in  loss  of  milk  and  in  anaemia  or 
loss  of  blood.178 

Wines,  being  destructive  of  wind,  are  beneficial  in  hiccup, 
asthma,  catarrh  or  cold  in  nose,  consumption,  constipation  of  the 
bowels,  disgust  for  food,  vomitting,  and  epistasis  or  suppression 
of  urine.173 

The  wine  called  Jagala,  which  operates  as  an  inspissant,  and  is 
dry  and  hot,  is  beneficial  in  cases  of  sharp  pains,  diarrhoea, 
flatulence,  excitements  of  phlegm  and  wind,  and  in  piles. 

It  cures  intumescence,  and  digests  the  food  that  has  been 
eaten.*180 

The  wine  called  Arishta  is  destructive  of  diseases  caused  by 
excitement  of  phlegm,  such  as  intumescence,  piles,  ailments  of 
the  Grahani,  chlorosis,  anaemia,  and  jaundice,  disgust  for  food, 
and  fevers. 

It  creates  a  liking  for  food  and  increases  the  appetite.f18' 

Wine  manufactured  from  sugar  is  agreeable  to  the  mouth,  is 
a  slight  intoxicant,  fragrant,  destructive  of  all  diseases  of  the  anal 
canal,  aids  digestion,  and  when  old,  promotes  cheerfulness  or 
relish,  and  improves  the  complexion.188 

The  juice  of  the  sugar-cane  when  old  is  regarded  as  possessed 
of  these  virtues  :  it  creates  a  liking  or  relish  for  food  ;  it  promotes 


*  Cula  implies  sharp  pains,  generally  in  the  abdomen,  of  a  cholic  character. 
There  are  many  kinds  of  Cula.  Pravahika  implies  diarrhoea.  ‘Atopa’  is  flatulence  in 
general. — T. 

t  Arishta  cures  the  diseases  mentioned  when  they  are  caused  by  excitements  of 
the  phlegm.  ‘Rochana’  is  that  which  simply  creates  a  liking  for  food.  ‘Dipana’  is 
that  which  promotes  or  increases  the  appetite  without  helping  the  digestion  of 
undigested  food. — T. 


364 


CM  A  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


the  appetite  ;  it  causes  cheerfulness  ;  and  is  beneficial  in  swellings 
and  intumescences  and  piles.*188 

The  cool  (fresh)  juice  of  the  sugar-cane  digests  the  food  that 
is  eaten  ;  it  is  destructive  of  constipation,  improves  the  voice  and 
complexion  ;  operates  as  an  attenuant  by  removing  bad  humours, 
and  is  beneficial  in  swellings  and  intumescences  and  also  piles.t131 

The  wine  called  Gauda  (manufactured  from  molasses),  when 
cleaned,  purges  the  contents  of  the  intestines  (without  producing 
watery  motions)  ;  clears  the  stomach  of  the  wind  ;  operates  as  a 
Tarpana  and  promotes  the  appetite.135 

The  wine  called  Akshiki  (manufactured  from  the  fruits  called 
Terminalia  Bellerica,  Roxb.)  are  beneficial  in  cases  of  chlorosis, 
anaemia,  and  jaundice,  as  well  as  of  boils  and  wounds.  It  operates 
also  for  promoting  appetite.185 

The  wine  called  5.sava  is  very  intoxicating,  destructive  of  wind, 
and  agreeable  to  the  mouth.187 

The  wine  called  Madhwasava  is  very  keen  in  energy  and 
purges  the  contents  of  the  intestines. 

The  wine  called  Maireya  is  sweet  and  heavy.183 

The  wine  manufactured  from  Dhataki  ( Woodfordia  floribunda, 
Salisb ;  syn.  Grislea  tomentosa,  Roxb.)  promotes  cheerfulness  and 
relish,  is  dry,  creates  taste  for  food,  and  promotes  the  appetite.189 

Like  the  wine  called  Madhwika  (manufactured  from  honey) 
is  that  manufactured  from  Uvae passos  and  the  juice  of  the  sugar¬ 
cane.  The  latter,  again,  is  not  very  hot.190 

The  wine  manufactured  from  honey  promotes  relish  for  food, 
increases  the  appetite,  creates  cheerfulness,  adds  to  strength,  and 
is  destructive  of  bile.  Further,  it  cures  constipation,  is  destructive 
of  phlegm,  and  slightly  excites  the  wind.191 

*  Pakkarasa  is  a  technical  term,  by  which  the  juice  of  the  sugar-cane,  when  old 
or  properly  fermented  for  a  long  period,  is  known. — T. 

+  “Lekhana  or  attenuants  remove  bad  humours  and  altered  constituents  of  the 
body  by  thinning  them  gradually  and  clearing  the  system  of  them.”  U,  C.  Dutt’s 
Mat.  Med.  of  the  Hindus, 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  M  HIT  A, 


365 


The  wine  manufactured  from  the  diverse  varieties  of  Yava 
( Hordeum  hexastichum,  Linn.),  with  their  Manda  or  barm,  is  dry 
and  hot;  and  provocative  of  wind  and  bile.  It  is,  again,  heavy, 
and  is  not  digested  without  producing  sensation  of  heaviness 
in  the  stomach  and  temporarily  suppressing  both  faeces  and  urine. 
That  called  Madhulaka  (viz.,  manufactured  from  a  particular 
variety  of  Yava  which  is  so  called)  is  provocative  of  phlegm.193 

The  wines  called  Sauviraka  and  Tushodaka  promote  the 
appetite,  assist  the  digestion,  are  destructive  of  thoracic  diseases 
as  also  chlorosis,  anaemia,  and  jaundice,  and  of  worms.  They  are, 
again,  beneficial  in  diseases  of  the  Grahani  and  in  piles.  They, 
further,  operate  as  Bhedanas  (by  purging  the  intestines  without 
producing  watery  motions).193 

The  sour  gruel  of  rice,  by  touch,  is  alleviative  of  such  fevers  as 
are  characterised  by  a  burning  sensation  of  the  skin.  If  drunk,  it 
alleviates  wind  and  phlegm,  cures  constipation,  operates  as  a 
purgative,  and  promotes  the  appetite.194 

Generally,  all  new  wines  are  heavy  and  excite  the  faults. 

When  old,  they  are  corrective  of  the  ducts,  promote  the 
appetite,  are  light,  and  correct  relish.195 

In  such  a  state  they  induce  cheerfulness  and  joy,  are  nourish¬ 
ing,  increase  the  strength  ( by  operating  as  tonics  )  and  are 
alleviative  of  fear,  grief,  and  fatigue. 

They  also  induce  self-reliance,  energy,  brilliancy  of  intellect, 
satisfaction,  nourishment,  and  strength.196 

Wines,  used  duly  and  reasonably  by  good  men,  become  bene¬ 
ficial  as  nectar.197 

Thus  has  been  declared  the  seventh  Group  on  the  subject  of 
Wines. 


The  Group  on  Waters. 

The  water  that  falls. from  the  sky,i.e.,  from  the  clouds,  is  of  one 
kind.  Falling  and  fallen,  it  takes  the  qualities  of  time  and  place.198 


366 


CHA  RAKA  -SA  M HIT  A. 


While  falling  from  the  sky,  coming  in  contact  with  the  sun,  the 
moon,  and  the  atmosphere,  eacli  of  which  is  dependent  upon 
season  (for  its  own  virtues),  water  becomes  possessed  of  the 
attributes  of  being  cool  or  hot,  or  oily,  or  dry,  &c.,  all  of  which 
appertain  to  the  earth.199 

By  nature,  the  water  that  falls  from  the  sky  is  possessed  of 
these  six  attributes,  viz.,  cool,  pure,  beneficial  (to  the  body),  clear, 
without  any  filth  (or  transparent),  and  light. 

Fallen  from  the  sky,  it  depends  for  its  properties  upon  the 
vessel  or  receptacle  which  holds  it.200 

The  water  that  falls  on  a  soil  that  is  white  becomes  possessed 
of  astringent  taste. 

That  which  falls  on  soil  of  a  pale  yellowish  hue  becomes 
possessed  of  a  bitter  taste. 

That  which  falls  on  soil  of  a  tawny  color  becomes  endued  with 
alkaline  ashes. 

That  which  falls  on  saline  soil  becomes  possessed  of  saline 
taste.  201 

That  which  falls  on  mountainous  beds  becomes  possessed  of  a 
pungent  taste. 

That  which  falls  on  a  soil  made  of  black  earth,  becomes  sweet. 

These  are  the  six  properties  of  water  as  dependant  on  the  kind 
of  soil  on  which  it  falls.202 

The  water  that  is  poured  by  the  deity  of  the  clouds,  that  which 
is  obtained  from  (dissolved)  hail,  and  that  from  (dissolved)  snow, 
have  an  unmanifest  taste.1*208 

That  water  which,  created  by  the  deity  of  the  clouds,  falls  from 
the  sky  and  is  held  in  such  vessels  as  have  been  directed  to  be 


No  particular  taste  attaches  to  such  water. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  367 

used  for  the  purpose,  is  called  Amdra  water  by  the  wise.  That  is 
the  foremost  of  all  waters  and  deserves  to  be  drunk  by  kings.204 

All  the  properties  of  water,  in  season  and  out  of  season,  are 
now  being  mentioned. 

That  water  which  is  slightly  astringent-sweet,  exceedingly 
subtle,  clear,  and  light,  not  dry,  and  which  never  deposits  anything 
at  the  bottom,  is  regarded  as  the  best.205 

The  water  that  belongs  to  the  season  of  rains  is  heavy,  leaves 
a  deposit  below,  is  sweet,  and  new.208 

The  water  that  falls  in  autumn  is  generally  subtle  (thin),  light, 
and  never  deposits  anything  at  the  bottom.  That  water  is  applaud¬ 
ed  for  use,  in  the  four  kinds  of  food,  by  those  persons  that  are 
very  delicate,  and  those  also  that  take  oily  food  or  food  in  copious 
measure.*207 

That  which  falls  in  the  season  of  dews  is  slightly  lighter  than 
the  above.  That  water,  again,  is  alleviative  of  phlegm  and  wind. 

The  water  that  falls  in  spring  should  be  known  to  be  astringent- 
sweet  and  dry.209 

The  water  of  summer  leaves  no  deposit.  This  is  certain. 

At  times  when  indications  of  more  than  one  season  appear, 
the  water  that  is  poured  by  the  clouds  becomes  productive  of  faults. 
There  is  no  doubt  in  this.210 

By  kings  and  those  that  are  equal  to  kings,  as  also  by  men  of 
delicate  constitutions,  the  water  carefully  collected  at  autumn 
should  be  used.f211 

Rivers  whose  waters  are  obstructed  in  their  course  by  rocks, 
by  constant  beating  against  them,  become  clear  and  transparent. 

*  The  four  kinds  of  food  are  food  that  is  swallowed,  that  is  chewed,  that  is 
lapped,  and  that  is  drunk. — T. 

f  Verses  201  to  211  do  not  occur  in  all  texts.  Chakrapani  regards  them  as 
interpolations.  Gangadhara,  though  doubting  their  genuineness,  includes  them  in 
his  text  and  comments  upon  them.  As,  however,  these. verses  enunciate  some  quaint 
propositions,  I  have  thought  it  proper  not  to  reject  them. — T. 


3&8 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


Rivers  that  have  their  sources  in  the  Himavat  mountains  are 
sacred  and  resorted  to  by  the  deities  and  the  Rishis.  Their  waters 
are  worthy  of  being  used.212 

Rivers  that  flow  over  rocks  and  sands,  have  clear  and  trans¬ 
parent  waters.  Rivers  that  have  their  source  in  the  Malaya 
mountains  have  waters  that  resemble  nectar  itself.218 

Those  rivers  that  flow  westwards  are  full  of  waters  that  are 
clear  and  transparent  and  worthy  of  being  used. 

Those  that  fall  on  the  eastern  ocean  have  generally  slow 
currents.  Their  waters  are  heavy.214 

The  waters  of  those  rivers  that  have  their  rise  in  the  Paripatra 
mountains,  as  also  those  that  have  their  source  in  the  Vindhya  and 
Sahya  mountains,  cause  diseases  of  the  head  and  thorax,  the 
different  kinds  of  leprosy,  and  elephantaisis.215 

Rivers,  when  they  carry  the  waters  of  the  rainy  season,  become 
stained  with  mud  and  worms  and  the  filth  of  snakes  and  rats. 
Hence  they  are  capable  of  exciting  all  the  faults.218 

The  waters  obtainable  from  tanks,  wells,  ponds,  springs,  large 
tanks  or  lakes,  and  rillets  escaping  from  fountains,  should  be 
regarded  as  possessed  of  the  virtues  and  faults  that  attach  to 
marshy  soil,  or  rocky  land,  or  arid  deserts.217 

Water  that  is  slimy,  or  full  of  worms,  or  foetid  in  consequence 
of  (putrified)  leaves  and  and  moss  and  mire,  that  has  lost  its  color 
and  taste,  and  that  has  become  thick  and  stinking,  is  not 
beneficial.218 

The  water  obtainable  from  the  ocean  is  saline.  It  is  provoca¬ 
tive  of  the  three  faults,  and  possesses  a  bad  odor.219 

Thus  has  been  declared  the  eighth  Group,  viz.,  that  about  Waters. 

The  Group  about  Milk. 

The  milk  of  the  cow  has  these  ten  properties,  viz.,  it  is  sweet, 
cool,  mild,  oily,  copious,  fine,  slimy,  heavy,  not  pungent,  and  free 
from  impurities,220 


CHAR  A  KA -SAMHITA.  369 

In  consequence  of  the  possession  of  these  properties  and  of  their 
parity  with  the  element  called  ojas,  vaccine  milk  enhances  ojas. 
Vaccine  milk  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  prolong  life.  It 
has  also  been  said  to  operate  as  a  Rasayana.221 

The  milk  of  buffaloes  is  heavier  than  vaccine  milk  and  cooler. 
Being  excessively  oily,  such  milk  produces  sleeplessness.  It  is 
beneficial  for  those  persons  whose  digestive  fire  is  keen.222 

The  milk  of  camels  is  dry  and  hot.  It  is  slightly  saline  and 
light.  It  has  been  recommended  for  alleviating  excitements  of  the 
wind  and  the  phlegm,  in  cases  of  retention  of  urine,  worms,  intu¬ 
mescence,  stomachic  and  abdominal  disesases,  and  piles.228 

The  milk  of  animals  that  are  of  undivided  hoofs  operates  as  a 
tonic,  strengthens  the  muscles,  is  hot,  and  sour,  with  a  saline  taste, 
and  dry,  and  alleviates  wind  generated  in  the  blood  and  other 
elements  of  the  body.*224 

The  milk  of  the  goat  is  astringent-sweet,  cool,  operates  as  an 
inspissant,  and  is  light.  It  alleviates  hemorrhage  due  to  excite¬ 
ments  of  the  bile,  and  diarrhoea.  It  cures  also  phthisis  and  fever.22* 

The  milk  of  sheep  is  very  hot.  It  causes  hiccup  and  asthma, 
and  excites  the  bile  and  the  phlegm. 

The  milk  of  the  elephant  is  a  tonic.  It  is  also  heavy,  and 
great!}7  strengthens  the  muscles.226 

Human  milk  prolongs  life,  promotes  nutrition  and  corpulency, 
is  capable  of  being  properly  assimilated  by  the  human  system, 
operates  as  an  emollient,  is  used  as  a  cerebral  purgative  in  hemorr¬ 
hages  due  to  excitements  of  the  bile,  and  acts  as  a  sedative  in  the 
cases  of  persons  suffering  from  inflammation  of  the  eye.222 

Curds  create  relish  for  food,  promote  the  appetite,  increase 
the  semen,  operate  as  emollients,  and  increase  strength.  On 
assimilation  they  become  sour  and  hot.  They  are  destructive  of 
the  wind,  and  regarded  as  an  auspicious  object.  They  also  promote 
nutrition,  adding  to  the  bulk  of  the  body.228 

*  CakhS  is  explained  by  the  Commentators  as  implying  blood  and  other  con¬ 
stituents  of  a  like  nature. — T. 


74 


370 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  MHITA. 


Curds  are  applauded  as  remedies  in  inflammations  of  the  Schnei¬ 
derian  membrane  with  loss  of  smell,  in  diarrhoea,  in  fits  of  cold,  in 
obstinate  fevers,  in  disgust  for  food,  in  difficulty  of  micturition,  and 
in  emaciation.2*9 

Curds  are  generally  harmful  in  autumn,  summer,  and  spring. 

They  are  also  harmful  in  all  ailments  that  arise  from  bilious 
hemorrhage  and  phlegm.230 

Those  curds  that  are  not  properly  formed  (congealed)  are  pro¬ 
vocative  of  the  three  faults. 

When,  however,  properly  formed,  they  are  destructive  of  wind 
and  increase  the  semen. 

The  cream  of  curds  is  destructive  of  phlegm  and  wind. 

The  barm  of  curds  cleanses  all  the  ducts  of  the  body.231 

Butter-milk  should  be  administered  in  cases  of  intumescence, 
piles,  ailments  of  the  Grahani,  difficulty  of  micturition,  stomachic 
and  abdominal  diseases,  disgust  for  food,  in  maladies  brought 
about  by  excessive  oiling,  chlorosis,  anaemia,  and  jaundice,  and  in 
vomiting.232 

Cheese,  newly  extracted,  operates  as  an  inspissant,  promotes 
the  appetite,  induces  cheerfulness  and  relish,  and  alleviates 
diseases  of  the  Grahani,  piles,  facial  paralysis,  and  disgust  for 
food.233 

Ghee  strengthens  the  memory  and  the  understanding,  the 
digestive  fire,  the  element  called  ojas,  phlegm,  and  serum.  It  is 
destructive  of  wind,  bile,  poisons,  intoxication  and  insanity,  waste, 
ill-luck,  and  fever.  It  is  the  foremost  of  oily  substances,  cool,  and 
sweet  in  both  taste  and  assimilation.  When  mixed,  agreeably  to 
the  ordinance,  with  the  proper  substances,  it  becomes  endued  with 
a  thousand  kinds  of  energy,  and  operates  in  a  thousand  ways.234-3* 

Old  Ghee  alleviates  vertigo,  delusions,  epilesy,  intumescence, 
insanity,  ailments  due  to  poisons,  fevers,  and  sharp  pains  in  the 
genital  organs  (of  women),  the  ears,  and  the  head.23' 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHITA. 


37: 


The  Ghee  prepared  from  the  milk  of  goats,  sheep,  and  buffaloes 
should  be  regarded  as  possessing  the  same  virtues  as  the  milk 
from  which  it  is  prepared- 

Piyusha(a),  Morata(^),  and  Kilata(c),  and  such  other  varieties, 
are  very  beneficial  for  such  persons  as  have  a  keen  digestive  fire 
or  as  sleep  very  little. 

These  are  heavy,  operate  as  emollients,  increase  the  semen, 
promote  nutrition  and  corpulency,  and  are  destructive  of  wind.®37-38 

Inspissated  butter-milk  is  clear,  heavy,  and  dry.  It  dries  up  the 
humours  or  fluids  of  the  body. 

Thus  has  been  declared  the  ninth  Group  consisting  of  the 
different  kinds  of  Milk.839 

The  Group  about  Sugar-cane. 

The  juice  of  the  sugar-cane,  if  the  stalk  is  chewed  with,  the  aid 
of  the  teeth,  increases  the  semen,  is  cool,  purges  the  intestines,  is 
oily,  promotes  nutrition  and  corpulency,  is  sweet,  and  excites  the 
phlegm. 

If  the  juice  is  taken  after  extraction  with  the  aid  of  some 
machine,  it  leads  to  a  burning  sensation  of  the  skin.840 

That  variety  of  sugar-cane  which  is  known  by  the  name  of 
Vansaka  is  superior  to  that  which  is  called  Paundra,  in  properties 
of  coolness,  purity,  and  sweetness. 

Treacle  is  aboundantly  productive  of  worms,  marrow,  blood, 
serum,  and  flesh.841 

Thick  black  treacle,  called  Kshudra,  that  in  which  only  a 
fourth  part  of  the  juice  of  sugar-cane  remains,  that  in  which  a 
third  thereof  remains,  and  that  in  which  only  half  remains,  possess 
the  property  of  heaviness  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  mentioned, 
{i.e.j  the  first  is  heavier  than  the  second,  the  second  than  the  third, 
and  the  third  than  the  fourth). 

a.  The  milk  of  a  cow  during  the  first  seven  days  after  calving. — T. 

b.  Milk  of  seven  days’  standing,  that  is,  when  it  has  lost  its  milky  nature. _ T. 

c.  Inspissated  milk,  i.e.,  coagulated  with  the  aid  of  some  sour  substance. — T. 


372 


CM  A  RA  KA  -SA  MHI TA. 


Treacle  that  has  been  washed  creates  less  impurities  than  the 
others.*242 

Clearer  than  treacle  are  Matsyandika,  and  Khanda  and  Sarkara 
(so  that  the  second  is  superior  in  clearness  to  the  first,  and  the 
third  to  the  second).  The  coolness,  again,  of  these  is  proportionate 
to  their  clearness.f243 

All  varieties  of  sugar  manufactured  from  treacle,  are  oily, 
increase  the  semen,  and  are  beneficial  for  persons  that  are  weak  or 
that  have  sustained  injuries. 

The  sugar  that  is  called  Yasha  is  bitter  in  taste,  as  also 
astringent-sweet,  and  possessed  of  cooling  properties.:]:244 

The  sugar  made  from  honey  is  dry,  alleviates  vomitting  and 
diarrhoea,  and  operates  as  a  Cchedana.§ 

AH  kinds  of  sugar  are  beneficial  in  thirst,  hemorrhages  due  to 
excitements  of  the  bile,  and  in  all  diseases  characterised  by  a 
burping  sensation  of  the  skin.215 

Makshika,  Bhramara,  Kshaudra,  and  Pauttika  are  the  four 
varieties  of  honey. 

Among  them  all,  Makshika  is  the  foremost.  In  consequence  of 
its  speciality,  Bhramara  is  heavy.||245 

The  honey  called  Makshika  is  of  the  color  of  oil. 

*  Impurities,  that  is,  in  the  form  of  faeces  and  other  excreta  that  escape  from  the 
body. — T. 

t  MatsyandikS  is  coarse  sugar.  When  refined  a  little,  it  is  called  Khanda.  The 
latter,  when  further  refined,  is  called  Sarkara  or  sugar. — T. 

t  YSsha  is  sugar  manufactured  from  the  decoction  of  DurSlabhS.  or  Hedysarum 
Alhagi,  Linn. ;  syn.  Hedysarum  Maurorum,  D.  C. 

§  ‘‘Cchedana  are  medicines  which  remove  by  force,  as  it  were,  and  discharge 
from  the  body,  adherent  phlegm  or  other  humours.  Emetics,  expectorants,  errbines, 
caustics,  &c.  would  probably  come  under  this  head.” — U.  C.  Dutt’s  Mat.  Mad.  of  the 
Hindus. 

I!  Chakrapani  observes  that  Makshika  honey  is  that  which  is  gathered  by  the 
ordinary  bee  of  a  pale  color.  BhrSmara  is  that  gathered  by  those  bees  which  are 
called  Bhramara.  Kshaudra  is  gathered  by  bees  of  a  very  small  variety.  Pauttika 
is  gathered  by_that  variety  of  pale  bees  which  are  large  in  size. — T. 


CHAU  AKA -SA  MHITA. 


373 


The  honey  that  is  of  a  white  color  is  called  Bhramara. 

That  which  is  called  Kshaudra  should  be  known  to  be  of  a 
tawny  hue. 

That  called  Pauttika  is  of  the  color  of  Ghee.247 

The  general  properties  of  honey  are  these  — it  is  provocative 
of  the  wind  ;  heavy  and  cooling  ;  alleviates  phlegm  and  hemorr¬ 
hages  caused  by  excitement  of  the  bile  ;  it  unites  fractures ;  it 
operates  as  a  Cchedana  ;  it  is  dry,  and  astringent-sweet  in  taste.248 

Honey,  if  taken  in  a  heated  state,  kills  the  person  taking  it.  If 
taken  also  by  one  who  has  been  afflicted  by  heat  or  who  is  of  a 
hot  constitution  by  nature,  it  brings  about  death.  This  is  due  to 
the  presence  of  poison  in  it. 

In  consequence  of  its  being  heavy  and  dry  and  astringent 
and  cooling,  honey,  if  taken  in  a  very  small  measure,  becomes 
beneficial.249 

There  is  nothing  more  painful  and  difficult  of  treatment  than 
mucus  generated  in  the  stomach  through  (excessive  use  of)  honey. 
That  disease  soon  kills  the  patient,  like  poison,  in  consequence  the 
conflicting  nature  of  the  treatment  to  be  followed. 

When  mqcus  is  generated,  heating  operations  should  be 
followed.  Such  operations,  however,  in  the  case  of  mucus  generated 
by  (excessive  use  of)  honey,  become  hostile.  Mucus,  therefore, 
due  to  honey,  is  a  very  serious  disease,  and  soon  brings  about  death 
like  poison.*250-51 

In  consequence  of  the  presence  of  diverse  essences  in  honey,  it 
is  exceedingly  assimilable  (with  other  objects).t 

*  The  sense  is  this  :  Honey  is  heavy.  If  taken  in  copious  measure,  it  generates 
mucus  in  the  stomach.  The  treatment  is  very  difficult,  for  all  medicines  that  are 
destructive  of  mucus  must  be  of  heading  virtues.  Honey,  however,  is  heating.  The 
ordinary  medicines,  therefore,  aggravate  the  disease  brought  about  by  honey.  If 
cooling  medicines  are  administered,  they  become  hostile  to  the  mucus  generated  by 
the  copious  use  of  honey.  Hence,  the  treatment  of  such  a  disease  is  exceedingly 
difficult ;  while  its  progress  is  so  rapid  that  it  brings  about  death  before  it  can  be 
stayed. — T. 

t  Some  texts  incorrectly,  read  ‘himam  madhu.’  The  correct  reading  is 
‘param’. — T. 


374 


CHA  RAKA -SA  MH I TA. 


Thus  is  declared  the  tenth  Group  which  consists  of  the  diverse 
modifications  of  the  Sugar-cane  or  substances  that  resemble  it  in 
nature.*52 

The  Group  about  Prepared  (cooked)  Food. 

Liquid  food,  vie.,  that  which  is  drunk,  alleviates  hunger,  thirst, 
fatigue,  weakness,  and  diseases  of  the  stomach. 

It  generates  sweat  and  excites  the  digestive  fire. 

It  makes  the  wind  and  the  faeces  move  downwards  in  their 
natural  direction.*55* 

Vilepika  operates  as  a  Tarpana,  and  Grahi.  It  is,  besides,  light 
and  promotes  cheerfulness.f 

The  barm  (of  barley  or  rice)  excites  the  digestive  fire,  and 
induces  the  wind  to  move  (downwards)  in  its  natural  course.*51 

It  softens  all  the  ducts,  and  generates  sweat. 

In  the  case  of  persons  who  have  fasted  or  who  have  been 
purged,  or  of  those  who  are  thirsty  after  the  oils  drunk  by  them 
have  been  digested,  barm,  in  consequence  of  its  power  of  exciting 
the  digestive  fire  and  of  its  being  light,  becomes  the  support  of  life. 

It  alleviates  thirst  and  diarrhoea,  and  restores  the  diverse  ele¬ 
ments  of  the  physical  organism  to  harmony.*55-56 

The  Manda  of  fried  paddy  excites  the  digestive  fire,  and  alle¬ 
viates  burning  of  the  skin,  and  swoons. 

The  Manda  of  fried  paddy,  properly  prepared  and  purified, 
should  be  given  to  persons  whose  digestive  fire  is  mild,  or  whose 
digestive  fire  is  excited  unequally,  or  to  children,  and  aged, 
persons,  and  women,  and  persons  that  are  of  delicate  constitutions. 

It  alleviates  hunger  and  thirst  quickly.  It  is  a  good  regimen. 

for  ‘himam.’  ‘Yogavahi’  is  explained  by  GangSdhara  as  assimilable.  The  fact  is, 
honey  takes  the  properties  of  those  substances  with  which  it  is  mixed. — T. 

*  Gangadhara  observes  that  ‘ptya’  indicates  thin  gruel  of  barley. — T. 
t  ‘Vilepika’  is  understood  in  the  sense  of  rice-gruel.  Tarpana  is  that  which 
soothes  and  promotes  nourishment.  Grahi  is  something  that  dries  up  the  fluids  of 
the  body. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


375 


It  expels  the  impurities  of  such  persons  as  have  undergone  a 
course  of  corrective  treatment.**57-53 

Rice,  well  boiled,  properly  divested  of  the  water  in  which  it  has 
been  boiled,  and  then  adequately  washed,  and  while  still  warm,  is 
regarded  as  food  that  is  light. 

In  constitutions  injured  by  poison  or  characterised  by  excess  of 
phlegm,  fried  rice  is  much  desired.*53 

Rice,  boiled,  not  divested  of  the  water  in  which  it  has  been 
boiled,  unwashed,  and  cold,  is  regarded  as  food  that  is  heavy.*60 

Rice  boiled  with  meat,  potherbs,  fat,  oil,  Ghee,  marrow,  and 
fruits,  forms  food  that  operates  as  a  tonic,  acts  as  Santarpana, 
promotes  cheerfulness  and  relish,  is  heavy,  and  increases  the  vital 
seed.*61 

Rice  cooked  with  Masha  ( Phaseolus  radiatus,  Roxb.J,  sesame, 
milk,  Mudga  (Phaseolus  Mungo,  Linn.),  is  endued  with  the  same 
attributes. 

Kulmashas(a)  are  heavy,  and  dry,  excite  the  wind,  and  purge 
the  intestines  without  producing  watery  motions.*6* 

As  regards  those  kinds  of  prepared  food  that  are  made  from 
Saupya(3),  or  wheat,  or  barley,  the  physician  should  declare  their 
heaviness  and  lightness  according  to  (the  properties  of)  their 
constituent  ingredients.*56 

Of  unprepared  soup,  prepared  soup,  thin  (well-cooked)  juice  of 
flesh,  sour  supa,  and  supa  that  is  not  sour,  it  should  be  known  that 
each  is  heavier  than  that  which  precedes.*64t 

*  Some  texts  read  ‘Kshutpip&rSsahah’  which  is  incorrect.  The  correct  reading, 
of  course,  is  'KshutpipasSpahah  ‘9uddhan5m’  implies  such  persons  as  have  been 
properly  purged  and  as  have  undergone  the  treatment  called  Corrective.  Vide  Section 
XV,  ante.—T. 

3.  Powdered  barley,  half  boiled  in  warm  water,  and  then  made  into  calces  is 
called  ‘KulmSsha.’ — T. 

b.  By  ‘prepared  food’  is  meant  such  food  as  cakes,  &c.  ‘Supya’  means  all  varieties 
of  ‘D51,’  such  as  Phaseolus  radiatus,  Roxb.  ;  Phaseolus  Mungo,  Linn.  ;  &c. —  T. 

t  'Unprepared  soup’  means  such  soup  as  has  been  prepared  with  only  oil  or  Ghee 
and  salt,  but  in  which  no  spices  occur.  ‘Prepared  soup’  is  that  in  which  occur 


37& 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITl. 


Water  mixed  with  powder  of  fried  barley,  if  drunk,  excites  the 
wind,  is  dry,  increases  the  quantity  of  faeces,  and  makes  all  the 
faults  (i.e.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm)  move  in  their  natural  courses. 
It  acts  also  as  a  Tarpana  (by  exercising  a  soothing  and  sedative 
effect  on  the  constitution).  This  drink  immediately  promotes 
strength  also.5,65 

£ali  rice,  fried  and  reduced  to  powder,  is  sweet  in  taste;  dry, 
and  cooling.  It  operates  as  an  inspissant  (by  drying  up  the  fluids 
of  the  body),  alleviates  hemorrhage  caused  by  excitement  of  the 
blood,  thirst,  vomiting,  and  fever.265 

Cakes  made  of  barley,  Yavaka(tf),,  and  Vatya(i5),  alleviate  the 
diseases  known  as  Udava.rtta(c),  Pratifyaya^',,  consumption, 
diabetes,  and  Galagraha.268 

All  these  kinds  of  food  which  go  by  the  name  of  DhSnas(V) 
generally  operate  as  attenuants.  In  consequence  of  being  dry, 
they  carete  thirst,  and  owing  to  their  causing  flatulence,  tfley  are 
difficult  of  digestion.268 

Such  grains  of  barley  as  have  put  forth  sprouts,  £ashkoli 
(cakes  made  of  sesame),  cakes  fried  in  Ghee  and  steeped  in  honey, 
Sapindika  (cakes  made  of  diverse  ingredients  and  of  the  form  of 
round  balls),  cakes  made  of  Phaseolus  radiatus  and  other  varieties 
of  supa,  and  also  those  called  Pupulika,  are  exceedingly  heavy.*268 

oil  or  Ghee,  salt,  and  also  spices  of  every  kind.  Thin  juice  of  flesh  implies  the 
decoction  of  flesh  with  or  without  salt.  It  is  generally  taken  without  oil  or  Ghee, 
having  been  boiled  along  with  it.  ‘Supa,’  as  explained  before,  is  Dal,  i.e.,  the  juice 
of  Phaseolus  radiatus,  P.  Mungo,  $fc.  To  this  day,  certain  varieties  of  Dal  ate 
taken  with  some  kind  of  sour  fruit,  such  as  tamarind,  Dillenia  Indica,  Linn.,  &c. 
Such  sour  Dal  is  lighter  than  Dal  otherwise  prepared. — T. 

a.  Yavaka  is  barley  boiled  in  water  and  then  strained  through  a  fine  cloth. 

5.  Vatya  is  fried  barley  boiled  and  strained. — T. 

c.  Diseases  due  to  suppression  or  retention  of  wind  ;  such  suppression  leads  to 
retention  of  urine  and  fasces,  &c. — T. 

d.  Catarrh  of  the  noise. 

'e.  Food  made  from  fried  barley. — T. 

*  It  is  difficult  to  say  how  Pindika  and  Pupulika  were  made.  The  words  are 
no  longer  current.  All  that  is  known  of  them  is  that  they  were  certain  kinds  of 
cakes. — T. 


The  fol’ owing  publications  relating  to  Hindu  Medical  Science 
may  be  had  at  No.  200,  Cornwallis’  Street, 
Calcutta,  India. 


1.  Charaka-Samhiia  in  original,  with  Chakrapanidatta’s  Com¬ 
mentary  ;  edited  by  Pandit  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna 
(published  in  Devanagara  character  in  successive  fascicules). 
Price  Rs.  20  in  advance. 

2.  Susruta-Samhita  (in  original)  with  Uahlanacharya’s  com¬ 
mentary,  edited  by  Pandit  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna 
(published  in  Devanagara  character  in  successive  fasci¬ 
cules).  Price  Rs.  19  in  advance. 

Bengali  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  with  the  original 
xt  (complete)  in  the  Bengali  character.  Price  Rs.  12. 

Iindi  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive  fasci- 
'  Price  Rs.  16  in  advance. 

translation  of  Susruta-Samhita  (published  in  suc- 
'  fascicules).  Price  Rs.  10  in  advance. 

’i  translation  of  Ditto  (published  in  successive  fasci. 

. s) .  price  Rs.  .15  in  advance. 

7.  C h Hits  A -Sammilan i,  (a  monthly  medical  journal  in  Ben¬ 
gali).  Subscription  in  advance  for  one  year  Rs.  3-6  ;  for 
the  poorer  classes,  Rs.  2-6.  (Back  volumes  for  seven  years 
may  be  had  for  Rs.  21,  'or  Rs.  3  for  each  volume  embracing 
12  numbers.)  : 


NOTICE. 


The  English  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  will  be  issued  in  successive 
fascicules  of  four  forms,  Royal  Octavo,  each  ;  1 2  fascicules  will  be  issued 
every  year.  Under  favourable  circumstances,  the  number  of  fascicules  or 
the  number  of  forms  in  each  fascicule  may  be  increased.  For  subscribers 
in  India,  paying  in  advance,  the  charge  is  Rs.  32  for  the  whole  work.  For 
subscribers  in  Europe  and  America,  the  charge  is  ^3  in  advance,  post  free. 
The  price  for  each  part  is  one  Rupee.  The  arrear  rate  is  Rs.  40  (in  India) 
payable  (if  subscribers  wish)  in  instalments  of  Rs.  10  each.  Remittances 
to  be  made  to  the  Publisher,  200,  Cornwallis’  Street,  Calcutta,  by  drafts  on 
Indian  Banks  or  Postal  money-orders. 


OPINIONS. 

(  From  Dr.  D.  Hooper,  F.  I.  C.,  Government  Quinologist ,  Mussuri ). 

W4.LNUT  Grove,  Mussuri,  N.  W.  P. 

"  My  dear  Sir, — I  have  received  the  English  translation  of  Charaka,  arid 
I  must  apologize  for  not  acknowledging  it  before.  I  have  pleasure  in  sending 
you  a  Currency  Note  for  Rs.  *  *  *  towards  the  expenses  connected 

with  the  undertaking  of  translating  and  publishing  this  ancient  Sanskrit  work. 
I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  portions  of  the  book  already  received,  and 
it  is  very  interesting  to  know  how  the  Hindus  studied  and  practised  Medicine  in 
the  olden  time.  The  plants,  mentioned  in  the  book,  are  most  of  them  known  to 
me,  and  I  have  been  engaged  for  the  last  five  years  in  examining  some  of  them 
chemically  *  *  * 

“  Your  work  will  ever  be  a  monument  of  industry  and  research  and  appre¬ 
ciated  by  all.  who  study  the  history  of  Medicine. 

I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  faithfully, 

D.  Hooper,  F.  I.  C.,  ■' 

Government  Quinologist. ” 

(  From  Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson,  the  great  Sanskrit  and  Zend 
Scholar,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A. ) 

"Dear  Sir, — Part  XII  of  your  'Charaka  Samhita’  I  have  heartily  welcomed. 

and  I  watch  with  pleasure  the  steady  advance  your  work  is  making.  1  can  well 

imagine  the  heavy  labour  such  a  task  must  entail.  Believe  me,  you  have  my 
hearty  encouragement  and  best  wishes  as  well  as  always  my  thanks  for  your  very 
kind  thought  of  me.  It. is  cordially  appreciated. 

Yours  very  sincerely, 

A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.” 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS 

OF 

FASCICUL  US  XIII 


The  concluding  portion  of  Lesson  XXVII  completes  the  twelve  groups, 
of  food  and  drink.  Articles  used  as  Anupana  (*.  e.,  as  vehicles  for  medi¬ 
cines  and  as  drinks  with  which  a  dinner  or  act  of  eating  is  to  be  concluded), 
and  the  heaviness  and  lightness  of  food  and  drink  in  brief,  have  also  been 
treated  of  in  this  Lesson. 

Lesson  XXVIII  is  very  important.  It  deals  with  food  and  drink  more 
particularly  and  shows  what  purposes  are  served  by  the  juice  or  fluid 
into  which  food  is  changed  in  the  stomach  and  what  by  the  refuse  of  food. 

How  the  body  has  food. for  the  source  of  its  growth  is  also  explained. 

Health  and  disease  are  due  to. wholesome  and  unwholesome  food  and 
drink,  as  also  to  causes  unconnected  with  food  and  drink. 

Those  bodies  which  are  particularly  liable  to  disease,  and  those  which 
are  capable  of  resisting  disease  are  indicated. 

Then  are  mentioned  the  different  diseases  which  arise  in  different' 
parts  of  the  body  owing  to  the  excitement  of  Wind,  Bile,  and  Phlegm, 
individually,  or  in  two’s,  or  all  together. 

The  treatment  fs  indicated  in  bricf  of  these  different  diseases.  « 

The  difference  is  set  forth  between  men  that 'are  wise  and  those  that 
are  foolish  or  ignorant. 

Things  which  are  beneficial  for  some  are  not  so  for  others. 

Lesson  XXIX  deals  principally  with  who  are  good  physicians  and  who 
bad  ones.  A  summary  is  given  of  the  contents  of  the  previous  Lessons. 
The  whole  of  this  Lesson  is  exceedingly  important. 

The  observations  on  bad  physicians  or  killers  of  Life  and  helpers  of 
disease  are  very  curious.  Many  of  them  apply  to  the  quacks  of  the 
present  day. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


377 


Those  varieties  of  food  that  are  prepared  by  being  mixed  with 
fruit,  flesh,  fat,  potherbs,  powdered  sesame.-  and  honey,  increase 
the  semen,  improve  strength,  are  heavy,  and  operate  as  tonics.*270 

Vesavara(«)  is  heavy,  cooling,  and  increases  one’s  stock  of 
strength. 

Cakes  prepared  with  milk  and  the  juice  of  the  sugar-cane  are 
heavy,  soothing  and  sedative,  and  increase  the  vital  seed.271 

Those  kinds  of  food  that  are  prepared  with  treacle,  sesame, 
milk,  honey,  and  sugar,  increase  the  vital  seed,  act  as  tonics,  and 
are  exceedingly  heavy.272 

Food  made  of  wheat  and  prepared  with  oil  and  Ghee,  or  boiled 
or  fried  in  oil  and  Ghee,  is  possessed  of  diverse  virtues.  It  is 
heavy,  soothing  and  sedative,  increases  the  vital  seed,  and 
promotes  cheerfulness. 

Cakes  made  of  wheat,  if  prepared  in  a  particular  way,  become 
light  of  digestion-t 

Dhana,  Parpata,  and  Pupa  and  other  food  of  the  same  kind, 
should  be  prescribed  after  ascertainment  (of  their  virtues). J273-7* 

Prithuka(5)  is  heavy.  A  little  of  it  may  be  taken,  after  frying 
it  first. 

That  variety  of  it  which  is  made  of  barley  causes  heaviness  of 
the  stomach  and  suppresses  urine  and  faeces  before  it  can  be 
digested. 

If  mixed  with  husk  or  chaff,  it  purges  the  intestines  (without 
producing  watery  motions). §27S 


*  ‘Palala’  is  powdered  sesame. — T. 

a.  A  kind  of  food  made  of  rice  or  barley  or  wheat  and  flesh  and  spices  of  diverse 
kinds.— T. 

f  'If  prepared  in  a  particular  way,’  i.e ,  if  properly  corrected.  The  Commentators 
observe  that  if  wheat  cakes  are  cooked  with  heat  applied  on  every  side,  they  become 
light. — T. 

f  These,  though  ordinarily  heavy,  may  become  light  in  consequence  of  especial 
methods  of  preparation.  Hence,  in  prescribing  them,  the  physician  should  be  guided 
by  the  method  of  their  preparation. — T. 

f  ‘Prithuka’  is  ordinarily  known  by  the  name  of  Chida.  Paddy  is  first  boiled. 
It  is  then  fried  a  little  and  then  flattened  with  the  aid  of  the  husking  apparatus. 
Sometimes,  again,  unripe  paddy  is  brought  from  the  fields  and  then  flattened  into 
Chida.  The  latter  variety  is  regarded  lighter,  and  is  very  agreeable. — T. 

48 


378 


CHA  RA  KA  -SA  MHI TA. 


Food  prepared  from  the  different  varieties  of  Supya  {i.e., 
Phaseolus  radiatus,  Phaseolus  Mungo,  and  other  Dais),  changed 
from  their  natural  state  {i.e.,  fried,  &c.),  and  food  prepared  from 
£uka  paddy  changed  from  its  natural  state,  excite  the  wind,  and 
are  dry,  and  cooling. 

Mixed  with  pungent  things,  and  oil,  and  salt,  a  little  only  of 
such  food  should  be  taken.*276 

The  above  varieties  of  food,  when  they  happen  to  be  gross  and 
hard  and  are  cooked  in  mild  heat  (or,  not  cooked  properly),  become 
heavy  of  digestion. 

When  cooked  in  strong  heat,  they  conduce  to  growth  of  body 
and  strength. f277 

The  admixture  of  articles,  their  correction,  their  measure,  and 
dissociation  or  separateness,  in  respect  of  food,  should  be  prescrib¬ 
ed  after  ascertainment  of  the  heaviness  or  lightness  of  each.J278 

The  curds  called  Rasala(#)  promote  nutrition  and  corpulency, 
increase  the  vital  seed,  are  oily,  act  as  tonics,  and  cause  relish 
for  food. 

Curds  mixed  with  raw  sugar  oilify  the  system,  are  soothing  and 
sedative,  promote  cheerfulness  and  relish,  and  alleviate  wind.279 

Sherbets  prepared  from  Draksha(3),  Kharjjura(c),  and  Kola(af), 
are  heavy  and  cause  a  sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  .  stomach  and 
lead  to  supression  of  urine  and  faeces. 

*  ‘SupySnnavikritah’  means  ‘Supya-vikritaV  and  ‘Anna-vikritS.’  The  former 
implies'the  different  varieties  of  Phaseoli,  oats,  &c.,  in  a  fried  state  ;  the  latter,  Cuka 
paddy  in  a  fried  state.  To  this  day,  these  are  taken  with  salt,  oil,  and  red  pepper. — T. 

t  I  follow  GangSdhara  in  rendering  this  verse.  He  takes  it  as  applying  to 
‘SupyftnnavikritSh.’  It  would  not  be  wrong  to  take  it,  however,  as  applying  to  other 
articles  that  are  gross  and  hard.  If  mildly  cooked,  they  become  heavy.  If  cooked 
in  strong  heat,  they  become  beneficial. — T. 

|  What  is  stated  here  is  this :  Food  frequently  consists  of  diverse  articles. 
What  articles  should  be  combined,  how  they  should  be  corrected  or  neutralised,  what 
should  be  the  measure  of  each,  and,  lastly,  what  articles  should  be  taken  separately  or 
without  admixture,  should  all  be  prescribed  after  a  careful  ascertainment  of  the 
heaviness  or  lightness  of  each  article. — T. 

a.  Curds  made  fragrant  by  admixture  are  called  RasalS. — T. 

b.  Vitis  Vinifera,  Linn.;  Uvce  passes. 

c.  Phcenix  Sylvestris,  Koxb.  ;  the  wild  date  palm. 

d.  Zieyphus  jujuba,  LamTi. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


379 


Sherbets  made  also  of  Parushakas(tf),  of  honey,  and  of  every 
variety  of  article  manufactured  from  modification  of  the  (juice  of 
the)  sugar-cane,  are  possessed  of  the  same  virtues.280 

By  admixture  with  articles  that  are  pungent  or  sour,  these 
sherbets  come  to  be  regarded  as  entirely  different  objects. 

Ascertaining  the  measure  of  the  articles  used,  the  virtues  and 
effects  of  these  (diverse)  sherbets  are  to  be  declared.281 

The  drink  called  Ragash?dava(3),  being  mixed  with  what  is 
pungent,  sour,  sweet,  and  saline,  is  light,  becomes  agreeable  to  the 
taste,  promotes  cheerfulness,  excites  the  appetite,  and  causes  a 
relish  for  food.282 

Semi-liquid  pickles  made  of  Amra  ( Mangifera  Indica,  Linn ) 
and  Amalaka  (Phyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn.)  promote  nutrition 
and  corpulency,  increase  strength,  create  relish  for  food,  and  are 
soothing  and  sedative.  They  are  so,  it  is  said,  because  of  their 
oiliness,  sweetness  in  taste,  and  heaviness.283 

Ascertaining  their  admixture,  correction,  and  measure  of  the  in¬ 
gredients  used,  should  the  virtues  and  effects  of  each  variety  of 
pickles  be  declared.584 

£ukta(c),  alleviates  hemorrhage  caused  by  excitement  of  bile, 
and  causes  the  expectoration  of  phlegm.  It  makes  the  wind  move 
in  its  natural  course.  When  bulbous  roots,  roots,  and  fruits  are 
soaked  in  it,  it  takes  the  virtues  of  what  is  thus  soaked  in  it.. 
Thus  prepared,  it  should  be  known  by  the  name  of  Asuta.285 

£indaki(«Q,  other  kinds  of  I_suta(,?),  and  that  which  he- 


a.  Gremia  Asiatica,  Linn. 

5.  Gangadhara  cites  the  following  verse  for  explaining  the  ingredients  of  R&ga- 
shadava  : — “ Khathitanlu  gudopelam  sahdkaraphalam  navam,  Tilanagara  samyuktam 
vijneyo  Ragashadavah.  The  meaning  is,  a  drink  made  of  frayed  treacle,  raw 
mangoes,  sesame  seeds,  and  Cyperus  partenuis  of  Roxburgh. — T. 

c.  An  acid  preparation  made  from  fruits  and  roots. — T. 

d.  Cindaki  is  defined  to  be  Rajiha  yuktaih  syan  muldkadaladravaih,  Sarshapa. 
sw  dr  as a irv [ip i  falipishtdkasamyaktaih.  This  implies  that  the  food  so  called  is 
prepared  with  the  larger  variety  of  mustard  seeds  called  Rajika,  and  garden  radish, 
and  plaintains  liquified  by  some  means,  or  with  mustard  oil.  The  principal  in¬ 
gredient  must  be  cakes  of  Cali  rice. — T. 

e.  As  explained  in  the  previous  Verse,  Asuta  is  KSnji  or  sour  gruel  of  rice  in 
which  has  been  cast  fruits  and  roots. — T. 


380 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHI TA. 


comes  sour  through  age,  create  a  relish  for  food  and  are 
light  * 

The  physician  should  thus  know  that  these  eleven  (separate) 
kinds  (of  food)  are  included  in  the  Group  of  Prepared  food.283 

Thus  ends  the  Group  of  Prepared  food. 

The  Group  of  Oils. 

In  subsidiary  taste,  the  oil  (of  sesame)  is  astringent.  It  is 
sweet,  capable  of  penetrating  into  even  the  minute  nerves  of  the 
body,  and  hot.  It  operates  as  an  aphrodisiac,  enhances  the  bile, 
retains  both  faeces  and  urine,  and  does  not  increase  the  phlegm.28' 

It  is  the  foremost  of  all  things  that  are  destructive  of  the  wind.  It 
is  a  tonic  ;  it  improves  the  skin,  memory  and  intelligence,  and  the 
digestive  fire. 

If  improved  by  admixture  with  other  articles,  the  oil  of  sesame 
is  regarded  as  capable  of  alleviating  all  diseases. t283 

Through  use  of  oil,  Daitya  chiefs,  in  days  of  old,  transcended 
decrepitude  and  change,  and  became  capable  of  bearing  great 
fatigue  and  putting  forth  great  might  in  battle.283 

The  oil  of  Eranda  (Ricinus  communis ,  Linn.)  is  sweet  in  taste, 
heavy,  and  increases  phlegm,  and  is  highly  efficacious  in  alleviat¬ 
ing:  leprosy,  abdominal  tumours,  thoracic  diseases,  and  chronic 
fevers.- 

The  oil  of  mustard  seeds  is  pungent  and  hot  and  injures  blood 
and  bile  ;  and  destroys  phlegm,  the  vital  seed,  and  the  wind,  and 
alleviates  itches  and  urticaria  evanida.231 

The  oil  of  Piyala  seeds  (Buchanania  latifolia ,  Roxb)  is  sweet, 
heavy,  and  increases  phlegm.  In  consequence  of  its  not  being 
very  hot,  it  is  beneficial  in  excitements  of  wind  and  bile.232 

The  oil  of  Atasi  (Linnm  usitatissimum,  Linn.)  is  sweet  and 
sour  j  it  is  pungent  in  assimilation.  In  energy  it  is  hot.  It  is 

*  ‘Kalamla’  is  something  that  has  become  sour  through  age  and  not  anything 
that  is  naturally  sour,  or  sour  in  a  state  of  freshness.— T. 

f  Like  Ghee,  the  oil  of  sesame  has  the  capacity  of  receiving  the  virtues  of 
articles  steeped  in  it  for  sometime.  The  steeping  of  articles  for  this  purpose  is 
the  principal  kind  of  'Samskara'  (correction  or  improvement)  to  which  oil  is 
subjected. — T. 


CH A  R  A  KA  -SAM  HIT  A.  381 

beneficial  in  ( excitements  of  )  wind  and  it  excites  bilious 
hemorrhage.298 

The  oil  of  Kusumbha  (Carthamus  tinctorius,  Linn.)  is  hot. 
In  assimilation  it  is  pungent.  It  is  heavy  and  produces,  in 
especial,  a  burning  sensation  of  the  skin.  It  is  capable  of  exciting 
all  diseases.294 

The  other  oils  made  from  ftuits,  which  are  used  in  connection 
with  food,  should,  in  respect  of  their  qualities  and  effects,  be 
declared  as  similar  to  the  fruits  from  which  they  are  made.295 

Serum  and  marrow  are  sweet,  promote  nutrition,  increase  the 
vital  seed,  and  act  as  tonics.  In  respect,  again,  of  their  cooling 
and  heating  qualities,  serum  and  marrow  should  be  declared  as 
conformable  to  the  animals  to  which  they  belong.*298 

Vi?wabhesaja  (or  dry  ginger)  is  oily,  excites  the  appetite,  in¬ 
creases  the  vital  seed,  is  hot,  and  destructive  of  wind  and  phlegm, 
and  sweet  in  assimilation,  and  promotes  cheerfulness  and  adds 
relish  to  food.297 

Pippali  (Piper  longutn ,  Linn. ;  syn.  Chavica  Roxburghii,) 
when  juicy,  provokes  the  phlegm,  is  sweet  in  taste,  heavy,  and  oily. 

When  dry,  it  is  regarded  as  destructive  of  phlegm  and  wind, 
pungent  and  hot,  and  capable  of  increasing  the  vital  seed.293 

Maricha  ( Piper  nigrum,  Linn.)  is  not  much  hot.  It  does  not 
increase  the  vital  seed.  It  is  light  and  adds  relish  to  food.  In 
consequence  of  its  capacity  to  remove  adherent  phlegm  and  other 
matters,  and  of  drying  them,  it  promotes  the  appetite  and  subdues 
phlegm  and  wind.f299 

Hingu  (Ferula  Assafcedita,  Linn.)  is  destructive  of  wind  and 
phlegm  and  retention  of  faeces,  pungent  and  hot,  provocative  of 
the  appetite,  and  light.  It  should  also  be  known  as  capable  of 
alleviating  sharp  deep-seated  pains  and  operating  as  a  Pachana 
and  adding  relish  to  food.300 


*  The  sense  is  that  serum  and  marrow,  in  respect  of  these  two  qualities,  follow 
the  meat  of  the  animals  from  which  they  are  taken.  If  the  meat  be  heating,  the 
serum  and  marrow  also  will  be  so.  If  it  be  cool,  these  also  will  be  cool. — T. 

t  Chhedanas  are  medicines  which  remove  by  force  adherent  phlegm  and  bad 
humours  ;  emetics,  expectorants,  caustics,  errhines,  &c.,  probably  come  under  it. — T. 


382 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  M HIT  A. 


Saindhava  (rock)  salt  is  the  foremost  of  all  salts.  It  adds  relish 
to  food  and  excites  the  appetite.  It  promotes  cheerfulness, 
strengthens  the  vision,  is  not  pungent,  is  destructive  of  all  the  three 
faults,  and  endued  with  a  sweet  taste.301 

Sauvarchala  salt,  in  consequence  of  the  fineness  of  its  grains, 
its  heat-producing  capacity,  its  lightness,  and  its  aromatic  quality, 
is  capable  of  adding  relish  to  food,  and  alleviating  cases  of  reten¬ 
tion  of  faeces.  It  further  promotes  cheerfulness  and  alleviates 
nausea  and  vomiting.*802 

Vit  salt,  in  consequence  of  its  keenness  and  heat-producing 
and  aphorodisiac  qualities,  promotes  the  appetite,  alleviates  sharp, 
deep-seated  pains,  and  causes  the  wind  in  both  the  upper  and  the 
lower  parts  of  the  body  to  move  in  its  usual  or  ordinary  course.f308 

Audbhid  salt  is  bitter  and  pungent  and  alkaline.  It  is  keen, 
and  operates  as  an  expectorant. J  804 

t  The  following  extract  Irom  Li.  C.  Dutt's  Materia  Medico,  of  the  Hindus,  p.  85, 
may  be  read  with  interest.  "Souvarchala  called  Souchala  or  Ka.lanim.dk  in  Hindu¬ 
stan  is  said  to  be  aromatic,  agreeable  and  digestive,  and  useful  in  the  same  sort  of 
cases  as  Vit-lavana.  It  is  described  in  the  report  on  the  Punjab  Products  as  a  dark- 
colored  salt  said  to  be  made  by  dissolving  common  salt  in  a  solution  of  ‘SSjimati’ 
(crude  soda)  and  evaporating  it ;  this  salt  contains  Chloride  of  sodium,  sulphate  of 
soda,  caustic  soda,  and  a  little  sulphate  of  sodium,  but  no  carbonate  of  soda.’  Sonchal 
salt  is  not  available  in  the  drug  shops  of  Calcutta.  Some  Bengali  physicians  give 
this  name  to  a  crystalline  form  of  rock  salt,  but  Up-country  physicians  always 
translate  Sauvarchala  as  Sonchal  or  Kalanimak." — 7'. 

t  "Vit-lavan  occurs  in  dark-red  shining  granules  somewhat  resembling  coarsely 
powdered  lac  in  appearance.  It  has  a  mild,  saline  and  somewhat  nauseous  taste. 
Dr.  Fleming  says  that  ‘the  following  process  for  making  this  salt  was  communicated 
by  a  native  druggist  to  Mr.  Turnbull  at  Mirzapore  and  was  actually  performed  in  his 
presence.  Fifty-six  pounds  of  Sambar  salt  are  mixed  with  twenty  ounces  of  dried 
aonlas  (Emblic  myrobalans).  One  fourth  of  these  materials  is  put  into  a  round 
earthen  pot  with  a  narrow  mouth,  which  is  put  in  a  fire-place  made  of  clay.  The 
fire-place  has  a  hole  at  the  bottom  for  introducing  the  fire-wood.  After  the  fire  has 
been  lighted  about  an  hour,  and  the  materials,  in  the  pot,  appear  to  be  heated,  the 
rest  of  the  materials  is  added  by  degrees.  The  whole  is  then  exposed  to  a  strong  red 
heat  for  about  six  hours.  The  fire  is  then  allowed  ty  die  away,  and  the  pot  to  cool, 
which,  upon  being  broken,  is  found  to  contain  about  forty-eight  pounds  of  cala-nimak 
or  hit-lavan.'  ’’ — U.  C.  Dutt's  Mat.  Med.  of  the  Hindus,  p.p.  84-85. 

£  “ Audbhid ,  that  is,  produced  of  itself  from  the  earth,  is  the  name  applied  to  a 

salt  produced  as  an  efflorescence  on  reh  lands.  The  salt  is  called  reh  or  kalar  in 
the  vernacular.  It  consists  principally  of  sulphate  of  soda  with  a  little  choride  of 
sodium,  and  is  described  as  alkaline,  bitter,  pungent,  and  nauseating.  It  is  said  to 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  383 

Kala  salt  has  no  smell.  Its  qualities  are  exactly  those  that 
belong  to  Sauvarchala.805 

Samudraka  salt  is  sweet.*  Panfuja  is  bitter  and  pungent: t306 

All  varieties  of  salt  add  relish  to  food,  aid  in  digestion,  cause 
secretions,  and  alleviate  the  wind.807 

Yava9uka  (alkaline  ashes  of  the  stalks  of  barley)  cures  diseases 
of  the  thorax,  anaemia  and  jaundice,  disorders  of  the  Grahani, 
enlargement  of  the  spleen,  epistasis  or  suppression  of  urine,  inflam¬ 
mation  of  the  throat  leading  to  hoarseness  or  suspension  of  the 
voice,  and  consumption  due  to  excitement  of  phlegm,  and  piles.808 

All  varieties  of  alkaline  ashes  are  keen,  hot,  light,  dry,  produc¬ 
tive  of  secretions,  capable  of  aiding  digestion,  boring,  and  caustic. 
They  are,  besides,  capable  of  provoking  the  appetite,  and  of 
separating  by  force  all  kinds  of  adherent  matter  and  bad  humours. 
They  are  like  fire  in  energy.809 

Karavi>),  Kunchika(£),  Ajaji(c),  Kavari(^),  Dhanya(^),  and 
Tumvuru(y),  add  relish  to  food,  excite  the  appetite,  and  destroy 
wind,  phlegm,  and  bad  odours. 

Nothing  can  be  laid  down  regarding  the  measure  in  which 
articles  that  are  regarded  fit  for  eating  should  be  mixed.310 

Thus  ends  the  twelfth  Group  of  objects  used  as  food. 


be  so  abundant  in  some  parts  of  the  Punjab  as  to  render  the  soil  quite  barren.  Some 
physicians  or  rather  writers  substitute  this  article  for  Sambar  salt  in  the  composition 
of  Pancha-lavana  or  the  five  salts.” — U.  C.  Dutl’s  Mat.  Med.  of  the  Hindus,  p.  84. 

*  “Samudra  literally  means  produced  from  the  sea.  The  term  is  applied  to 
sun-dried  sea-salt,  manufactured  in  the  Madras  Presidency.  It  is  called  Karkach  in 
the  vernacular.  Orthodox  natives  who  consfder  common  salt  as  impure  from  the 
circumstance  of  its  having  undergone  the  process  of  boiling,  and  who  take  only  rock 
salt,  substitute  Karkach  for  rock  salt,  if  the  latter  is  not  available.” — U.  C.  Dutt’s 
Mat.  Med.  of  the  Hindus,  p.  84: 

t  “Pansuja  or  Ushasuta  literally  means  salt  manufactured  from  saline  earth. 
Panga  or  common  salt,  manufactured  from  earth  impregnated  with  salt  water,  would 
come  under  this  head.” — U.  C.  Dutt’s  Mad.  Met.  of  the  Hindus. 

a.  A  variety  of  Nigella  Saliva,  Linn.  It  is  very  fine. 

5.  A  variety  of  Nigella  Sativa.  It  is  thick  and  gross. 

c.  A  variety  of  Cuminum  Cyminum,  Linn.  It  is  very  fine. 

d.  A  variety  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan. 

e.  Coriandrum  Sativum,  Linn. 

f.  Zanthoxylum  alatum,  Roxb. 


3^4 


CIJ A  RA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


£uka  paddy  and  £ami  paddy,  when  one  year  old,  is  praised. 
When  very  old,  they  generally  become  dry ;  when  new,  they 
generally  become  heavy.811 

Amongst  all  grain  of  the  paddy  species,  those  varieties  which 
grow  or  ripen  quickly,  are  regarded  very  light. 

Freed  from  husk  and  fried  under  proper  regulations,  all  grain 
which  falls  under  the  class  called  Supya  is  light  and  easily 
digestible.81® 

The  flesh  of  animals  that  are  dead,  or  emaciated,  or  unclean,  or 
old,  or  too  young,  or  slain  with  poison,  or  which  have  been  brought 
up  in  habitats  other  than  their  own,  or  which  have  been  assailed  by 
beasts  of  prey  or  snakes,  should  be  avoided.*813 

Flesh  that  is  otherwise  is  beneficial,  promotes  nutrition  and 
bulk  of  body,  and  increases  strength.814 

The  juice  of  (good)  meat  is  gratifying  to  all  creatures,  and 
highly  conducive  to  cheerfulness. 

In  the  case  of  those  that  are  being  emaciated,  or  that  are  con- 
valascent,  or  that  are  weak  and  wasted,  or  whose  vital  seed  is 
weak,  or  that  are  desirous  of  strength  and  complexion,  the  juice 
of  meat  should  be  regarded  as  Nectar. 

Such  juice,  prescribed  according  to  the  requirements  of  each 
individual  disease,  is  capable  of  alleviating  every  disease.  It 
improves  the  voice  and  conduces  to  the  strength  of  the  aged  and 
of  the  intellect  as  well  as  of  the  senses,  and  lengthens  one’s  period 
of  life. 

Those  that  undergo  physical  exercise  every  day,  or  indulge  in 
sexual  association  every  day,  or  drink  alcoholic  spirits  every  day, 
by  taking  meat  every  day,  will  not  feel  either  weak  or  afflicted.615-317 

*  The  correct  reading  of  the  first  line  of  313  is  ‘Krifamamedhyam’  and  not 
‘Kecatimedhyam.’  The  flesh  of  dead  animals  must,  of  course,  be  eschewed  ;  dead 
implies  dead  in  course  of  nature,  of  disease,  &c.  ‘Amedhyam’  is  ‘not  allowable  for 
sacrifice’  ;  hence,  unclean.  ‘Slain  with  poison,’  i.e.,  by  the  aid  of  poisoned  food  or 
envenomed  arrows.  ‘Agocharabhritam’  is  reared  in  elements  or  places  which  are 
not  their  own  by  nature ;  such  as  amphibious  animals  reared  on  land  exclusively. 
‘Assailed  by  beasts  of  prey  or  snakes  ;’  beasts  of  prey  are  believed  to  have  poison. 
Hence,  when  a  goat  or  sheep  or  hare  has  escaped,  with  wounds,  from  the  clutches 
of  a  tiger  or  panther  or  jackal  or  dog, or  from  the  fangs  of  a  snake,  its  meat  should 
be  eschewed. — T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


3S5 


Such  potherbs  as  are  afflicted  by  worms  and  wind  and  the  sun, 
as  are  dry  or  faded,  as  do  not  belong  to  the  season,  as  are  boiled 
without  using  oil  or  Ghee,  and  as  have  not  the  moisture  extracted 
from  them  after  boiling,  should  be  avoided.318 

Flesh  that  is  old,  or  that  is  stained  by  worms,  or  beasts  of  prey, 
or  cold  or  heat,  or  that  is  obtained  from  animals  slain  untimely 
or  in  countries'  which  are  not  their  habitat,  or  that  is  putrid, 
produces  consequences  that  are  baneful.813 

As  regards  Greens,  the  directions  are  the  same  as  in  the  case 
of  Potherbs.  The  operations  of  correction,  however,  do  not  apply 
to  them.* 

As. regards  the  kinds  of  wines,  water,  milk,  and  others  (that 
should  or  should  not  be  taken),  the  conclusions  occur  under  their 
respective  heads.810 

That  fluid  food  or  drink  should  be  taken  subsequently  which  in 
■qualities  is  the  reverse  of  the  food  taken  previously.  It  should  be 
remembered,  however,  that  the  subsequent  fluid  food  should  not  be 
hostile  to  the  upholding  ingredients  of  the  body.f821 

Four  and  eighty  varieties  of  wines  have  been  laid  down  before. 

As  regards  water,  one  should  first  examine  whether  it  is  drink-, 
■able  or  otherwise.  If  drunk  after  such  examination,  then  only  it 
proves  beneficial. 322 


*  In  318  it  is  laid  down  that  potherbs,  when  they  happen  to  be  afflicted  by  worms, 
■&c.,  should  be  avoided.  Further,  they  should  never  be  taken  unless  the  juice  has 
■been  pressed  out  of  them  after  boiling,  and  then  fried  in  oil  or  Ghee.  What  is  said 
here  is  that  Greens  must  be  avoided  when  they  happen  to  be  of  the  same  kind.  They 
should  not,  however,  be  subjected  to  the  same  operation  as  potherbs,  i.e..  their  juice 
should  not  be  pressed  out. — T.  ;  v 

t  The  sense  is  this  <  having  taken  food  possessed  of  hot  qualities,  one  should;  {jtl 
take  fluid  food  or  drink  that  is  cooling;  having  taken  what  is  sour,  one  should  takfe  ■>& 
what  is  sweet.  In  thus  adjusting  one's  courses  of  eating  and  drinks,  one.  should,: 
however,  take  care  that  one  does  not  take  what  is  hostile  to  one’s  constitution.  The 
choice,  therefore,  of  flui,d  food  or  drink  is  regulated  by  two  rules.  The  first  is 
that  it  should  be  the  reverse  in  qualities  to  that  taken  .before,  and  tnendtishould 
not  be  hostile  to  the  upholding  ingredients  of  the  constitution.  The  word  ‘Anupana,’ 
it  should  be  noted,  implies  not  only  fluid  food  or  drink  that  is  taken  subsequently, 

— that  is,  at  the  conclusion  of  a  course  of  eating, — but  also  such  fluids  as  are  used  as 
vehicles  of  medicines. — T.  . 

49 


386 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  MH1 TA. 


As  regards  such  subsequent  fluid  food  or  drink,  that  which  is  oily 
and  hot  is  praised  in  excitements  of  the  wind  ;  that  which  is  sweet 
and  cooling  is  praised  in  excitements  of  the  bile  ;  that  which  is 
dry  and  hot  is  praised  in  excitements  of  the  phlegm  ;  while  ire 
emaciation  and  waste,  the  juice  of  meat  is  highly  beneficial.*28 

Unto  men  exhausted  by  fast,  or  walking,  or  loud  talking,  or 
.sexual  indulgence,  or  exposure  to  wind,  or  the  sun,  or  exercise,  milk 
is  the  proper  drink  as  Anupana.  It  operates  as  nectar  itself.821 

Wine  as  an  Anupana  is  praised  for  the  nourishment  of  ema¬ 
ciated  or  wasted  persons. 

For  reducing  the  bulk  of  overgrown  persons,  honey  mixed  with 
water  is  regarded  as  a  beneficial  Anupana. m 

For  persons  whose  digestive  fire  is  weak,  or  who  are  afflicted 
with  insomnia,  or  who  are  afflicted  by  lassitude  or  grief  or  fear  or 
exhaustion,  as  also  for  those  who  are  addicted  to  wine  and  meat, 
wine  is  applauded  as  a  proper  Anupana.328 

I  shall  now  speak  of  the  effects  of  Anupana .* 

Anupanas- exercise  a  sedative  and  nutritive  influence. 

They  make  the  mind  cheerful.  They  conduce  to  increase  of 
energy. 

They  produce  the  sensation  of  gratification  after  one  has  eaten. f 

They  moisten  what  is  eaten  (and  thereby  assist  at  digestion). 

They  disjoin  united  food.J 

They  soften  the  food  in  the  stomach. 

They  cause  the  impurities  to  separate  themselves  from  the  food 
in  the  stomach.  They  cause  the  food  to  be  digested. 

They  contribute  to  that  sensation  of  pleasure  which  arises  after 
eating. 

*  The  word  'AnupHna,’  as  already  explained,  is  used  in  two  senses  in  Hindi* 
medicine.  It  implies  a  fluid  or  semi-fluid  vehicle  in  which  medicine  is  administered, 
or  it  means  any  fluid  food  or  drink  taken  at  the  conclusion  of  a  course  of  eating. 
What  should  be  particularly  remembered  is  that  the  context  determines  the  sense  in 
which  it  ts4x»  be  taken. — T. 

t  Ga.nglidhara  explains  that  the  original  means  that  these  drinks  cause  the  food 
to  be  assimilated  with  the  body. — T. 

f  Probably,  melt  or  dissolve  solidified  food,  or  food  existing  in  a  united  mass 
within  the  stomach. — T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA.  387 


They  cause  the  food  to  extend  its  effects  to  all  parts  of  the 
body,*™ 


(  Here  occur  some  verses. ) 

An  Anup*na  that  is  suitable  is  certainly  beneficial.  It  soon 
exercises  a  sedative  and  nutritive  influence  on  the  body.  It  causes 
easy  digestion  of  the  food  that  has  been  eaten.  It  conduces  to 
strength  and  long  life.328 

Those  persons  the  upper  parts  of  whose  bodies  are  afflicted  with 
wind,  those  persons  who  are  afflicted  with  asthma  and  consumption-, 
those  persons  who  are  generally  engaged  in  singing  or  speaking 
aloud  or  reading  aloud,  and  those  who  have  sores  or  wounds  on 
the  chest,  should  not  drink  water  after  having  taken  their  food, 
for,  if  they  drink,  that  water,  remaining  in  their  throat  or  chest, 
will  destroy  the  oily  secretions  of  the  food  previously  taken,  and 
generate  many  faults.323-20 

It  is  not  possible  to  mention  all  objects  in  their  entirety  by 
their  names.  Hence,  a  portion  only  of  such  Anupanas  as  are 
ordinarily  used  (may  be  named). 

As,  of  medicinal  objects  a  few  only  are  capable  of  being  men¬ 
tioned  by  names,  as  of  words  belonging  to  the  languages  of 
different  countries  a  few  only  are  capable  of  being. mentioned,  so 
of  objects  a  few  only  are  capable  of  being  mentioned.  Hence, 
those  objects  (or  Anupanas)  which  are  not  spoken  of  here  should 
be  regarded  as  such  (that  is,  as  inconvenient  to  mention,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  their  multudinous  tale).381-32 

In  the  matter  of  Anupanas,  the  following  things  touching  the 
food  that  has  been  eaten  are  taken  into  consideration,  viz.,  habitat 
or  place  of  living,  the  different  limbs  of  the  body,  the  nature  or 
habits  of  the  animal,  the  ingredients  that  compose  it,  its  acts,  sex, 
size,  the  manner  of. cooking,  and  quantity. f 


*  The  correct  reading  is  'SukhaparinSmitStm  vyav&yitSncha  janayati.’  Some 
texts  have  ‘S.fu'  before  ‘Vyav5.yit3.ncha.’  It  may  or  may  not  be  retained.  ‘VyavSyitSm.’ 
is  explained  by  GangSdhara  as  equivalent  to  ‘AkhiladehavySpitSm.’ — T. 

+  The  sense  is  this  :  in  selecting  the  AnupS.ua  one  should  be  guided  by  the  points- 
noted  in  respect  of  the  animal  whose  flesh  one  has  eaten. — I V. 


charaka-samhitA. 


As  regards  place  of  living,  that  includes  the  circumstance  of 
residence  in  marshy  regions,  in  water,  in  the  sky,  in  arid  deserts, 
and  other  places.  These  should  be  considered  in  respect  of  those 
animals  that  may  be  selected  for  food. 

Those  which  are  born  in  water,  or  in  marshy  regions,  or  those 
which  move  about  in  both  water  and  marshy  regions,  and  all  those 
animals  which  subsist  on  heavy  food,  have  been  regarded  as 
heavy. 

Those  animals  which  subsist  on  light  food,  those  which  are 
born  in  arid  deserts,  and  which  move  about  in  arid  deserts,  are 
regarded  as  light. 883-35 

Among  parts  of  the  body  should  be  reckoned  haunches,  head, 
neck,  and  others.  Heavier  than  the  flesh  of  the  haunch  is  the 
neck.  Heavier  than  the  neck  is  the  flesh  about  the  belly.  Heavier 
than  the  belly  is  the  head.  And  heavier  than  the  head  is  the  flesh 
of  the  feet.886 

The  testes,  the  skin,  the  male  organ  of  generation,  the  hips, 
the  two  divisions  of  the  heart,  the  liver,  the  anus,  are  heavier  (in 
the  order  stated)  than  the  flesh  of  other  parts.  The  marrow  that 
is  within  the  bones  is  heavier  than  these  all.337 

By  nature,  Mudga  (Phaseolus  Mungo,  Linn.)  is  light,  and 
Lavas  and  Kapinjalas  also  are  so.  By  nature,  Masha  ( Phaseolus 
radiatus,  Roxb .)  is  heavy,  and  the  flesh  of  the  boar  and  the 
buffalo  is  so.*338 

Of  the  constituent  ingredients  of  the  body  beginning  with 
blood,  that  which  comes  after  should  be  known  as  heavier  than  that 
which  precedes. f 

From  those  animals  that  are  not  of  active  habits,  those  that  are 
of  active  habits  are  distinguished  (in  point  of  lightness)4389 

*  Lava  is  the  Perdix  ckinensis.  Kapinjala  is  the  Francoline  partridge. 

f  The  order  oE  enumeration  of  the  Dhatus  or  upholding  ingredients  of  the  body 
is  fluids,  blood,  flesh,  fat,  bone,  marrow,  vital  seed,  and  Ojas. — T. 

+  The  second  line  is  complete  by  itself.  It  does  not  run  into  the  next  Verse. 
The  original  'V^ishyante’  simply  implies  'are  distinguished.’  Chakrapani  explains 
that  this  means  that  animals  of  active  habits  are  lighter  than  those  that  are  not  of 

active  habits. — T. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  M  HI  TA. 


389 


When  there  is  community  of  species,- heaviness  attaches  to 
animals  of  the  male  sex,  and  lightness  to  those  of  the  female  sex. 

In  the  same  species,  again,  those  that  are  large-sized  are  heavy  ; 
while  those  that  are  otherwise  are  light.*810 

Through  the  necessary  operations  (of  admixture  'or  cooking),  of 
things  that  are  heavy,  lightness  may  be  brought  about ;  the  reverse 
of  this  may  also  be  induced.  For  example,  the  cases  may  be 
quoted  of  Laja  from  paddy  and  Siddha-p in dika  from  flour  of  fried 
barley. t31t 

When  a  little  is  taken  of  things  that  are  heavy,  that  becomes 
light.  When  much  is  taken  of  things  that  are- light,  that  becomes 
heavy.  In  the  matter  of  the  heaviness  or  lightness  of  things,  it  has 
been  already  pointed  out  that  measure  is  the  cause. if342 

Of  things  that  are  heavy  a  little  should  be  taken.  Of  things  that 
are  light,  as  much  may  be  taken  as  produces  gratification.  Things, 
in  respect  of  their  use  (as  food)  depend  upon  measure.  Measure, 
again,  depends  upon  the  digestive  fire.§843 

Strength,  health,  and  period  of  life,  and  the  life-winds,  are  all 
established  on  the  digestive  fire. 

*  The  correct  reading  is.  ‘Gauravam’  and  not  the  locative  form  'Gaurave.’ 
'Linga'  means-'Jati’  or  species.  Chakrapani  observes  that  this  remark  about  the 
heaviness  of  males  and  the  lightness  of  females  should  be  understood  in  respect  of 
only  quadrupeds  and  not  of  birds  or  fowl.  He  quotes  Harita  in  support.  Chutush- 
padeshu  laghwistri  vihageshu  laghu  pitman.  Further,  Striyagchatushpade  grahyah 
pumdnso  vihageshu  cha. 

It  seems  to  be  unaccountable  why,  when  the  Rishis  declared  the  males  of  quadru¬ 
peds  to  be  heavier  than  females,  the  practice  among  Hindus  has  always  been  to 
prefer  male  animals  to  female  ones  for  slaughter.  The  Mahomedans  slaughter  both 
females  and  males  although  they  prefer  the  former.  Probably,  in  selecting  the. 
male  the  Hindus  were  guided  by  the  desire  of  preserving  the  species.  Destruction 
of  female  animals  may  soon  make  the  species  extinct. — T. 

t  ‘Samskara’  implies  the  processes  of  admixture  or  cooking.  What  is  stated 
here  is  this  :  by  such  processes  things  heavy  may  be  made  light,  as  laja  from  paddy. 
(Laja  is  fried  paddy;  frying  is  the  Samskara  here).  So  things  light  may  be  made 
heavy,  as  flour  of  fried  barley  may  be  converted  into  Siddha-pindikS.— T. 

t  The  reference  is  to  the  lesson  called  “Mara^itiya”  (vide  p.  49  ante)  where 
it  has  been  said  that  articles  of  food  depend  upon  their  measure  for  their  quality  of 
heaviness  or  lightness  as  food. — T. 

§  ‘Tripti’ is  gratification.  One  should  eat  ‘tripti-matram,’  that  is,  to  that  point 
which  produces  ‘gratification’  without  bringing  about  satiety  or  inability  to  act  or 
move  about. — T. 


39° 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHITA. 


With  AnupSnas  as  fuel,  that  fire  blazes  up.  Without  them,  it 
becomes  extinguished.*344 

Generally,  it  is  with  respect  to  those  persons  that  are  of  little 
strength,  that  are  not  of  active  habits,  that  are  in  ill  health,  that 
are  delicate,  or  that  are  nurtured  in  happiness,  that  heaviness  or 
lightness  (in  the  matter  of  food)  is  necessary  to  be  ascertained.845 

With  regard  to  those  that  are  of  blazing  digestive  fires,  that 
are  habituated  to  hard  and  heavy  food,  that  are  devoted  to  active 
work,  that  are  of  large  stomach,  it  is  not  at  all  necessary  to  look 
into  the  question  of  heaviness  or  lightness  (of  food).846 

Man,  reflecting  on  measure  and  time,  with  concentrated  atten¬ 
tion,  should  every  day  pour  beneficial  food  as  libations  on  the 
internal  fire  fed  by  the  fuel  of  Anupana.f847 

That  man  who,  having  established  his  sacrificial  fire,  silently 
recites  every  day  the  syllable  OM,  makes  gifts  (according  to  the 
best  of  his  power),  and  pours  beneficial  food  on  his  internal  fire,848 
unto  that  man  who  is  thus  engaged  in  (achieving)  what  is  for  his 
highest  good  and  who  in  the  matter  of  food  and  drink  is  well 
acquainted  with  the  laws  of  assimilation,  no  diseases  ever  attach 
themselves,  not  even  in  his  future  lives,  for  want  of  cause. t949 

The  man  who  is  habituated  to  beneficial  food  lives  for  six  and 
thirty  thousand  nights  in  perfect  health,  with  soul  under  his  control 
and  winning  the  esteem  of  those  that  are  good  and  pious.850 

(  Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary.  ) 

The  qualities  of  food  and  drink,  and  twelve  principal  Groups 
(of  food  and  drink),  have  thus  been  laid  down. 

*  ‘Ayus’  is  period  of  life.  By  ‘prS.n5h’  is  meant  the  life-winds  called  PiSna, 
Apana,  SamSna,  Udana,  and  Vvana.  These  life-winds  support  the  physical  organism, 
and  when  they  move  in  harmony,  the  result  is  perfect  health  and  vigour. — T. 

f  The  figure  here  is  borrowed  from  the  ritual  of  sacrifice.  Every  good  man 
should  perform  the  daily  sacrifice  of  Homa,  that  is,  pour  libations  of  clean  Ghee  on 
his  sacred  fire  which  is  fed  by  sacred  fuel.  The  digestive  fire  is  the  sacrificial  fire 
within  the  body.  Anupanas  are  the  fuel  which  feed  that  fire.  Upon  that  fire  should 
every  day  be  poured  libations  of  good  food. — T. 

+  ‘AntarSdrite’  is  'in  the  absence  of  cause’ ;  that  is,  of  those  causes  that  bring 
about  diseases.  ‘Bhavinah’  simply  implies  future  (diseases).  Hence  the  meaning  is, 
as  Chakrap5.ni  explains,  that  so  great  is  the  merit  achieved  by  such  a  man  that  not 
even  in  his  future  births  (in  course  of  his  transmigrations)  diseases  ever  eome 
to  him. — T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


39 ! 


(Articles  used  for)  Anupana,  with  their  qualities,  and  heaviness 
and  lightness  (of  food  and  drink)  in  brief,  have  been  spoken  of  in 
this  Lesson  on  the  Ordinances  about  Food  and  Drink. 

The  instructions  laid  down-  should  be  particularly  observed. 

Food  is  said  to  be  the  very  Life  of  all  living  creatures.  The 
whole  world  (of  living  creatures)  pursues  food. 

Clearness  of  complexion,  melodiousness  of  voice,  prolongation 
of  existence,  lustre  of  intelligence,  happiness,  contentment,  growth, 
strength,  memory,  are  all  established  in  Food. 

Whatever  worldly  acts  have  to  be  done  for  the  support  of  life, 
and  whatever  Vedic  (religious)  acts  for  attaining  to  Heaven,  and 
whatever  acts  have  been  laid  down  for  achieving  Empancipation, 
are  all  established  in  Food.*1-1 

Thus  ends  the  seven  and  twentieth  Lesson,  called  the  Ordi¬ 
nances  about  Food  and  Drink,  forming  one  of  the  four  Lessons  on 
Food  and  Drink,  in  the  treatise  of  Agnivefa  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  XXVIII. 

We  shall  next  expound  the  Lesson  on  diverse  kinds  of  Food 
and  Drink. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.f1 

Swallowed,  drunk,  licked,  and  chewed,  diverse  kinds  of  food, 
beneficial  for  a  living  creature,  and  taken  seasonably,  being 
properly  digested  by  their  respective  fires  whose  strength  is  excited 
by  the  internal  fire,  bring  an  accession  of  growth,  strength,  com¬ 
plexion,  happiness,  and  prolongation  of  existence,  to  that  body 
which  is  free  from  sin,  in  which  a  development  into  all  upholding 
ingredients  is  ceaselessly  going  on,  and  in  which  the  action  is 
never  obstructed  of  those  ingredients,  of  heat,  of  wind,  and  of  all 


*  The  Hindu  idea  of  Emancipation  is  a  cessation  of  separate  or  individual  cons¬ 
ciousness  by  its  being  merged  in  the  Supreme  universal  consciousness  of  Brahman  or 
Supreme  Godhead.— T. 

t  ChakrapSni  observes  that  in  the  previous  Lesson  it  has  been  said  that  Food  is 
the  Life  of  living  creatures.  In  this  Lesson,  it  is  the  object  of  the  author  to  explain 
how  Food  is  the  Life  of  living  creatures. — T. 


392  CHARAKA-SAMHITa. 

the  fluicl-curferttS.  Food  does  all  this  by  strengthening  the  physical 
ingredients* 

Having  themselves  for  the  food  upon  which  they  subsist*  those 
ingredients  (thus  supported)  follow'in  the  track  of  health.*4 

From  that,  (viz.,  the  food  thus  taken),  arises  a  juice  which  is 
called  Aharaprasdda  or  food-substance,  as  also  a  Refuse  called 
dregs  or  dross. 

From  the  Refuse  arise  urine,  sweat,  faeces*  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm  ;  as  also  those  excrements  which  have  for  their  sources  the 
ears  and  eyes  and  nose  and  mouth,  the  hair-cells  of  the  body  and 
the  genital  organs,  and  such  limbs  of  the  body  as  hair,  beard, 
bristles,  nails,  &c.t3 

From,  however,  that  juice  which  springs  from  food  grow  the 
fluids,  blood,  flesh,  fat,  bones,  marrow,  vital  seed,  and  that  which 
has  been  called  Ojas ;  as  also  those  substances  that  are  requisite 

*  This  is  a  very  difficult  aphorism  and  Commentators  differ  from  each  other 
in  explaining  it.  Several  propositions  have  been  united  together.  First,  four  kinds 
of  food  are  mentioned,  viz.,  that  which  is  swallowed,  that  which  is  drunk,  that  which 
is  licked,  and  that  which  is  chewed.  It  is  a  rough  classification,  but  very  common 
in  Hindu  medical  and  sacred  books.  Then  come  two  adjectives  ;  the  first  is  ‘beneficial 
to  a  living  creature,’  and  the  second  is  ‘Kalavat’  or  ‘taken  seasonably.’  Bad  food,  or 
even  good  food  taken  unseasonably,  does  not  produce  the  results  mentioned.  ‘Kala’ 
has  reference  both  to  the  time  of  the  year  and  the  age  of  the  person  eating. 

The  theory  is  that  all  food  consists  of  the  five  elements  of  eaith,  water,  air,  light, 
and  space  or  ether.  Each  of  these  has  a  fire  of  its  own.  That  fire  is  excited  by  the 
digestive  fire.  Digestion  or  assimilation  is  the  result  of  the  heat  that  is  in  the  food, 
or  rather,  the  heats  (for  there  are  five  kinds  of  heat  corresponding  with  the  five 
elements  that  compose  the  food)  being  excited  by  the  internal  or  digestive  h  eat  of 
the  stomach. 

The  healthy  body  is  an  organism  in  which  everything  is  ceaselessly  developing 
into  all  the  ‘DhStus’  or  upholding  ingredients,  viz.,  fluids,  blood,  flesh,  fat,  bones, 
marrow,  and  vital  seed.  It  is  also  an  organism  in  which  the  Dhatus,  the  heats,  the 
wind,  and  the  fluid-currents  are  never  obstructed.  The  ingredients  have  themselves 
for  their  food,  i.e.,  blood  is  supported  by  the  fluids  ;  flesh  is  supported  by  the  blood  ; 
and  so  on,  ‘Kevalam’  is  sinless.  The  gist  of  the  whole  passage  is  that  food,  taken  by 
one  possessed  of  a  healthy  body  that  is,  besides,  free  from  sin,  supports  or  maintains- 
one  in  health. — T. 

t  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  food,  going  into  the  stomach,  becomes  dissolved 
into  Substance  and  Refuse.  From  the  Refuse  spring  such  excrements  as  urine,  &c  ; 
such  secretions  as  escape  from  the  eyes,  the  ears,  &c. ;  and  such  elements  as 
wind,  bile,  and  phlegm ;  the  Refuse  also  sustains  such  growths  as  hair,  beard, 
nails,  &c. — T. 


€1-1 A  jR  A  KA -SA  M  HIT  A. 


393 


for  the  functions  of  the  five  senses.  These  latter  are  called  the 
essence  of  the  Dhatus..  From  the  same  source  grow  the  joints  of 
the  body,  the  ligaments,  wings  and  feathers,  and  other  limbs.  All 
these  Dhatus,  called  Refuse  and  Substance,  supported  by  both 
Refuse  and  Substance,  follow  .in  respect  of  their  growth)  their 
respective  measures  according  to  age  (and  the  dimensions  of  the) 
body.*4 

After  the  same  manner,  Fluid  and  Refuse,  existing  according 
to  their  respective  measures,  bring  about  a  harmony  of  Dhatus  in 
a  body  characterised  by  harmonious  Dhatus. 

The  Fluid,  for  bringing  about  health,  generates  a  harmony  of 
those  Dhatus  which  are  called  Substance,  and  which  through 
(diverse)  causes  become  attenuated  or  overgrown,  by  growth  or 
attenuation,  each  of  which  has  food  for  its  root.f 

The  Refuse  operates  similarly  with  respect  to  those  Dhatus 
which  are  called  by  the  name  of  Malas.%s 

*  ‘Panchendriya  dravyani,’  implies  the  substances  that  are  required  for  the  five 
senses  to  discharge  their  functions.  ‘Dhatu’  literally  means  ‘anything  that  holds  or 
supports  the  body.’  Hence,  it  implies  the  juice,  blood,  fiesh,  &c.,  without  which  the 
body  cannot  last.  The  substances  that  help  the  senses  in  discharging  their  respective 
functions  are  also  called  'Dhatu-pra^a  ’a’  or  the  essence  of  the  Dhatus.  The  theory- 
then  is  this  :  food  taken  becomes  transformed  into  food-substance  or  juice,  and  Refuse. 
From  the  former  spring  the  Dh&tus.  The  Dhatus,  again,  produce  some  substance 
which  support  the  senses. — T. 

f  ‘Samadhatoh  asrayasya’  indicates  an  abode  or  body  in  which  all  the  DhStus 
exist  in  a  state  of  harmony.  In  other  words,  what  is  meant  is  a  healthy  body. 
What  is  stated  here,  therefore,  is  this  :  Food  becomes  transformed  into  Juice  and 
Refuse.  These  latter,  existing  according  to  their  respective  measures,  Conduce  to 
harmony  in  respect  of  Dhatus  in  bodies  that  are  healthy  or  in  which  the  Dhatus 
already  exist  in  a  state  of  harmony.  Thus,  food  taken  by  a  diseased  person,  can 
never  conduce  to  a  harmony  of  Di.atus. 

In  the  second  portion  of  the  aphorism  what  is  said  is  this :  through  diverse 
causes,  Dhatus  called  ‘Prasada,’  that  is  those  which  spring  from  the  juice  of  food, 
sometimes  become  attenuated  and  sometimes  overgrown.  The  juice  of  food  newly 
taken  generates  a  harmony  among  the  DhSms  so  attenuated  or  so  overgrown.  The 
result  of  this  is  health.  The  means  by  which  this  is  achieved  is  the  growth  and 
attenuation  of  Dhatus, — growth  in  the  case  of  attenuated  Dhatus  and  attenuation  in 
the  case  of  overgrown  ones.  Such  growth  and  attenuation  have  food  for  their  root, 
i.e.,  they  are  ‘aharamula.’ — T. 

+  ‘Kittancha  malanameva  this  is  elliptical.  The  meaning  is  this  :  when  those 
Dhatus  called  ‘Prasada’  decrease  or  increase,  it  is  ‘rasa’  or  the  juice  of  food  that 

50 


394 


CHA  RAKA  -SA  MHI TA. 


As  regards  the  latter  Dhatus,  viz.,  Malas,  which  have  the  virtue 
of  being  excreted,  when  they  increase  beyond  their  normal 
measure,  being  treated  alternately  by  regiihen  of  cooling  and 
warm  properties,  they  regain  their  position  of  restoratives  of  the 
elements  of  the  body  to  harmony.6 

Of  the  Dhatus  of  both  classes,  viz,  those  called  Malas  and 
those  called  Prasddas,  the  passages  of  motion  are  the  ducts  (of 
the  body. 

Those  ducts,  agreeably  to  their  order,  nourish  the  Dhatus,  each 
its  particular  one. 

Thus,  the  body  has,  for  the  source  of  its  growth,  food  that  is 
swallowed,  drunk,  licked,  and  chewed. 

Diseases  arise  in  the  body.*7 

As  regards  the  body,  particular  administrations  (of  regimen), 
wholesome  or  unwholesome,  become  productive  of  good  or  evil  ' 
consequences.8 

Unto  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  who  said  so,  Agnivega  said 
these  words. 

It  is  seen,  O  illustrious  one,  that  men  who  take  even  such  food 
as  has  been  called  wholesome,  catch  disease,  and  that  others,  after 
taking  food  that  has  been  called  unwholesome,  do  not  catch  any 
disease. 

When  such  is  the  case,  how  can  good  and  bad  results  (on  the 
physical  system)  be  attributed  to  the  operation  of  food  that  is 
wholesome  or  that  is  otherwise  ?8 

Unto  him  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  answered  (as  follows). 

restores,  them  to  harmony.  Similarly,  when  the  Dhatus  called  'Malas'  decrease  or 
increase,  it  is  ‘Kitta’  that  restores  them  to  harmony.  The  case  of  increase  is  especially 
noticed  below,  for  there  it  is  said  that  when  they  increase  beyond  their  normal 
measure,  they  are  decreased  by  being  treated  alternately  with  regimen  of  cooling  and 
warm  properties  ;  ije.,  when  the  increase  is  due  to  the  taking  of  food  possessed  of 
cooling  properties,  warm  regimen  is  prescribed,  and  vice  versa,. — T. 

*  The  ‘ayana  mukhani,’  or  passages  of  motion,  of  both  classes  of  Dhatus,  are 
the  ducts  of  the  body.  It  is  through  those  ducts  that  they  course  upwards  or  down¬ 
wards  or  transversely.  Those  ducts,  again,  nourish  the  Dhatus,  each  its  own,  so 
that  the  blood-ducts  nourish  blood  j  those  that  appertain  to  the  marrow,  nourish 
the  marrow  j  &c. — T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  M  HIT  A. 


395 


©  Agnive^a,  as  regards  those  persons  who  take  food  that  is 
beneficial,  they  never  catch  such  diseases  as  arise  from  food. 
Then,  again,  all  fear  of  catching  diseases  cannot  be  transgressed 
by  only  confining  oneself  to  good  food. 

For  there  are  other  sources  of  disease  than  the  taking  of  food 
that  is.‘not  beneficial. 

They  are  as  follow :  the  perverse  course  of  time,  faults  in 
respect  of  the  understanding,  as  also  such  sound,  touch,  colour, 
taste,  and  smell  as  are  not  in  harmony  with  the  physical  system. 

These  sources  of  disease  bring  evil  on  even  a  person  that 
properly  enjoys  the  different  tastes.19 

It  is  for  this  that  men  who  take  even  beneficial  food  are  seen  to 
be  assailed  by  disease. 

From  several  causes,  the  transgression  committed  by  those  tvho' 
take  food  that  is  the  reverse  of  beneficial,  does  not  become- 
injurious  immediately. 

All  kinds  of  food,  again,  that  are  not  beneficial,  are  not  equally 
injurious. 

Nor  is  the  injury  in  every  case  of  equal  strength. 

All  bodies,  again,  are  not  equally  liable  to  disease. 

The  unwholesome  food  that  one  takes,  in  consequence  of 
excessive  correlation  with  place,  time,  use,  potency,  and  measure,, 
becomes  more  unwholesome.11 

The  injury,  again,  (that  is  produced  by  unwholesome  food),  if. 
it  arises  from  the  operation  of  more  than  one  cause,  or  if  treated 
in  a  way  that  is  the  reverse  of  what  is  laid  down  for  its  cure,  or 
if  it  affects  some  deep-seated  part  of  the  body,  or  if  it  is  generated 
in  some  part  that  is  regarded  as  the  seat  of  life,  or  if  it  afflicts 
some  vital  limb,  gains  in  strength,  leads  to  much  pain,  and 
produces  (evil)  results  very  soon.12 

Those  bodies  which  are  very  fat,  or  which  are  very  lean,  or 
which  are  made  up  of  flesh,  blood  and  bones  that  are  either  undeve¬ 
loped  or  of  measure  less  than  normal,  or  which  are  destitute  of 
strength,  or  which  are  supported  by  such  kinds  of  food  as  are  not 
agreeable  to  them,  or  which  depend  upon  a  very  small  measure 


396  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

of  food,  or  which  are  endued  with  very  little  vitality,  are  incapable 
of  resisting  diseases.13 

These  bodies  which  are  the  reverse  of  those  described  above 
are  capable  of  resisting  diseases. 

From  these  causes,  viz.,  the  taking  of  unwholesome  food,  the 
(force  or  measure  of  the)  injury,  and  the  differences  in  respect  of 
the  kind  of  body,  diseases  become  either  mild  or  virulent,  quickly- 
arising  or  slow  in  generation.14 

Through  these  causes,  the  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  being  excited 
in  particular  parts  of  the  body,  produce  different  diseases. 

The  faults  becoming  excited  in  particular  places  such  as  the 
food-fluids  and  others,  produce  particular  diseases.  We  shall  now, 
O  Agniveca,  declare  which  diseases  arise  from  which  places  becom¬ 
ing  the  seats  of  the  excited  faults.*15 

An  absence  of  relish  for  food,  disgust  for  food,  tastelessness  in 
the  mouth,  incapacity  to  discern  taste,  hiccup,  a  sensation  of  heavi¬ 
ness  in  all  the  limbs,  drowsiness,  general  lassitude  or  langour  of  the 
foody,  fever,  a  sensation  of  being  surrounded  by  darkness  on  every 
side,16  paleness  of  complexion,  obstruction  of  the  ducts,  impotence, 
langour,  emaciation  of  the  body,  loss  of  the  digestive  fire,  premature 
wrinkles  and  white  hairs,17 — there  are  the  diseases  that  spring  from 
the  excitement  of  the  faults  in  the  food-fluids. 

Those  that  spring  from  the  faults  when  they  are  excited  in  the 
blood  are  now  enumerated.  They  are  : — 

Leprosy,  Erysipelas,  Eruptions  (of  diverse  kinds)  on  the  skin, 
Bilious  hemorrhage,  Leucorrhcea  with  discharges  of  blood,13  Infla- 
mation  (ending  in  sores  gangrenous  or  otherwise)  of  the  anal  canal, 
the  organ  of  generation,  and  the  mouth,  enlargement  of  the  spleen, 
abdominal  tumours,  deep-seated  abscesses,  black  spots  on  the 
face,  jaundice,  brown  spots  on  the  face,  freckles  on  the  face  and 
other  parts  of  the  body,  moles  (on  the  face  or  the  body),19  cutaneous 
and  herpetic  eruptions,  Impetigo,  whiteness  of  the  skin  or  Vitiligo, 
Eczema,  Urticaria  Evanida,  and  circular  eruptions  emitting  bloody 
discharges. 


*  The  original  is.  expanded  a  little. — T. 


CHA  RAKA  -SA  MHITA. 


397 

Listen  now  to  the  diseases  that  arise  from  the  faults  when 
excited  in  the  skin.20 

They  are  Adhimanga(a),  Arvuda(£),  Kila(c),  Gala£aluka(«0, 
£undika(d?),  Putimahga(/),  Alaji(^),  Ganda(^),  Gandamala(* ), 
and  Upajihvika(y  ).21 

The  diseases  that  appertain  to  the  adeps  or  fat  are  as  follows  : — 

The  eight  censurable  incidents  (mentioned  in  Lesson  XXI 
ante),  as  also  all  the  preliminary  or  incepient  stages  of  Diabetes.*28 

When  the  faults  are  excited  in  the  bones,  the  diseases  that 
occur  are  as  follows  : — 

Adhyasthi(/£),  Adhi-danta(Z),  Danta-bhedabw),  Danta-£ula(;z), 
Asthibheda(tf),  Asthi-9ula(/),  Adhyasthi-fula'yl,  Adhidanta-gulafr) 
Adhyasthi-bheda(j),  and  Adliidanta-bheda(^),  loss  of  complexion, 
and  diseased  condition  of  the  hair,  bristles,  nails,  and  beard.23, 

a.  Fleshy  excrescences  on  the  eye.  The  word  is  also  used  to  imply  the  cancer 

of  the  eye. 

b.  Tumours  in  general. 

e.  Chakrapani  explains  that  by  Kila  is  meant  piles  in  this  connection. 

d.  Probably,  any  inflammatory  growth  in  the  throat. 

e.  Cundika  or  Gala-^undika  is  enlarged  tonsil. 

/.  Dead  or  decayed  flesh. 

g.  Inflammation  of  the  eye  or  edge  of  the  cornea. 

h.  Bronchocele. 

i.  Enlargement  of  the  lymphatic  glands. 

j.  Ranula. 

*  The  eight  censurable  incidents  are  i.  Excessive  tallness  of  stature  ;  2.  Excessive 
shortness  of  stature  ;  3.  Excessive  hairiness  of  the  skin  ;  4.  Total  absence  of  hair 
on  the  skin  ;  5.  Excessive  darkness  of  complexion  ;  6.  Excessive  whiteness  of  com¬ 
plexion  ;  7.  Excessive  corpulency  or  obesity;  and  8.  Excessive  leanness  or  emacia¬ 
tion. — T. 

k.  A  bone  growing  on  a  bone  is  called  Adhyasthi. 

l.  A  tooth  growing  on  a  tooth  is  so  called. 

m.  Rottenness  of  tooth. 

n.  Tooth-ache. 

o.  Rottenness  of  bone. 

p.  Severe  or  aching  pain  on  any  of  the  bones. 

q.  Aching  pain  in  a  bone  growing  on  another  bone. 

r.  Aching  pain  in  a  tooth  growing  on  another  tooth. 

s.  Rottenness  of  a  bone  growing  on  a  bone. 

t.  Rottenness  of  a  tooth  growing  on  a  tooth. 

Chakrapani  points  out  that  the  first  line  up  to  'julam’  gives  ten  different 
diseases. — T. 


39« 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITl. 


Pains  in  the  joints,  delusions,  swoons,  a  sight  of  darkness  all 
around,  and  the  appearance  of  the  boils,  called  A  rushes,  with 
broad  bases,  on  the  joints  of  the  body, — these  are  said  to  be  the 
diseases  that  arise  from  the  faults  of  the  marrow. 

From  the  faults  of  the  vital  seed  arise  incapacity  for  sexual 
congress  even  when  there  has  been  erection  of  the  genital  organ, 
the  absence  of  erection,  and  the  birth  of  offspring  that  are  diseased, 
impotent,  short-lived,  and  ugly,  or  incapacity  to  produce  concep¬ 
tion,  or  when  there  is  conception  it  is  followed  by  abortion  or 
impure  discharges  from  the  uterus. 

The  vital  seed  being  diseased,  it  makes  a  man  miserable  along 
with  his  offspring  and  wives.24-7'6 

When  the  faults  become  excited  in  connection  with  the  different 
senses,  they  then  bring  about  loss  of  power  or  destruction  upon 
them.27* 

The  faults,  when  excited  in  the  arteries  and  veins,  principal 
and  subsidiary,  afflict  the  patient  greatly  with  Stambha(a),  Sanko- 
cha [b),  Khalli(c),  Granthisphuranay1,  and  Supti(tf).28 

The  faults,  when  provoked  in  connection  with  those  Dhatus 
which  are  known  by  the  name  of  Malas,  cause  Bheda(y)  and 
£osha(  g)  and  Pradushanai/z)  of  the  Malas,  and  lead  to  excessive 
constipation  or  excessive  discharge.29 

Those  diseases  which  we  have  enumerated  above  arise  in  men 
from  diverse  kinds  of  unwholesome  drink  and  food  that  is  chewed 
or  drunk  or  licked  or  swallowed.80 

That  man  of  intelligence  who  wishes  to  avoid  these  diseases 
should  always  use  only  wholesome  food  and  drink.  In  that  case, 

*  ‘Upatapa,’  as  explained  by  Chakrapani,  is  partial  loss  of  power;  and 
‘Upaghata’  is  ‘Vinanja’  or  destruction. — T. 

а.  Rigidity  of  the  limbs,  including  paralysis. 

б.  Contraction  of  the  limbs. 

c.  Shooting  pains  in  the  extremeties  of  the  limbs. 

d.  Quivering  or  throbbing  of  the  limbs. 

e.  Complete  loss  of  sensation  of  the  body. 

f.  Chakrapani  points  out  that  Bheda,  meaning  excessive  discharge,  applies  only 

to  the  case  of  faeces. 

g.  ‘Cosha,’  is  drying  up  and  applies  to  all  the  Mala  Dhatus. 

h.  By  ‘Pradushana’  is  meant  an  alteration  in  colour.  It  applies  to  all  the  Mala 

Dhatus. 


:ha  ra  ka  -  sa  mhitA. 


399 

diseases  that  spring  from  bad  food  will  not  appear  in  their 
constitutions.81 

Of  all  diseases  that  spring  from  the  (vitiated)  food-fluids, 
Langhana*  is  the  medicine  prescribed. 

Of  all  diseases  that  spring  from  the  vitiated)  blood,  the  treat¬ 
ment  has  been  laid  down  in  the  Lesson  called  Vidhi-fonitiya.f 

The  cure  of  all  diseases  that  spring  from  (vitiated)  flesh  is  t<j  be 
effected  by  surgical  instruments,  alkaline  ashes,  and  the  application 
of  caustics. 

The  treatment  of  those  diseases  that  spring  from  the  (vitiated) 
adeps  or  fat  has  been  laid  down  in  the  Lesson  on  the  eight  censur¬ 
able  incidents,  if82-88 

Of  all  diseases  having  their  seat  in  the  bones,  the  medicament 
is  the  five  operations,  as  also  the  use  as  enemata  of  milk  and  Ghee 
mixed  with  some  bitter  substance.§84 

Of  all  diseases  arising  out  of  the  (vitiated)  marrow  and  the 
(vitiated)  vital  seed,  the  medicament  is  food  endued  with  relish 
and  food  that  is  bitter  ;  sexual  indulgence  and  physical  exercise  ; 
and  the  correction  of  the  system  (by  the  usual  methods)  at  the 
proper  time  and  to  the  required  measure-85 

The  relief  of  all  diseases  that  spring  from  the  (vitiated)  senses 
shall  be  spoken  of  in  the  Lesson  called  Trimarmiya.86 

The  alleviation  of  the  diseases  arising  from  arteries  and  ducts 
will  be  spoken  of  in  the  Lesson  devoted  to  diseases  of  the  Wind 
called  Vatarogika. 


*  Vide  Lesson  XXII,  p.  244  ante.  Anything  that  lightens  or  attenuates  (the 
aggravated  humours)  of  the  body  is  called  Langhana.  The  word  does  not  mean 
fast  only. 

t  Vide  Lesson  XXIV,  p,  256  ante. 

|  Vide  Lesson  XXI,  p.  233  ante. 

$  The  live  operations  are  1.  Vamana  (administration  of  emetics);  2.  Virechana 
(administration  of  purgatives)  ;  3.  Ciro-virechana  (administration  of  errhines)  ; 
and  4.  Asthapana  and  3.  AnuvSsana,  meaning  the  use  of  enemata  dry  and  oily.  The 
mention  of  milk  and  Ghee  mixed  with  some  bitter  substance,  after  the  mention  of 
Asti  Spana  and  Anuvasana  as  included  in  the  five  operations,  is  due,  as  Chakrpani 
explains,  to  the  fact  of  such  enemata  being  regarded  as  particularly  beneficial. — T. 


4oo  CHA  RA  KA-  SA  M HIT  A. 

An  abstract  of  the  treatments  of  diseases  in  general  has  been 
presented  in  the  Lesson  called  “Na  vegan  dharaniya.”*8' 

The  cure  of  diseases  arising  from  (vitiated)  Malas  has  been 
indicated  here  and  there.88 

Through  physical  exercise,  through  the  keeness  of  (internal) 
heat,  through  neglect  of  beneficial  acts  and  practices,  the  Malas 
pass  from  the  Koshtha  to  the  ducts,  impelled  thereto  by  the  speed 
(or  fdrce)  of  the  wind. 

Arrived  at  the  ducts  they  sometimes  stay  there,  unimpelled 
by  any  other  force.  Unless  the  region  and  the  time  be  undisposed 
thereto,  they  do  not  become  excited,  for  they  await  some  cause  of 
excitement. 

In  consequence  of  aggravation,  of  escape  (through  liquefaction, 
&c.).  of  digestion,  and  of  the  clearance  of  the  mouth  of  the  duct, 
the  Malas,  leaving  the  ducts,  return  to  the  Koshtha,  the  force  of 
the  (impelling)  wind  having  been  subdued.88-40 

The  man  that  is  desirous  of  happiness  should  observe  those 
rules  that  have  been  laid  down  for  the  non-appearance  of  unborn 
diseases  and  the  alleviation  of  those  that  have  been  born.41 

All  the  inclinations  of  all  creatures  are  regarded  (as  planted  in 
them)  for  their  happiness. 

The  inclinations,  however,  that  are  manifested  for  the  right  or 
the  wrong  way  are  due  to  knowledge  or  ignorance. 

They  that  are  observant  follow  only  what  is  beneficial  after 
proper  or  careful  observation  and  reflection. 

Whereas  the  vulgar,  whose  understandings  are  clouded  by 
Passion  and  Darkness,  follow  only  what  is  (immediately)  agreeable. 

Knowledge  of  the  scriptures,  self-denial,  intelligence,  memory, 
firmness,  adherence  to  what  is  beneficial,  purity  of  speech,  tran¬ 
quillity,  fortitude, — these  establish  themselves  in  the  observant 
man  as  their  refuge. 

These  quajities  never  establish  themselves  in  the  vulgar  man 
who  is  resort  of  stupefaction  and  darkness. 


*  Lesson  VII,  p.  73  ante  j  on  the  inadvisability  of  suppressing  the  urgings  of 
nature.— T. 


CttA  RA  R. AS AM  HIT A. 


401 

Innumerable  diseases,  bodily  and  mental,  have  for  their  root 
that  stupefaction  and  darkness.*12”15 

Through  fault  of  the  understanding,  one  indulges  in  the  five 
injurious  objects  5  suptesseS  the  urgings  of  nature,  and  accomplishes 
acts  that  are  highly  rash.16 

The  man  of  Ignorance  then  becomes  united  with  those  condi¬ 
tions  which  are  called  by  the  name  of  disease. 

The  man  of  Knowledge,  however,  being  purified  by  knowledge, 
never  becomes  united  with  those  conditions. 

One  should  never  take  any  food,  acting  only  from  a  desire  for 
it  or  guided  by  ignorance.  Only  food  that  is  beneficial  should  be 
eaten,  after  proper  examination. 

Verily,  the  body  is  the  result  of  food.47^18 

As  regards  the  ordinances  about  food,  eight  particulars  hatfe 
been  set  forth,  called  Hetus  or  reasons.  Examining  these  in 
respect  of  their  capacity  to  produce  beneficial  or  injurious  results, 
one  should  take  one’s  food.49 

The  man  of  learning  or  wisdom,  by  always  abstaining  from 
such  diet  or  regimen  as  deserves  to  be  avoided,  is  said  to  free 
himself  from  the  debt  he  owes  to  the  pious  and  the  good.t50 

As  regards  those  diseases  which  are  incapable  of  being  avoided, 
men  of  wisdom,  if  they  get  them,  should  not  repine.51 


*  What  is  said  in  these  Verses  is  this  : — the  inclinations  of  men,  it  is  well-known, 
have  been  planted  in  them  for  leading  them  to  happiness.  The  question,  therefore, 
arises, — Why  do  those  inclinations  sometimes  lead  some  men  to  act  in  a  way  that 
brings  unhappiness  or  misery?  The  answer  to  this  is,— the  desire  to  walk  along 
the  right  or  the  wrong  path  is  due  to  Knowledge  or  Ignorance.  He  that  is  truly 
wise  acts  after  observation  and  reflection.  He  that  is  destitute  of  wisdom  betakes 
himself  to  that  which  is  immediately  or  apparently  agreeable.— T. 

t  The  Hindu  scriptures  lay  down  that  one,  by  taking  birth,  incurs  several  debts 
of  obligations.  These  are  the  obligation  to  marry  and  procreate  children.  By  doing 
this  one  pays  off  one’s  debt  to  one’s  ancestors.  Then  there  is  the  obligation  to  study 
the  Vedas  and  perform  certain  minor  religious  rites.  By  this  one  pays  off  one’s  debt 
to  the  Rishis.  One  should  sacrifice.  By  this  one  pays  off  one’s  debt  to  the  deities. 
By  living  well  and  taking  care  of  one’s  own  health,  one  pays  off  one’s  duty  to  one’s 
ownself  and  to  the  good  and  the  pious. — T. 


5' 


CM  A  RA  KA -SAM HI  TA. 


402 

Here  occur  some  verses  containing  a  summary. 

That  which  springs  from  food,  the  diseases  that  are  born  of 
food,  the  distinction  between  wholesome  and  unwholesome  food, 
the  distinction  between  happiness  and  misery,  the  susceptibility 
or  non-susceptibility  of  body  and  mind  to  catch  diseases,  the 
particular  groups  of  diseases  that  are  born  of  the  different  Dhatus, 
the  means  of  their  alleviation,  how  faults  going  from  the  stomach 
into  the  ducts  become  excited  and  how  they  come  back  from  the 
ducts  into  the  stomach,  the  difference  between  the  wise  and  the 
ignorant,  what  is  beneficial  for  those  that  are  hale  and  those  that 
are  ill,  have  all  been  declared  in  this  Lesson  on  the  ordinances 
about  diverse  kinds  of  food  that  is  swallowed  or  drunk  or  eaten 
or  chewed.1-1 

Thus  ends  the  twenty-eighth  Lesson  called  ‘That  on  the  ordin¬ 
ances  about  food  that  is  swallowed  or  drunk  or  eaten  or  chewed’ 
■in  Agnivefa’s  treatise  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  XXIX. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  called  ‘That  on  the  ten 
■substrata  of  the  Life-breaths.’ 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.1 

It  has  been  said  that  there  are  ten  substrata  on  which  are 
established  the  life-breaths.  They  are  the  two  temples,  the  three 
vital  parts  [viz. ,  the  head,  the  heart,  and  the  anal  duct),  the  throat, 
the  blood,  the  semen,  ojas,  and  the  anus.** 

That  man  who  knows  these  (ten  substrata),  the  senses,  the 
understanding,  the  cause  of  life,  and  (symptoms  of)  disease,  is  said 
to  be  truly  learned.  He  is,  besides,  called  a  saviour  of  life+s 

*  ‘Ayatana’  is  literally  an  abode  or  surface  or  ground  plot.  Here  it  is  used  to 
imply  that  on  which  the  life-breaths  (or  vitality)  rest.  Besides  the  limbs  or  parts  of 
the  body  named,  blood,  semen,  and  ojas  are  regarded  as  ‘ayatanas.’  Hence,  I  render 
it  as  ‘substrata’  instead  of  ‘abode’. — T. 

t  ‘Indriyam' or  the  senses,  as  explained  by  Gangadhara,  imply  ‘jivana-liog&ni,’ 
4.e.t  the  indications  of  the  functions  of  life.  ‘Vijnanam,’  Chakrapani  explains, 
implies  the  understanding  ;  Gangadhara  thinks  it  means  the  Science  of  Life. 
‘Chetana  hetum’  is  taken  by  Chakrapani  as  meaning  either  the  soul  or  the  cause  of 


CHA  RA  KA  -SA  MHITl. 


403 


Physicians  happen  to  be  of  two  classes,  0  Agnive^a  !  One  class 
consists  of  those  that  follow  (save)  the  Life-breaths  by  destroying 
diseases  ;  the  other  class  consists  of  those  that  follow  diseases  and 
destroy  life. 

Unto  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  who  said  so,  Agnive^a  said, — 
O  illustrious  one,  how  shall  we  distinguish  them  ?. 

The  illustrious  One  said, — Those  that  are  well-born,  of  clear 
understanding,  possessed  of  experience,  skilful,  of  pure  behaviour, 
possessed  of  mastery  over  their  hands,  with  souls  under  thorough 
control,  equipt  with  every  necessary  object,  with  every  sense  iiv 
order,  capable  of  reading  the  dispositions  of  others,  furnished  with, 
knowledge  of  results  (of  processes,  operations,  drugs,  &c.),  are  said- 
to  be  saviors  of  life  and  destroyers  of  diseases.* 

Such  men  are  freed  from  every  doubt  as  regards  the  correct 
knowledge  of  the  body,  knowledge  of  what  conduces  to  the  growth- 
of  the  body  and  of  conditions  both  normal  and  abnormal. 

They  are  also  freed  from  doubts  in  respect  of  the  origin,  the 
premonitory  indications,  symptoms,  pains,  and  diagnoses  of 
diseases  that  are  easily  curable,  or  that  are  curable  with  difficulty, 
or  that  can  only  be  suppressed,  or  that  should  not  be  taken  up  for 
treatment  (because  of  their  incurability). 

They  are,  again,  the  expounders  of  the  aphorisms  of  the  Science 
of  Life  which  are  of  three  kinds  (viz.,  those  that  relate  to  the 


life,  i.e.,  the  causes  of  disease  and  its  cure.  This  seems  to  be  correct.  Chakrap£ni' 
takes  'Smayam’  as  equivalent  to  ‘lingam’  or  symptoms.  ‘PrSnabhisara’  is  one  who 
follows  the  life-breaths,  that  is,  one  who  saves,  instead  of  destroying,  life.  The  sense 
is  that  of  a  companion  or  friend  of  the  life-breaths. —  T. 

*  ‘Paryavadata’  is,  literally,  pure  or  clean.  Gangadhara  takes  it  as  implying 
those  whose  intellects  have  become  clear  in  consequence  of  a  proper  or  attentive 
study  of  the  medical  and  other  scriptures. 

'Jitahasta’  applies  to  surgical  operations  ;  possessing  mastery  over  the  hand,  i.e., 
having  a  handsthat  is  quick  and  steadied  by  practice. 

‘Prakritjna’  implies  one  who  is  conversant  with  the  dispositions  of  other  people  ; 
it  may  also  mean  one  that  is  acquainted  with  what  constitutes  the  normal  state  of 
the  body. 

‘Pratipatti’  implies  the  production  of  anticipated  results.  One  conversant  with 
‘pratipatti’  is  one  who  performs  an  operation,  or  adopts  a  particular  process,  or 
administers  a  particular  drug,  knowing  the  result  fully. — T. 


4°4 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


causes  of  disease,  those  relating  to  the  symptoms  of  disease,  and 
those  to  the  medicines  that  should  be  applied  for  its  cure). 

They  are  conversant  with  those  aphorisms  as  set  forth  in  brief 
or  as  explained  in  detail. 

They  are,  further,  acquainted  with  the  entire  group  of  medicines 
which  are  of  three  varieties  {viz.,  those  that  are  destructive  of 
wind,  those  that  are  destructive  of  bile,  and  those  that  are  destruc¬ 
tive  of  phlegm.*4 

They  are  well  conversant  with  the  proper  use  (and  nature)  of 
the  five  and  thirty  kinds  of  fruits  and  roots  ;  four  kinds  of  principal 
oils  j  five  kinds  of  salts  ;  eight  kinds  of  urine  ;  eight  kinds  of  milk  ; 
six  varieties  of  trees  yielding  milk  and  barks  ;  the  groups  of  drugs 
that  are  resorted  to  in  the  five  operations  beginning  with  purging 
the  cerebrum  ;  the  eight  and  twenty  kinds  of  gruel  ;  the  two  and 
thirty  varieties  of  powders  and  plasters  ;  the  six  centuries  of  pur¬ 
gatives  ;  the  five  centuries  of  Astringents  ;  the  rules,  occurring  in 
the  exposition  of  what  should  be  done  for  keeping  up  health, 
respecting  food  and  drink,  place  (of  residence^,  walking,  bed, 
seats,  measure,  articles,  collyrium,  smoking,  snuffs,  rubbing  (of  oils 
on  the  body),  cleansing  the  body  (by  baths,  &c),  suppression  of 
urgings  and  allowing  urgings  to  have  free  play,  physical  exercises, 
the  soul,  the  senses,  what  is  beyond  the  ken  of  the  senses,  and 
treatment. +5 

*  The  Science  of  Life  as  expounded  in  the  medical  treatises  consists  of  three 
principal  divisions,  viz.,  ‘Hetu’  ot  causes  of  disease,  ‘Linga’  or  the  symptoms  of 
disease,  and  ‘Aushadha’  or  medicine.  ‘Sangraha  and  Vyakarana’  mean  in  brief  and 
in  expansion  or  detail.  Medicines  are  of  three  kinds,  viz.,  as  curing  wind,  as  curing 
bile,  and  as  curing  phlegm. — T. 

t  In  this  aphorism  the  author  gives  a  summary  of  the  contents  of  many 
previous  Lessons.  In  Lesson  I,  Verse  73,  it  is  stated  that  “of  vegetable  products, 
sixteen  are  root-bearing  and  nineteen  fruit-bearing.”  See  pp.  8  and  7  ante.  Clarified 
butter,  oil,  fat,  and  marrow  are  the  four  kinds  of  oil.  See  p.  8  ante.  The  five  salts 
are  Sauvarchala,  Saindhava,  Vit,  Audbhida,  and  SSmudra.  See  p  9  ante.  The 
eight  varieties  of  urine  are  those  of  the  sheep,  the  goat,  the  cow,  the  buffalo,  the 
elephant,  the  camel,  the  horse,  and  the  ass.  The  eight  varieties  of  milk  are  those 
of  the  sheep,  the  goat,  the  cow,  the  buffalo,  the  elephant,  the  camel,  the  horse,  and 
women.  See  p.  10  ante.  The  six  varieties  of  trees  whose  milk  and  bark  are  used 
are  Snuhi,  Arka,  A9wantaka,  Putika,  Krishnagandha,  and  Tillaka.  See  pp.  9  and 
lo  ante.  The  groups  of  drugs  which  are  used  in  the  five  operations  of  administering 
errhines,  emetics,  purgatives,  and  enemata  oily  and  dry,  are  mentioned  in  Lesson 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


4«5 


Such  men  are  also  freed  from  doubts  in  respect  of  conclusions 
about  Treatment  having  six  and  ten  incidents  as  laid  down  in  the 
two  Lessons  called  the  Aggregates  of  four  j  as  also  in  respect  of  the 
three  Aspirations,  and  the  merits  and  faults  of  the  wind. 

They  are  capable  of  prescribing  the  four  kinds  of  Oils  with  the 
four  and  twenty  ways  of  administering  them  as  also  the  four  and 
sixty  subsidiary  ways. 

They  are  skilful  in  administering  the  diverse  kinds  of  snehanas 
(emollients),  swedyas  (diaphoretics),  vamya  (emetics),  and  virechyas 
(purgatives),  with  their  numerous  ordinances  (about  measure,  time, 
and  other  considerations).* 

II.  ApSmarga  to  Dhamargava  are  thirty-three.  See  pp.  13  and  14  ante.  The 
eight  and  twenty  varities  of  Gruel  occur  in  Lesson  II,  pp.  15  and  18  ante.  The  two 
and  thirty  varieties  of  powders  and  plasters  occur  in  Lesson  III,  pp.  19 — 27  ante. 

The  six  senturies  of  purgatives  occur  in  Lesson  IV,  pp.  27 — 28  ante.  The  five 
centuries  of  Astringents  occur  in  the  same  Lesson. 

The  rules  in  respect  of  food  and  drink,  place,  &c.,  occur  in  brief  in  Lesson  V,  and 
in  other  subsequent  Lessons. — T. 

The  varieties  of  collyrium  are  spoken  of  in  Lesson  V,  pp.  52 — S3  ante. 

The  rules  in  respect  of  smoking  occur  in  Lesson  V,  pp.  S3 — 59- 

The  rules  in  respect  of  snuffing  are  given  in  the  same  Lesson.  See  pp.  59 — 60. 

The  rules  in  respect  of  cleansing  and  rubbing  occur  in  the  same  Lesson.  See 
pp.  60—65. 

The  inadvisability  of  suppressing  the  urgings  of  nature  is  treated  in  Lesson  VII. 
See  p.  73. 

The  soul,  the  senses,  and  what  is  beyond  the  ken  of  the  senses,  are  all  treated  in 
Lessons  VIII  and  XL 

As  regards  treatment,  it  has  been  indicated  in  diverse  places,  particularly  in 
Lessons  IX  and  X. — T. 

*  The  word  ‘Bhesaja’  here  does  not  imply  drug  or  medicament  but  has  been 
used  in  a  more  extended  sense,  vis.,  that  of  Treatment  as  consisting  of  Physician, 
Drugs,  Nurse,  and  Patient,  each  of  whom  and  which  should  possess  four  varieties, 
thus  making  up  a  tale  of  six  and  ten.  See  Lessons  IX  and  X  ;  particularly,  aphorism 
1  of  Lesson  X.  The  three  Aspirations  are  treated  of  in  Lesson  XI.  They  are  1.  that 
for  preserving  Life  ;  2.  for  earning  Wealth  ;  and  3.  for  attaining  to  Felicity  or  Eman¬ 
cipation  in  the  next  world. 

The  merits  and  faults  of  the  wind  are  spoken  of  in  the  Lesson  called  ‘VStakala.-’ 
kala.  See  the  last  note  in  p.  132  ante. 

The  four  kinds  of  Oils  are  Ghee,  oil,  fat,  and  marrow.  There  are  four  and  twenty 
ways  of  using  oils.  These,  as  also  the  four  and  twenty  subsidiary  ways  of  adminis¬ 
tering  oils  have  been  laid  down  in  Lesson  XIII.  See  p.  141. 

Snehanas  or  emollients  have  been  spoken'of  in  Lesson  XIII. 


406 


CH  A  RA  KA  -SA  M  HI  TA. 


They  are  well  conversant  with  also  the  diseases  of  the  head, 
those  diseases  stated  in  brief  which  are  due  to  varying  measures 
of  the  three  faults,  the  attenuation  or  loss  (of  the  constituent 
elements  of  the  body),  the  diseases  called  Pidaka  (eruptions),  and 
Vidradhi  (abscesses),  the  three  kinds  of  Inflammations,  the  diverse 
kinds  of  diseases  that  supervene  upon  Inflammations,  the  eight  and 
forty  kinds  of  disease-heads,  and  one  hundred  and  forty  varieties 
of  diseases  of  diverse  groups.*6 

So  also  they  are  well  versed  in  those  censurable  incidents  of 
excessive  fatness  and  excessive  leanness  (&c.)  with  their  causes, 
symptoms,  and  treatment  ;  sleep  of  both  kinds,  viz.,  beneficial  and 
otherwise  ;  insomnia  and  excessive  sleep,  with  their  causes  and 
treatment  ;  the  six  curative  operations  beginning  with  Langhana 
the  diseases  that  are  born  of  over-indulgence  in  practices  that  are 
sedative  and  nutritive  in  their  effects,  with  their  symptoms  and 
modes  of  alleviation  ;  diseases  that  are  born  of  (vitiated)  blood, 
(including)  insanity,  fainting  or  swoons,  and  apoplexy,  with  their 
causes,  symptoms,  and  remedies. +' 


Swedanas  or  diaphoretics  and  the  manner  of  applying  them  have  been  treated  of 
in  Lesson  XIV.  The  diverse  drugs  used  for  Swedana  and  the  diverse  ways  of  apply¬ 
ing  them  have  been  clearly  set  forth  there. 

The  administration  of  emetics  and  pergatives  is  treated  of  in  Lesson  XV.— T. 

*  Diseases  of  the  Head  occur  in  Lesson  XVII. 

The  brief  enumeration  of  diseases  due  to  varying  measures  of  faults  serves  in- 
Lesson  XVII.  (See  pp.  i8p — 194* 

The  attenuation  or  loss  of  the  constituent  elements  of  the  body  is  treated  of  in 
Lesson  XVII.  See  p.  194. 

The  diseases  called  Pidaka  are  mentioned  in  Lesson  XVII.  See  p.  194. 

Fir  Vidradhi,  see  pp.  195 — 198. 

The  three  kinds  of  Inflammations  occur  in  Lesson  XVIII.  See  p.p.  200 — 209. 

The  diverse  kinds  of  diseases  that  supervene  upon  inflammations  have  been 
treated  of  in  Lesson  XIX.  See  pp.  21 1 — 213. 

The  eight  and  forty  kinds  of  disease-heads  occur  in  Lesson  XIH.  See  pp.  213 - 

219.  The  summary  occurs  in  p.  219,  in  Verses  45  and  46. 

The  hundred  and  forty  varieties  of  diseases  of  diverse  groups  are  mentioned  in 
Lesson  XX.  See  p.  222.  Eighty  are  diseases  of  the  Wind  ;  forty  are  of  Bile  ;  and 
twenty  of  Phlegm. — T. 

t  The  censurable  incidents  of  excessive  fatness  and  excessive  leanness,  &c.,  are 
treated  of  in  Lesson  XXI.  See  pp.  233—33. 

Sleep  both  beneficial  and  otherwise,  insomnia,  and  excessive  sleep,  with  their 
causes  and  treatment,  occur  in  Lesson  XXI,  See  pp.  208 — 243. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  Mil  IT  A. 


407 

They  are  also  well  skilled  in  certainty  of  conclusions  respecting 
the  ordinances  about  food  ;  those  kinds  or  modifications  of  food 
that  are  beneficial  by  nature  and  those  that  are  otherwise,  with  the 
abstract  that  has  been  given  of  what  articles  are  regarded  as  the 
foremost  of  their  own  groups  or  classes  ;  the  four  and  eighty  kinds 
of  wines  ;  the  ascertainment  of  the  qualities  of  diverse  objects  in 
connection  with  their  tastes,  principal  or  true  and  subsidiary  or 
unmanifest,  along  with  their  combinations  that  are  harmonious  or 
otherwise ;  the  twelve  groups  of  food  and  drink,  with  their  qualities 
and  energy,  with  Anupanas  and  their  qualities,  and  the  nine  kinds 
of  food  in  brief ;  the  course  which  food  takes  (after  it  enters  the 
stomach)  ;  the  beneficial  and  injurious  effects  that  result  from 
wholesome  and  unwholesome  food  ;  and  the  diseases  that  appear  in 
consequence  of  the  faults  being  excited  in  this  or  that  Dhatu, 
together  with  their  remedies  ;  and  the  ten  substrata  of  the  life- 
breaths.  They  are  also  well  versed  in  what  shall  be  indicated  in  the 
Thirtieth  Lesson  called  “That  about  the  ten  great  roots  (or  ducts),” 
and  in  the  indications  of  the  purposes  of  the  entire  Science  of  Life  as 
treated  of  in  the  medical  scriptures.  They  are  equally  versed  in  the 
acquisition,  retention,  correct  interpretation,  and  application  of  those 
scriptures  as  also  in  treatment,  effects  of  drugs  and  remedial  opera¬ 
tions,  time,  agents,  and  means  as  laid  down  in  those  scriptures.*8 

The  six  curative  operations  or  remedies  beginning  with  Langhana  occur  in 
Lesson  XXII.  See  pp.  248 — 250. 

The  diseases  born  of  over-indulgence  in  practices  that  are  sedative  and  nutritive 
are  treated  of  in  Lesson  XXIII.  See  pp.  250 — 57. 

Diseases  born  of  vitiated  blood,  with  Insanity,  &c.,  are  treated  of  in  Lesson 
XXIV.  See  pp.  257 — 266. — T. 

*  The  ordinances  in  respect  of  food  are  laid  down  in  Lesson  XXV.  See  pp. 

272—73. 

The  modifications,  beneficial  and  otherwise,  of  food  are  laid  down  in  the  same 
Lesson.  See  pp.  273 — 75. 

The  four  and  eighty  kinds  of  wines  have  been  laid  down  in  Lesson  XXV.  See 
pp.  290-95. 

The  qualities  of  diverse  objects  in  connection  with  their  Tastes,  principal  and 
subsidiary,  together  with  their  combinations  that  are  harmonious  and  the  reverse, 
have  been  treated  of  in  Lesson  XXVI. 

The  twelve  groups  of  food  &c.  are  indicated  in  Lesson  XXVII. 

The  course  which  food  takes  and  the  other  topics  connected  with  it  are  set  forth 
in  Lesson  XXVIII. 

The  ten  substrata  of  Life-breaths  occur  in  this  very  Lesson,  vis.,  XXIX. 


408 


CIIA  RA  KA-SAMHITA. 


They  are  well  endued  with  memory,  intelligence,  (medical  and 
other)  scriptures,  capacity  for  drawing  inferences,  and  (general) 
knowledge. 

In  consequence,  again,  of  the  disposition  and  accomplishments 
of  their  souls,  they  behave  towards  all  creatures  after  the  manner 
of  mother  and  father  and  brother  and  kinsmen  without  ever  speak¬ 
ing  harshly  towards  them,  and  manifesting  a  friendship  for  them 
that  comes  from  the  heart. 

For  these  reasons,  O  Agnivega,  such  physicians  are  called 
companions  of  the  Life-breaths  and  destroyers  of  diseases.3 

Those  that  are  possessed  of  opposite  qualifications  are  com¬ 
panions  of  diseases  and  destroyers  of  the  Life-breaths. 

These  men,  wearing  the  robes  of  physicians,  are  the  thorns  of 
the  world.  Behaving  after  the  manner  of  those  whom  they  imitate, 
those  persons,  through  the  heedlessness  of  kings,  move  about  in 
all  countries.* 

This  is  their  especial  indication,  viz.,  clad  in  the  robes  of 
physicians  and  indulging  in  self-praise,  they  walk  along  the  public 
streets,  in  expectation  of  calls.f 

The  rest  are  treated  of  in  Lesson  XXX.  ‘Grahana’  indicates  the  acquisition  of 
the  scriptures.  ‘DhSrana’  implies  their  retention.  ‘VijnSna’  means  correct  knowledge 
of  their  meaning.  ‘Prayoga’  is  application  of  the  scriptures.  ‘Karma’  is  treatment. 
‘K&ryya’  indicates  the  results  of  drugs  and  remedial  operations.  ‘K51a’  is  time  in 
respect  of  treatment  or  the  application  of  remedial  operations.  'Kartri'  means 
agents.  'Karana'  implies  means. — T- 

*  It  is  evident  that  the  Rishi  was  for  suppressing  quacks  by  penal  legislation. 
Unfortunately,  the  question  is  not  easy  of  solution  as  to  who  are  quacks.  Under  most 
Governments,  Homoeopathy  is  still  regarded  as  a  form  of  quackery.  In  India, 
under  British  rule,  the  system  propounded  by  the  Rishi  himself  is  regarded  as 
quackery.  Kavirajes  are  classed  in  State-returns  as  herbalists,  a  fine  instance  of 
the  appreciation  in  which  the  Hindu  system  of  medicine  is  held  by  the  rulers  of  the 
country  !  The  fact  is  impossible  of  disproof  that  thousands  of  chronic  cases,  given 
up  by  European  physicians  as  hopeless,  are  cured  by  these  despised  herbalists. 
Dysentery,  when  it  attacks  a  European,  generally  proves  fatal  in  India.  Yet  those 
Europeans  who  place  themselves  under  Kavirajes,  get  themselves  cured  in  no  time 
of  this  formidable  disease. — T. 

t  It  would  be  curious  to  ascertain  what  the  dress  was  of  physicians  in  ancient 
India.  To  this  day,  many  physicians,  who  have  no  calls,  pass  and  repass  along  the 
public  thoroughfares  in  their  good  and  handsome  carriages  drawn  by  excellent  steeds, 
to  create  the  impression  that  their  practice  keeps  them  engaged  for  the  whole  day. — T. 


(  From  F.  Id.  Skrine,  Esgr.,  /.  C.  S..  ) 

Bhaugulpore ,  18th  December,  1894. 

‘Dear  Sir, — Charaka  Samhita  continues 'to  be  as  quaint  and  interesting  as 
ever,  and  when  complete/ it  will  form  a  perfect  Encyclopaedia  of  Indian  Medi¬ 
cine.  You  ought  to  present  a  set  to  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians,  &c.,  &c.” 

(  From  Ii.  A.  D.  Phillips.  Esqr.,  I.  C.  S. ) 

Monghyr,  the  23rd.  September,  1894. 

"Dear  Sir, — I,  beg  to  acknowledge  with  thanks  receipt  of  Part  X  of  the 
English  translation  of  Charaka.  Many  of  the  precepts  are  highly  instructive  and 
are  such  as  the  most  recent  developments  of  medical  science  are  tending  to  impart. , 
I  shall  look  forward  with  interest  to  the  causes  of  the  depopulation  of  entire 
towns  and  villages." 

(  The  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association,  Chicago,  U.  S.  A.  ) 

*  "This  is  thetwelfth  fasciculus  of  the  series,  the  appearance  of  which  we  have 
from  time  to  time  chronicled.  This  fasciculus,  which  is  not  less  interesting  than 
its  predecessors,  touches  on  the  very  practical  topics  of  wine,  water  and  milk. 
The  student  of  medical  history  must  receive  this  book  with  the  keenest  interest. 
The  vews  of  the  ancient  Hindus  on  water  and  milk  will  be  read  with  pleasure.  ” 

(  The  Medical  Age,  Detroit,  Michigan,  U.  S.  A.  ) 

"Part  XI  loses  none  of  the  interest  which  attached  to  its  predecessors.  This 
work  when  completed  will  be  the  most  valuable  addition  to  historical  medicine 
that  has  ever  been  published!  No  practitioner  who  is  interested  in  the  history  of 
his  profession  can  afford  to  be  without  this  wonderful  work.” 


(  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist,  St.  Louis,  U.  S.  A.  ) 

"The  contents  of  this  fascicule  are  varied  and  extremely  interesting.” 

(  The  Indian  Daily  News  ). 

"The  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  had  reached  its  twelfth  fascicule. 
We  may  gather  from  it  what  the  Rishis  thought  of  milk  and  wine,  of  certain 
made  dishes,  of.  the  excessive  use  of  honey  which  produced  almost  certain  death, 
of  the  peculiar  excellence  of  rain  water.  Ghee,  we  are  told,  ‘strengthens  the 
memory  and  the  understanding,’  while  curds  ‘are.  generally  harmful  in  autumn, 
summer  and  spring.’  Notwithstanding  the  huge  amount  of  nonsense  that  was 
passed  off  ,  in  those,  days,  as  doubtless  in  these,  to  be  science,  the  Rishis  were 
shrewd  enough  in  their  way,  and  have;  sent  down  to  posterity  a  few  observations 
Which  modern  medical  research  fully  endorses.” 


PART  XIV. 


iiii  rv  jpg  n :  ~ 

CHARAKA-SAMHITA 

I 

TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


PUBLISHED  BY 


AVINASIT  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita  (in  original)  with 
Commentaries  ;  Bengali  and  Hindi  Translator  of  Charaka- 
Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita  ;  Editor  of  Chikitsa- 
Samhilani  (Medical  Journal  in  Bengali)  ;  Prac¬ 
titioner  of  the  Hindu  System  of 
Medicine,  &c.,  &c.,  &c. 


CALCUTTA: 

Printed  b\  Girish  Chandra  Chakravarti, 
“Deva  Press”,  6i  Mirzapur  Street, 
and 

Published  at 

200,  Cornwallis’  Street. 


(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved. ) 

I 

■ _ '  _ _ _ _ _  qL 


The  first  division  of  Charaka’s  work,  called  Sutrasthana,  or 
place  of  aphorisms,  has  been  completed.  Of  all  the  divisions,  this 
is  unquestionably  the  most  difficult.  Charaka  himself  calls  it 
the  very  head  of  the  compilation.  Besides  giving  a  mass  of 
information,  its  last  Lesson  contains  a  summary  of  all  that  occurs 
in  the  subsequent  divisions.  No  summary,  however  skilfully 
framed,  can  afford  an  adequate  idea  of  the  real  contents  of 
Charaka’s  compilation.  The  object  of  the  Rishi  in  presenting 
such  a  summary  seems  to  be  to  guard  the  compilation  from  inter¬ 
polations,  like. the  abstract  occurring  in  the  Anukramamka,  of  the 
Maliabharata.  It  is  very  probable  that  the  summary  was  drawn 
up  by  Charaka  and  not  by  Agnvefa,  even  as  the  Anukramanika 
was  drawn  up  by  somebody  who  first  reduced  the  Mahabharata 
into  writing. 

It  is  a  matter  of  great  regret  that  Charaka’s  work  is  not 
read  by  practitioners  of  the  Hindu  system  of  medicine  with 
that  care  with  which  it  deserves  to  be  read.  Various  abridgments; 
by  other  authors  of  celebrity  occur.  Preceptors  of  reputation,, 
accordingly,  instead  of  lecturing  regularly  on  Charaka,  cause  their 
pupils  to  master  the  contents  of  those  abridgments.  For  this  and 
other  reasons,  Charaka’s  text  has  in  many  places  become  vitiated- 
The  belief  is  general  in  this  country  that  whoever  tampers  with 
the  scriptures  left  behind  by  the  Rishis,  inflicts  a  wound  on  the- 
very  bodies  of  the  Rishis,  for  their  bodies  now  exist  in  the  form, 
of  those  scriptures.  One,  therefore,  that  tampers  with  such  texts,, 
is  held  to  be  guilty  of  Brahmani9ide.  This  belief  has  powerfully 
operated  to  protect  the  scriptures  from  those  extensive  interpola¬ 
tions  which  would  otherwise  have  been  inevitable  in  consequence 
of  the  invention  of  printing  not  having  been  known  in  this- 
country.  That  interpolations  occur  may  at  first  sight  create 
surprise.  But  when  one  takes  into  account  the  circumstance  that 
the  invention  of  printing  was  unknown  in  India,  one  becomes  sur¬ 
prised  at  the  really  small  extent  to  which  interoolations  have 


[  H.  1 


occurred  in  the  handing  down  of  scriptures  by  means  of 
amenuenses  alone.  The  constructive  Brahmanicide  to  which  we 
have  referred  has,  indeed,  powerfully  operated  towards  this  end. 

In  consequence  of  the  small  attention  paid  to  Charaka’s  com¬ 
pilation  by  practitioners  of  the  Hindu  system  of  medicine,  the  diffi¬ 
culty  has  become  great  of  interpreting  many  portions  of  the  work. 
The  meanings  not  having  been  handed  down  by  authorised 
teachers  from  generation  to  generation,  no  attempt  to  interpret 
Charaka  can  be  successful  throughout.  Whenever  difficulties  arise, 
only  two  methods  present  themselves.  One  is  to  depend  on  one’s 
own  unaided  intelligence  ;  the  other  is  to  consult  brethren  of  the 
profession.  The  latter  of  the  two  ways  should  always  be  adopted 
by  every  cautious  man.  Accordingly,  in  rendering  the  Sutrasthdna, 
the  work  had  to  be  frequently  suspended,  pending  the  result  of 
references  made  to  practitioners  of  admitted  scholarship.  This 
explains  the  delay  that  has  occurred  in  completing  this  most 
difficult  of  all  the  divisions  of  the  work.  The  succeeding  divi¬ 
sions  are  comparatively  easy.  It  is  hoped  that  they  will  not  give 
so  much  trouble. 

There  is  another  matter  to  which  the  attention  of  the  reader 
should  be  drawn.  In  this  division  occurs  the  names  of  a  great 
many  plants.  Those  conversant  with  the  Indian  medical  script¬ 
ures  are  aware  that  almost  every  plant  has,  in  Sanskrit,  more  than 
one  name.  As  if  to  help  the  cause  of  confusion,  the  same  name 
in  many  cases  has,  again,  been  bestowed  upon  more  than  one 
plant.  It  is,  therefore,  very  difficult,  when  a  particular  name  is 
met  with,  to  determine  what  plant  is  meant.  Lexicons  can  afford 
little  help.  The  student  of  Charaka  is  obliged  in  such  cases  to 
depend  upon  tradition  and  present  practice.  The  medicines 
named  by  Charaka  are  still  prepared  and  prescribed  by  practition¬ 
ers.  The  same  ingredients  are  used  everywhere.  The  same  roots 
and  barks  and  leaves  and  flowers  and  fruits,  are  used  from 
generation  to  generation  In  the  identification  of  plants,  therefore, 
tradition  and  practice  must  be  looked  upon  if  not  as  infallible 
at  least  as  helpful  guides.  To  give  an  example :  Hastidanti 
enters  into  the  composition  of  some  drugs.  Lexicons  give 
garden  radish  as  one  of  the  meanings  of  Hastidanti.  Literally, 
‘Hastidanti’  means  something  after  the  form  of  an  elephant’s 


[  iii  ] 


tusk.  A  garden  radish  bears  some  resemblance  to  an  elephant’s 
tusk  when  it  is  not  a  large  one.  Hence,  ‘Hastidanti’  commonly 
means  a  garden  radish.  In  medical  scriptures,  however,  the  garden 
radish  is  never  understood  as  the  equivalent  of  ‘Hastidanti.’  It  is, 
on  the  other  hand,  a  plant  wrell-known  to  the  profession  and  to 
those  that  supply  the  profession  with  the  products  of  hill  and  dale, 
forest  and  swamp.  It  is  otherwise  called  ‘Nagadanci’.  In  Bengal 
it  is  known  by  the  name  of  ‘Cherapata-danti,’  so  called  because  of 
the  indentations  on  the  edge  of  its  leaf.  It  is  not  the  plant  known 
by  the  name  of  Nagadamani  or  Nagdona. 

Medical  science,  as  cultivated  in  ancient  India,  had  not 
botany  for  its  hand- maid.  Descriptions  occur  of  many  plants, 
but  no  scientific  classification  had  ever  been  attempted.  Medical 
students,  it  is  true,  have  to  familiarise  themselves  with  the  plants 
and  the  minerals  mentioned  in  the  scriptures  they  study.  But 
such  study,  however  regular,  cannot  lead  to  that  accurate  know¬ 
ledge  which  a  study  of  scientific  botany  would  confer.  There 
were,  again,  no  botanical  gardens  maintained  by  either  kings  or 
eminent  medical  teachers.  The  plants  mentioned  in  Hindu  medical 
treatises  growr  on  mountain  breasts  and  in  dales,  on  fields  and  road¬ 
sides,  in  bushes  and  forests  and  swamps.  Persons  belonging  to 
the  lowest  classes  of  society  have  always  been  the  purveyors  of 
medical  practitioners.  It  is  true,  particular  practitioners  have  left 
behind  them  compilations  carefully  describing  the  plants  mentioned 
in  medical  treatises  ;  but  these  compilations  have  not  as  yet  seen 
the  light.  They  are  still  in  manuscript,  and  are  guarded  with 
jealous  care  by  their  owners.  All  these  considerations  have 
tended  to  make  the  subject  of  medical  botany  a  difficult  one  in 
Hindu  Medicine.  When  to  this  is  added  the  fact  that  many  plants 
are  no  longer  obtainable  except  from  inaccessible  mountains  or 
distant  countries,  some  idea  is  capable  of  being  formed  of  the  real 
difficulties  that  beset  the  path  of  one  that  seeks  to  interpret 
Charaka  to  modern  readers,  especially  to  European  and  American 
readers. 

It  is  a  matter  of  deep  regret  that  the  first  attempt  at  publishing 
an  English  version  of  Charaka  has  not  met  with  that  measure  of 
support  from  Indian  readers  which  it  has  met  with  from  learned 
scholars  and  medical  men  of  Europe  and  America.  Costly  though 


[  iv  ] 


the  undertaking  is,  it  should  be  supported  by  the  enlightened  por¬ 
tion  of  our  countrymen.  The  diffusion  of  the  intellectual  treasures 
of  ancient  India  is  fraught  with  important  consequences  to  the 
people  of  India.  Their  indifference,  therefore,  to  it,  is  inexpli¬ 
cable.  The  British  Gevernment  of  India,  with  that  liberality 
which  has  always  marked  its  attitude  towards  ancient  Indian 
learning,  sympathises  with  every  project  like  mine.  The  English 
translation  of  the  Mahabharata  has,  in  this  spirit,  been  substan¬ 
tially  aided  by  it,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  it  will  extend  a  helping 
hand  to  the  English  translation  of  Charaka.  Already  the  Govern¬ 
ment  of  Bengal  has  very  kindly  accepted  the  recommendation 
of  Sir  Alfred  Croft,  the  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal, 
to  subscribe  for  65  copies  of  the  work.  This  comes  up  to  Rs.  2,080. 
The  other  local  Governments,  I  am  sure,  will  act  with  equal 
liberality.  My  best  thanks  are  due  to  Sir  Alfred  Croft,  who  has 
always  taken  a  warm  interest  in  my  work.  .  Among  officials  be¬ 
longing  to  other  Departments,  I  must  express  my  heart-felt  thanks 
to  the  Hon’ble  Mr.  Cotton,  Mr.  F.  H.  Skrine,  Mr.  H.  A.  D.  Phillips, 
and  Dr.  G.  A  Grierson,  C.  I.  E.,  for  the  kindness  they  have  always 
shown  me  by  noticing  every  fasciculus  as  it  has  come  out. 

I  take  this  opportunity  of  heartily  thanking  the  editors  of  Indian 
Journals,  European  and  native,  for  the  encouragement  they  have 
always  afforded  me  in  the  prosecution  of  my  difficult  task.  With¬ 
out  their  active  sympathy  and  valuable  support  I  could  never  have 
been  able  to  accomplish  what  I  have  succeeded  in  accomplishing. 
The  editors  of  many  Medical  Journals  of  Europe  and  America  also, 
by  noticing  every  fasciculus,  have  laid  me  under  equal  obligations. 
I  should  avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  for  also  thanking  those 
Oriental  scholars  and  eminent  medical  men  of  Europe  and  America 
who  have  sympathised  with  me  in  my  difficulties  and  encouraged 
me  from  time  to  time  with  kindly  words.  Whatever  those  difficulties, 
I  have  every  hope  of  conquering  them  with  support  so  powerful 
and  so  universal  as  I  have  been  fortunate  enough  to  receive. 


200,  Cornwallis’  Street, 
Calcutta  :  January  if,  1896.  J 


Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  403 

When  they  hear  of  anybody’s  illness,  they  run  towards  his 
neighbourhood,  and  in  the  hearing  of  that  person’s  friends  loudly 
proclaim  their  own  skill  and  accomplishments  as  physicians.* 

These  men  frequently  proclaim  the  shortcomings  of  the  person 
whose  treatment  they  take  up.t 

They  wish  to  win  over  the  friends  of  the  ailing  person  by  doing 
what  would  gladden  them,  by  stories  and  conversation,  and  various 
small  services. 

They  proclaim  their  own  disposition  to  be  pleased  with  a  very 
little  remuneration. 

Obtaining  a  case  for  treatment,  they  constantly  keep  their  eye 
on  all  things,  desirous  of  concealing  their  ignorance  by  dexterity. J 

Unable  to  alleviate  the  disease,  they  accuse  the  patient  as 
unequipt  with  desirable  necessaries,  as  disposed  to  transgress  the 
directions  of  the  physician,  and  as  having  no  control  over  his 
ncli  nations. 

Beholding  that  the  last  stage  has  come,  they  fly  away,  leaving 
the  patient’s  presence  and  repairing  to  some  other  place.  Happen¬ 
ing  to  be  present  in  assemblies  of  ignorant  or  common  men,  they 


*  ‘Abhitah  paripatanti’  implies  that  they  proceed  quickly  to  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  person  that  is  lying  ill. — T. 

‘Samfravane’  means  ‘in  the  hearing-,’  i.e.,  of  the  friends  and  relatives  of  the 
afflicted  person,  or  of  such  persons  as  are  sure  to  carry  the  intelligence  to  the 
friends  and  relatives  of  the  patient. — T. 

t  In  most  texts,  the  reading  is  vicious.  The  correct  reading  is  given  by 
Gangadhara.  It  is  Techa  yasya  pratikarma  kurvanti  &c.  The  passage  does 
not  mean  that  they  proclaim  the  faults  of  the  physician  whom  they  displace. 
The  fact  is,  as  pointed  out  by  Gangadhara,  unable  to  relieve  the  patient  and 
fully  assured  of  their  incapacity  to  afford  relief,  they  proclaim  the  shortcomings 
of  the  patient  in  the  hope  that  their  ill-success  would  be  ascribed  to  those  short¬ 
comings.  Those  shortcomings  have  reference  to  either  the  inattention  of  the 
patient  to  the  directions  of  the  physician  or  to  his  stinginess  in  not  spending 
money  freely  for  good  medicines,  &c. — T. 

+  They  keep  their  eye  on  all  things,  i.e.,  are  attentive  to  what  is  going  on 
in  the  house,  in  order  to  avail  of  that  knowledge  for  hiding  their  incompe.ence 
by  dexterity. — T. 


52 


4X0 


CIIA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


proclaim  their  own  skill  in  treating  disease,  betraying  their 
ignorance  the  while.* 

Manifesting  their  own  ignorance,  they  censure  the  knowledge 
and  wisdom  of  physicians  that  are  truly  wise. 

Beholding  an  assembly  of  men  that  are  learned  and  wise,  they 
avoid  it  from  a  distance,  like  travellers  avoiding  a  wilderness 
where  there  is  cause  of  fear.10 

If  anybody  be  ever  cured,  by  these  physicians,  of  any  light 
disease,,  that  cure  is  always  referred  to  by  them  in  cases  where  the 
treatment  that  effected  the  cure  is  inapplicable  or  where  an 
altogether  different  kind  of  treatment  is  required.f 

They  do  not  desire  to  consult  any  one  (in  respect  of  anything 
connected  with  the  medical  scriptures).  Nor  do  they  desire  to  be 
consulted  by  any  one. 

They  fear  any  one  who  wishes  to  consult  them  as  one  fears 
death  itself.  No  one  knows  who  their  preceptor  is,  or  who  their 
disciple,  or  who  their  fellow-student.11 

(  Here  are  some  verses. ) 

Those  men  who,  wearing  the  garb  of  physicians,  seek  to 
gratify  afflicted  persons  like  fowlers  seeking  to  capture  birds  in  the 
woods  by  having  recourse  to  their  nets  or  springes,12 — those  men 
who  are  unendued  with  scriptures,  experience,  (knowledge  of) 
curative  operations,  time,  measure,  and  place,  should  be  avoided. 
They  walk  on  the  earth  like  the  followers  (messengers) of  Death.13 

A  wise  patient  should  always  avoid  those  foolish  men  with  a 
show  of  learning  who,  for  earning  their  sustenance,  pretend  to  the 
honor  of  being  physicians.  They  are  like  snakes  subsisting  on  air.J1'* 


*  They  imagine  that  they  are  eloquently  expatiating  on  their  own  skill  ; 
but  all  the  while  they  express  nothing  but  their  own  ignorance. — T. 

The  reading  I  adopt  is  that  of  Gangadhara.  For  ‘Sutravayava’  Ganga- 
dhara  correctly  reads  'Kshudravayave  ’,  i.e.,  in  some  disease  of  a  light  nature. 
'Upayuktah'  is  restored  to  health  or  cured.  Tam  refers  either  to  the  person 
cured  or  to  the  treatment  that  has  effected  the  cure.’—  T. 

I  Quacks,  though  they  can  never  have  extensive  practice,  yet  manage  to 
keep  up  appearances.  Hence,  they  are  like  snakes  subsisting  on  air,  for 
ostensible  income  they  have  not.—  J. 


CHA  R  A  KA -SA  MHITA. 


4ir 

Salutations  of  reverence  are  ever  due  to  able  physicians 
who  are  conversant  with  the  scriptures,  possessed  of  cleverness, 
endued  with  purity  of  behaviour  and  heart,  skilled  in  treatment  of 
disease,  of  practised  hand,  and  with  souls  under  complete  control.15 

(  Here  is  a  verse  containing  a  summary . ) 

In  this  Lesson  on- the  ten  substrata  of  the  Life-breaths  occurs 
an  abstract  of  the  aphorisms  (laid  down  in  the  previous  Lessons- 
which  comprise  what  is  called  Sutrasthdna  or  the  place  of 
aphorisms).  In  it  the  two  kinds  of  physicians  also  have  been- 
spoken  of,  and  the  ten  substrata  of  the  Life-breaths.1 

Thus  ends  the  twenty-ninth  Lesson,  called  ‘That  on  the  Terr 
substrata  of  the  Life-breaths,  in  Agnive9a’s  work  as  revised  by 
Charaka. 


LESSON  XXX. 

After  this,  we  shall  expound  the  Lesson  called  ‘That  about 
the  ten  (great)  ducts  in  the  heart.’  Thus  said  the  illustrious  soa 
of  Atri.1* 

To  the  heart  are  attached  ten  great  ducts.  They  produce  mighty 
consequences.  Mahat  and  Artha  are  said  to  be  the  synonymes 
of  the  heart  by  the  wisest 

The  body  consisting  of  the  six  limbs,  knowledge,  the  senses, 
the  five  objects  of  the  senses,  the  Soul  as  invested  with  attributes, 
the  mind  and  thoughts,  are  all  established  in  the  Heart.!j; 

*  The  name  of  this  Lesson  is  'Arthe-daga  miiliyam' .  The  heart  has- 
many  names ;  among  these,  one  is  ‘Artha’.  The  first  verse  of  the  Lesson- 
begins  'Arthe  daga  maha  mulah  &c’.  Adopting  the  first  compound  of  this 
Verse,  the  Lesson  is  named  '  That  about  the  ten  great  ductslin.  the  heart.’  The 
distinction  between  arteries  and  nerves  was  not,  probably,  known  to  the  Rishis  ; 
hence  ducts  is  the  correct  word  instead  of  arteries. — T. 

f  ‘ Mahamulah ’  literally  implies  ‘those  which  have  the  Mahat  or  the 
heart  for  their  roots.  These  ducts  are  So  called  because  they  arise  from  the 
heart  or  have  the  heart  for  their  roots.  ‘Mahaphalah’  means  ‘those  whiclv 
produce  mighty  consequences.’  These  ducts  convey  the  Ojas  or  pure  blood  from 
the  heart  away  to  every  part  of  the  body  and  keep  a  creature  alive,  as  said  in' 
verse  6  below. — T.  . 

f  The  correct  reading  is  'Shadangamangam, '  meaning  the  whole  body  with 


4T2 


CHAR  AKA -SA  MHITA. 


Since' the  heart  is  the  refuge  of  these  existent  objects,  therefore 
is  it  regarded  by  persons  who  speculate  on  the  meanings  of  things 
as  the  top  beam  of  the  wooden  or  bamboo  frame-work  of  a  thatch.4 

One  gets  swoons  or  loss  of  consciousness  from  wounds  inflicted 
on  the  heart,  and  death  from  the  bursting  or  piercing  of  that  organ. 

That  which  is  the  well-known  consciousness  of  Touch  is  that 
which  is  called  Dhari  (or  Life);  that  is  situate  in  the  heart.5 

The  heart  is  the  seat  (or  receptacle)  of  the  foremost  Ojas.  It 
is  also  the  seat  of  supreme  Brahman.  For  these  reasons  the 
heart  is  called  Mahat  (Great)  and  Artha  (precious  possession), 
by  physicians.8 

Because  the  heart  or  Mahat  is  the  root  of  the  ten  ducts,  there¬ 
fore  these  are  called  Makamulci  (having  the  Great  for  their  root). 
These  bear  the  Ojas  and  run  into  every  part  of  the  body.7 

All  embodied  creatures,  vivified  by  the  Ojas,  move  about  or  act. 
Without  it,  the  life  of  all  creatures  becomes  extinct.8 

The  Ojas  operates  in  the  first  place  as  the  essence  of  concep¬ 
tion.  It  is  the  juice  springing  from  that  juice  which  produces 
conception.  Before  all  other  things  it  penetrates  into  the  growing 
heart  (of  the  foetus)} 

Without  its  loss  or  destruction,  there  can  be  no  destruction 
(or  death).  Dwelling  in  the  heart,  it  sustains  or  supports  life. 
The  Ojas  is  the  strength  of  the  body.  The  body  and  the  life- 
breaths  are  established  in  it.10* 

its  six  limbs.  The  six  limbs  are  the  two  arms,  the  two  legs,  the  hand,  and  the 
trunk.  By  'Vijnanam'  is  meant  that  knowledge  which  is  the  result  of  discri¬ 
mination.  The  senses  or  organs  of  knowledge  only  are  intended  here.  The 
five  objects  of  the  senses  are  color,  taste,  sound,  scent,  and  touch. 

The  Soul  is  independent  of  all  things.  Ignorance  or  Ne-science  invests  it  with 
attributes  and  then  it  becomes  embodied.  The  Soul  with  attributes,  i.e.,  the 
Soul  as  invested  with  body  through  the  operation  of  Ne-science,  has  the  Heart 
for  its  refuge. 

‘ Chetas ’  is  mind,  or  that  which  is  above  the  senses.  It  includes  here  ‘Buddhi’ 
or  the  understanding.  By  ‘Chintya’  is  meant  all  our  thoughts. 

All  these  have  the  heart  for  their  refuge.  This  is  further  explained  in  the 

*  The  second  line  is  read  differently.  The  sense,  however,  is  nearly  the 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


4r3 


The  (ten)  principal  ducts  are  called  Mahaphala,  because  they 
bear  this  Ojas,  or  because  they  serve  diverse  functions  in  the  body. 
Because  they  always  tremble  they  are  called  Dhamani ;  they  are 
called  Crotas  (currents)  because  of  the  blood  flowing  through  them  ; 
and  they  are  also  called  Siras  because  of  the  blood  journeying 
through  them.11* 

He  who  is  desirous  of  protecting  that  Mahat  (or  Heart),  those 
ten  ducts  (called  Mahamulas),  and  that  Ojas,  should  especially 
avoid  all  causes  of  mental  grief.13 

One  should  indulge  in  only  that  which  is  agreeable  to  the 
heart,,  or  which  is  beneficial  to  the  Ojas,  or  which  keeps  the  ducts 
in  good  order.  Indeed,  one  should  court  both  tranquillity  and 
knowledge.13 

Among  diverse  means  that  exist  for  prolonging  life,  those 
conversant  with  the  Science  of  Life  regard  one  as  the  foremost. 
Similarly,  among  those  that  enhance  strength,  one  is  regarded  as  the 
foremost.  Among  those  that  promote  nutrition  and  bulk  of  the 
body,  one  is  regarded  as  the  foremost.  Among  those  that  contri¬ 
bute  to  ecstasies  of  delight,  one  is  regarded  as  the  foremost. 
Among  all  paths,  one  is  regarded  as  the  foremost. 

As  regards  this,  abstention  from  injury  (or  universal  compas¬ 
sion)  is  regarded  as  the  foremost  of  all  means  for  prolonging  the 
lives  of  men.” 

*  In  the  previous  verses  the  Ojas  has  been  spoken  of.  The  Ojas  dwells  in 
the  heart  and  serves  all  the  important  functions  referred  to  above.  The  Ojas, 
therefore,  is  Mahat  or  Great.  The  ten  principal  ducts  rising  from  the  heart  are 
called  Mahaphala.  The  etymology  of  this  word  is  explained,  as  also  of  each  of  its 
synonymes,  in  verse  n.  ‘Tatphala  iti  Mahaphala,’  meaning  that  they  are  called 
so  because  they  bear  or  convey  the  Ojas  which  is  regarded  as  Mahat.  An  alterna¬ 
tive  etymology  is  '•vahudha  va  phalanti /  i.e.,  they  work  or  operate  in  various 
ways,  or  serve  various  functions.  The  synonymes  of  Mahaphala  are  dhamani, 
Crotas,  and  Sira.  ‘Sravana’  and  ‘Sarana’  imply  almost  the  same  kind  of  motion. 

It  is  curious  to  see  how  this  verse  is  rendered  by  Babu  Yasoda  Nandan 
Sircar,  the  author  of  the  new  edition  of  Charaka  (original  and  Bengali  trans¬ 
lation)  in  the  Bengali  character.  Vitiated  as  his  text  and  translation  are  by 
a  profusion  of  errors,  no  error  could  be  more  ridiculous  than  to  mistake  ‘Va  = 
or,  and  ‘tah’  (the  plural  of  'tad’)  for  'vatah,'  the  plural  of  ‘vata’  or  wind. 
According  to  Babu  Sircar,  the  meaning  of  the  first  line  is  ‘The  fruits  of  Ojas 
are  various  kinds  of  wind,’  A  grosser  blunder  cannot  be  conceived,— T. 


charakasamhitA. 


4M 


The  increaseof  energy  is  the  foremost  of  all  means  for  increas¬ 
ing  the  strength. 

Aphrodisiacs  are  the  foremost  of  all  means  for  promoting 
nutrition. 

The  subjugation  of  the  senses  is  the  foremost  of  all  means  for 
deriving  gladness. 

The  knowledge  of  Brahma  (Supreme  Soul)  is  the  foremost  of 
all  means  for  deriving  ecstasies  of  delight. 

The  practice  of  Brahmacharyya  is  the  foremost  of  all  paths 
(or  means  for  attaining  to  happy  goals).14* 

They  are  regarded  as  conversant  with  the  Science  of  Life  who 
are  declarers  of  the  Science,  the  principal  divisions  of  that  Science, 
its  sections,  and  of  questions  arising  therefrom,  respectively,  as 
regards  words,  the  meanings  of  words,  and  clear  explanations  of 
particular  portions.15 

In  this  conneetion  it  is  said  as  follows  :  if  it  be  asked  how  are 
the  Science  and  the  rest  declared  as  regards  words,  the  meanings 
of  words,  and  clear  explanations  of  particular  passages,  it  is 
answered  thus  : 

The  Science,  which  represents  the  work  of  a  Rishi,  when 
repeated  in  its  entirety  in  the  way  of  a  proper  recitation,  is  then 
said  to  be  declared  in  respect  of  words.f 

When  adequately  penetrating  into  it  by  means  of  the  under- 


*  Here,  only  the  foremost  ones  among  the  respective  means  are  noticed. 
Chakrapani  observes  that  although  food  is  regarded  as  the  means  for  the 
prolonging  of  life,  yet  abstention  from  injury  is  the  foremost  of  all  means 
towards  that  end.  Such  abstention  from  injuring  other  creatures  leads  to 
merit  which  directly  prolongs  life. 

Meat  is  one  of  the  means  for  promoting  nutrition.  Yet  it  promotes  the 
nutrition  of  the  body  alone.  Knowledge  promotes  the  nutrition  of  both  body 
and  mind. 

-\Yathamnayam  implies 'in  the  way  of  a  due  or  proper  recitation,’  i.e., 
each  part  coming  after  another,  and  the  pronunciation  regulated  by  the  rules 
of  orthoepy.  Chakrapani  tersely  explains  it  as  equivalent  to  'Yatha  pathcl 
kramena.:  It  is  curious  to  see  how  the  latest  Bengali  editor  of  Charaka,  i.e:, 
Cabu  Yasoda  Nandan  Sircar,  repeating  the  mistake  of  a  previous  edition,  reads 
’yathasthanam'  for  ‘yathnmnSyam.’-^T,  - 


C/JA  RA  KA-SAMHITA. 


4i5 


standing,  the  true  interpretations  are  declared  by  means  of  words 
that  are  fraught  with  explanations  at  large  or  in  brief,  as  also  with 
propositions  and  reasons  and  illustrations  and  syllogistic  statements 
and  winding  up  of  conculsions,  and  that  are  intelligible  to  the 
three  kinds  of  understanding  possessed  by  disciples,  it  is  said  to  be 
declared  in  respect  of  the  meanings  of  words.* 

When  the  difficult  topics  included  in  this  Science  are,  again, 
declared  with  discussions  fraught  with  discriminating  judgments 
of  facts  and  considerations,  the  Science  is  said  to  be  declared  by 
blear  explanations  of  particular  portions.lft 

If  enquirers  happen  to  be  present,  they  may  ask  the  following 
questions  : 

Of  the  four  Vedas,  viz.,  Rich,  Sdman,  Yajush,  and  Atharvan, 
which  Veda  is  taught  by  persons  conversant  with  the  Science  of 
Life? 

What  is  Life? 

Whence  is  the  Science  of  Life  ? 

What,  again,  is  this  Science  of  Life  ? 

Is  it  eternal  or  not  eternal  ? 

What  are  its  limbs  ? 

Who  are  they  that  should  study  it  ? 

Why  should  it  be  studied  ?17| 

The  physician  thus  asked  should  indicate  that  his  devotion  is 
directed  to  the  Atharvan  Veda  which  is  his  own,  among  the  four, 
viz.,  Rich,  Sdman,  Yajush,  and  Atharvan. 

Since  the  Atharvan  Veda,  after  (treating  of)  gifts,  propitiatory 
rites,  offerings  to  the  deities,  auspicious  ceremonies,  Homa,  obser- 


*  The  correct  reading  is  'Vyasa-samasa  6fc.,’  meaning  ‘at  large  and  in 
brief  &c.’  'Upanaya'  is  syllogistic  inferences,  and  'nigamana'  implies  the 
winding  up  of  conclusions.  The  three  kinds  of  understanding  are  the  superior, 
the  middling,  and  the  inferior. — T. 

f  The  correct  reading  is  ‘vibhavanaih.’  By  'vibliavana'  is  meant  discri¬ 
minating  judgments  of  facts  and  all  considerations  connected  therewith. — T. 

|  The  Vedas  are  regarded  as  eternal  and  increate.  At  every  new  creation 
of  the  universe,  they  arise  of  themselves  in  the  mind  of  Brahman,  the  Creator. 
JAyush'  is  the  period  of  Life.  Generally,  however,  it  stands  for  Life. — T. 


4x6 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


vances  and  vows,  expiations,  fasts,  Mantras ,  and  other  assemblage 
of  topics,  has  declared  (the  Science  of)  Treatment.* * * § 

The  Science  of  Treatment  is  taught  for  the  benefit  of  Life. 

Having  indicated  the  Veda  (in  which  the  Science  of  Life 
occurs)  Life  is  explained. 

As  to  Life  :  that  in  which  (or,  by  which)  Chetanci  exists  or 
follows),  Jivitam,  Anubandka,  and  Dhari,  are  words  expressive  of 
the  same  meaning.f 

It  is  called  the  Science  of  Life  because  it  explains  (the  condi¬ 
tions  of]  Life.f 

If  it  be  asked  how  (the  answer  is  as  follows):  by  its  indications, 
by  happiness  and  misery,  by  what  is  beneficial  and  what  is  injuri. 
ous,  by  its  measure  and  the  reverse.  Since  also  this  Science 
explains  what  objects,  attributes,  and  acts  are  subservient  to  Life 
and  what  not  so,  therefore,  it  is  called  Science  of  Life. 

In  this  connection  it  should  be  said  that  in  the  whole  of  this 
Science,  only  those  objects,  attributes  and  acts  that  are  subser¬ 
vient  to  Life  and  those  that  are  not  so,  are  laid  down.18 

Life  has  been  declared  by  its  indications  duly  in  this  very 
Lesson. §  Next,  as  regards  happiness  :  in  this  connection,  of  one 


*  'Parigraha'  implies  a  train  or  assemblage.  What  is  said  here  I  is  that 
the  Science  of  Treatment  forms  a  part  of  the  Atharvan  Veda,  having  been 
declared  after  the  topics  mentioned. — T 

f  Here  the  word  ‘A'yush’  is  explained  by  some  of  its  synonymes.  The 
first  is  ‘Chetananuvrittih,’  as  the  correct  reading  is,  and  not  ‘Chetanapravrittih' 
as  some  of  the  vicious  Bengal  texts  have  it.  Chakrapani  explains  it  as  equivalent 
to  Chaitanyasantanah,'  i.e.,  the  continuation  of  Chaitanya.  Gangadhara  explains 
it  as  ‘Chetana  anuva.rtateyatra.yena  va?  Chetanci  ought  to  be  taken  here  as 
equivalent  to  Soul.  Tivitam  is  jivati  asmin,  i.e.,  one  liveth  in  it.  Anubandhah 
is  a  union  of  the  senses,  mind  and  soul.  Dhari,  as  already  explained,  is  that 
which  upholds  or  sustains  several  things  together. — T, 

$  I.e.,  how  it  goes  on  ;  how  it  is  endangered  ;  and  when  endangered,  how 

the  danger  is  conquered  or  removed.  This  is  explained  fully  in  the  next  portion 
of  the  aphorism. — T. 

§  The  Science  of  Life  explains  Life  by  its  indications,  by  happiness  and 
misery,  by  what  is  beneficial  and  what  is  injurious,  &c.  (Vide  aphorism  io 
above).  In  this  and  the  succeeding  aphorisms,  the  Rishi  points  out  how  may 
Life  be  explained  by  its  indications,  how  by  happiness  and  misery,  &c.  As 


CHARAKA-SAMHITl.  417 

who  is  not  afflicted  by  any  disease  physical  or  mental,  who  is, 
particularly,  possessed  of  youth,  who  is  endued  with  strength, 
energy,  manliness,  and  prowess,  proportioned  to  the  capacity  of 
his  frame,  who  rests  on  strength  of  knowledge,  of  science,  and  of 
the  senses,  as  also  on  all  the  objects  of  the  senses,  who  is  endued 
with  great  affluence  and  diverse  agreeable  objects  of  enjoyment, 
who  is  crowned  with  success  in  respect  of  all  his  essays,  and  who 
moves  and  acts  as  he  pleases,  Life  is  called  happy. 

The  reverse  of  this  is  called  unhappy  Life.19* 

Of  one  who  seeks  the  good  of  all  creatures,  who  abstains  from 
appropriating  what  belongs  to  others,  who  is  truthful  in  speech, who 
is  devoted  to  tranquillity,  who  acts  only  after  reflection  and  exami¬ 
nation,  who  is  never  heedless,  who  pursues  the  aggregate  of  three 
(/.  e.,  Religion,  Wealth,  and  Pleasure)  without  any  one  of  them 
afflicting  the  others,  who  worships  with  reverence  all  those  that 
deserve  worship,  who  derives  praise  from  knowledge  and  science, 
who  waite  with  reverence  on  the  old,  who  has  properly  controlled 
the  impulses  of  affection  or  attachment,  of  jealousy,  of  arrogance, 
and  of  pride,  who  always  makes  diverse  kinds  of  gifts,  who  is 
devoted  to  penances,  knowledge,  and  peace,  who  is  conversant 
with  topics  connected  with  the  Soul,  who  is  devoted  to  That,  who 
acts  in  view  of  both  this  world  and  the  next,  and  who  has  a  good 
memory,  the  Life  is  said  to  be  beneficial.  The  reverse  of  this 
would  be  called  Life  of  an  opposite  character.-!"20 

regards  the  first  of  these  points,  he  says  that  in  that  particular  passage  where 
the  synonyms  of  Life,  viz.,  chetananuvritti  &c.  have  been  given,  {vide 
aphorism  18  above,)  there  Life  has  been  explained  by  its  indications. — T. 

*  Samartlianugata  is  proportionate  to  capacity  of  frame. 

Chakrapani  explains  that  vala  is  connected  with  Juana,  I  vijnaiici,  and 
indriya ;  while  samudsya  is  connected  with  indriyartha,  although  vala-samuddya, 
as  a  compound,  may  be  taken  as  connected  with  all  the  preceding  words.  The 
correct  reading  is  yathestta-vichai'inah  ;  the  genetive  would  follow  the  con¬ 
struction  regularly.  The  ablative  is  the  reading  of  the  vicious  Bengal  texts. 

f  Religion,  Wealth,  and  Pleasure  constitute  an  aggregate  of  three  that 
embraces  all  our  concerns.  To  this  is  added  Moksha  or  Emancipation  by  absorp¬ 
tion  into  the  Supreme,  in  the  case  of  those  that  follow  the  religion  of  Nivritti 
instead  of  Pravritti,  the  former  meaning  abstention  from  acts,  the  latter 
meaning  devotion  to  acts. 


53 


4i8 


CH  J  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  measure  of  Life  is  ascertained  by  indications  of  changes 
(for  the  worse),  that  are  apparently  causeless,  in  the  objects  of 
the  senses,  the  senses,  the  mind,  the  understanding,  and  exertions.* 

One,  from  this  reason,  attains  to  one's  own  Nature  after  the 
expiration  of  a  Kshana,  a  Muhurta,  a  day,  three  days,  five  days, 
seven  days,  ten  days,  twelve  days,  a  fortnight,  a  month,  six- 
months,  or  a  year.f 

The  words  Swabhava  (Nature),  suspension  of  functions,  Mara- 
nam  (death),  break  of  perpetuity  and  suspension  (of  action), 
have  all  the  same  meaning. 

This,  then,  is  as  regards  the  measure  of  Life. 

The  reverse  of  this  affords  no  indication  of  Life’s  measure. 

Instructions  on  it  will  be  laid  down  in  that  part  of  the  compi¬ 
lation  which  is  concerned  with  diseases,  while  treating  of  the, 
body,  its  nature,  and  symptoms. 

The  measure  of  Life  and  ignorance  of  its  measure,  are  treated 
6f  in  the  Science  of  Life. 


Gangadhara  reads,  1  j nana-vij nanopagansaplasya.  ’  This  seems  to  be  correct 
and  I  have,  therefore,  adopted  it. 

‘  Tat-parasya  ’  is  one  who  is  devoted  to  the  Supreme  Self.  ‘  Tat  ’  is  That, 
so  called  because  of  its  inexplicable  nature. — T • 

*  By  “artha'  is  meant  the  objects  of  the  senses,  such  as  sound,  smell,  taste, 
touch  and  color.  By  'cheshta'  is  meant  the  exertions  we  make,  i.  e.,  all  our 
motions  and  acts.  When  indications  are  observable  in  them  of  changes  for  the 
worse,  and  when  those  changes  are  apparently  causeless,  i,  e.,  not  ascribable 
to  the  action  of  well-known  and  intelligible  causes,  the  measure  of  Life  is 
believed  to  be  shortened.  What  is  said  here  is  that  when  the  functions  of  the 
several  organs  approach  towards  stoppage,  the  period  of  Life  is  regarded  as 
approaching  its  end. — T. 

f  ‘  Swabhava  as  used  here,  implies  death.  This  is  explained  immediately 
below. 

‘  Idam  ’  is  the  reading  of  the  vicious  Bengal  texts.  Gangadhara  correctly 
reads  ‘  Ayam  ’,  meaning  this  one  or  some  indefinite  person  ;  it  stands  as  the 
nominative  of  ‘  apatsyate.’  ‘  Tri-pancha-sapta-da^a-dwadafahat  ’  is  the  correct 
reading.  That  death  should  be  indicated  by  the  word  ‘  Swabhava  ’  or  Nature 
s  consistent  with  the  spirit  of  the  speculations  of  Hindu  philosophy.  The 
llnwing  oft-quoted  verse  is  an  authority  for  it : 

Maranatu  prakriiih  faririnam,  Vikritirjivitamuchyate  budhaih.” 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


41  g 

The  purpose  of  the  Science  of  Life  is  protection  of  the  health 
of  the  hale  and  alleviation  of  disease  of  one  that  is  ailing.®1 

The  Science  of  Life  is  stated  to  be  eternal,  in  consequence  of 
its  having  no  beginning. 

Its  indicating  those  facts  which  arise  from  the  very  Nature  (of  a 
living  creature)  and  ; 

the  eternal  character  of  the  actions  of  existent  objects  (which 
it  treats  of.)* 

It  cannot  be  that  there  was  not  at  any  time  a  current  of  Life 
(or  living  creatures) ;  or,  a  current  of  Intelligence  (or  intelligent 
beings),  or,  a  perennial  continuity  of  knowers  of  Life. 

Pleasure  and  pain,  again,  are  eternal,  along  with  health  and 
disease,  their  causes  and  indications,  through  union  of  one  another 
(i.  e.,  a  chain  of  living  creatures  one  coming  after  another). 

This  should  be  known  as  the  topic  of  the  Science  of  Life. 

As  regards  what  the  indications  are  of  the  Science  of  Life,  the 
answer  is  that  they  consist  of  the  increase  and  diminution  of  such 
pairs  of  opposites  as  heavy  and  light,  cold  and  hot,  oily  and  dry,  &c. 
through  similarity  and  dissimilarity. 

As  has  been  said,  through  heavy  things,  when  used  or  brought 
into  contiguity,  an  increase  results  of  all  that  is  heavy,  and  a 
diminution  of  all  that  is  light. 

The  same  is  the  case  with  the  other  pairs  of  opposites  (men¬ 
tioned). 

This  action  (or  nature)  of  existent  objects  is  eternal. 

The  respective  attributes  also  of  such  objects  as  earth  and  the 
rest  are  eternal. 

Objects  and  their  attributes  are  both  eternal  and  not  eternal.2®t 

Implying  that  death  is  the  normal  disposition  of  embodied  beings,  life  being 
called  by  the  wise  its  abnormal  condition. — T. 

*  These  three  considerations  are  fully  explained  in  the  text  below. — T. 

f  These  aphorisms  are  exceedingly  terse  and  abstruse.  What  is  said  in 
them  is  as  follows  : 

For  the  dignity  of  the  Science  of  Life  it  is  necessary  to  show  that  it  is  eter¬ 
nal.  Three  reasons  are  assigned  for  its  eternity.  The  first  is  its  having  no 
beginning.  Traditionally,  it  is  supposed  that  Bharadwaja,  who  introduced  it 


420 


CH  A  RA  RA-SA  MHITA. 


The  Origin  of  the  science  of  Life,  occuring  after  a  time  when  it 
was  not,  is  not  to  be  seen.  Nor  is  that  Origin  explained  otherwise 

in  this  world,  got  it  from  f  ndra ;  that  Indra  had  got  it  from  the  twin  Ac  wins,  the 
celestial  physicians  ;  the  twin  Afwins  had  got  it  from  the  Grandsire  Brahman. 
Brahman  is,  for  all  practical  purposes,  eternal,  for  whatever  knowledge  he  has 
shines  forth  in  him  by  inward  light  as  soon  as  he  awakes  after  sleep  and  re¬ 
creates  the  universe. 

Discarding  the  traditional  view,  the  Science  of  Life  is  said  to  be  eternal  on 
another  ground.  Nobody  knows  its  beginning  i.  e.  when  or  with  whom  it  first 
began.  It  is  so  ancient  that  its  origin  is  lost  in  the  mists  of  antiquity.  No  starting 
point,  in  respect  of  either  time  or  person,  is  known  or  can  be  conceived.  Hence, 
its  eternity  may  be  presumed.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  eterniny  is 
predicated  of  this  Science  as  regards  its  substance  and  not  as  regards  any  par¬ 
ticular  treatise  bearing  on  it. 

The  eternity  of  this  Science  is  made  out  more  particularly  from  the  considera¬ 
tions  beginning  with  “It  Cannot  be  that  there  was  not  at  any  time  &c _ ” 

and  ending  with  “  Pleasure  and  pain  &c.”  All  Hindu  systems  of  speculation 
on  the  subject  of  cosmogony  treat  the  universe  as  eternal.  Hence  no  time  can 
be  Conceived  when  there  was  no  human  being,  and  no  Intelligence  in  human 
beings,  and,  therefore,  no  knower  of  the  considerations  of  Life.  Hence,  that 
which  is  the  Jneya  of  this  Science,  that  also  which  is  its  Jnanam,  and  its  Jnatri 
too,  have  never  been  wanting. 

Pleasure  and  Pain,  again,  are  eternal,  with  health  and  disease,  their  causes 
and  indications.  This  is  so  because  of  the  chain  of  human  beings  one  after 
another  being  endless  or  without  beginning.  This  is  another  consideration  why 
the  Science  of  Life  should  be  regarded  eternal.  The  very  existence  of  pleasure 
and  health,  and  of  pain  and  disease,  and,  therefore,  of  the  causes  (including 
the  methods  of  alleviation)  of  health  and  disease,  being  eternal,  the  topic  of  this 
Science,  its  knowledge,  and  its  knowers,  cannot  but  be  eternal. 

The  second  consideration  upon  which  is  founded  the  eternity  of  this  Science 
is  furnished  by  “  its  indicating  the  facts  which  arise  from  the  very  Nature  (of 
a  living  creature.)”  It  has  been  already  pointed  out  that  pleasure  and  pain, 
with  health  and  disease. and  their  causes  and  cures  and  indications  or  symptoms, 
form  the  topic,  in  brief,  of  this  Science.  This  Science  is  indicated  by  Life 
being  treated  in  it,  as  also  pleasure  and  pain,  &c.  Hence,  both  Life  and 
pleasure  and  pain  being  eternal,  the  Science  also  is  eternal. 

The  third  consideration  is  furnished  by  the  eternal  character  of  the  actions 
of  existent  objects.  The  increase  and  diminution  of  such  pairs  of  opposites 
as  heavy  and  light;  cold  and  heat,  & c.,  which  form  the  attributes  of  objects, 
or,  rather,  the  laws  that  regulate  that  increase  and  diminution,  form  the  topic  of 
this  Science.  The  attributes  or  objects  being  eternal,  their  laws  also  are 
eternal.  Those  laws  affect  human  beings.  Hence,  this  Science  which  treats 
of  those  laws  land  of  how  they  affect  human  beings,  is  eternal. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


421 


than  by  Intuition  and  Instruction.  One  class  explains  that  origin  by 
adopting  these  two  {viz,  Intuition  and  Instruction.)  The  indications 
of  this  Science  arise  from  the  very  nature  of  living  beings.  They 
are  not  the  handiwork  of  any  particular  person.  This  has  been 
said  in  this  Lesson  (above),  as  also  in  the  initial  Lesson  of  this 
treatise.  As  the  heat  of  fire,  the  fluidity  of  water,  and  the  nature 
of  (other)  existent  objects,  are  eternal,  even  so  is  eternity  to  be 
predicated  of  the  Science  of  Life.  This  follows  from  what  has 
been  explained  before  :  heavy  things  used  or  brought  into  con¬ 
tact  with  those  that  are  heavy,  lead  to  the  enhancement  of 
the  heaviness  of  the  latter  and  the  diminution  of  all  that  are  light. 
This  being  so,  the  conclusion  follows.*23 


In  further  explanation,  for  guarding  against  a  misconception,  it  is  stated 
that  objects  are  both  eternal  and  not  eternal.  Objects,  as  due  to  the  mingling, 
in  various  proportions,  of  the  primal  elements,  may  not  be  eternal  in  their 
particular  forms.  But  the  elements  which  make  them  up  are  eternal.  Thus, 
earth,  water,  light,  air,  and  ether  are  eternal,  although  a  jug  or  a  jar,  or  a  mango 
or  a  peach,  may  not  be  so.  Then,  again,  a  mango  or  a  peach  may  be 
said  to  be  eternal  as  representing  species.  A  particular  peach  may  dissolve  or 
melt  away,  but  another  will  grow  from  its  seed.  The  eternity  of  objects  being 
thus  established,  as  also  of  their  attributes,  the  eternity  follows  of  the  manner 
in  which  they  act  on  the  human  body  or  mind.  The  manner  of  that  opera¬ 
tion  being  the  topic  of  this  Science,  it  is  evident  that  this  Science  also  is 
eternal. — T. 

*  What  is  stated  here  is  as  follows  :  the  eternity  of  the  Science  of  Life 
follows  from  the  fact  that  nobody  can  say  it  had  its  origin  at  such  and  such  a 
time,  and  that  it  had  no  existence  before.  Generally,  when  people  explain  the 
origin  of  this  Science,  they  refer  it  either  to  the  Intuition  of  the  Grandsire, 
Brahman,  in  whose  mind,  like  other  branches  of  knowledge,  it  springs  up  of 
itself  in  the  beginning  of  a  new  cycle  ;  or,  to  Indra,  the  chief  of  the  Celestials, 
who  is  said  to  have  instructed  the  sage  Bharadawja  who  brought  it  down  from 
Heaven  and  communicated  it  to  Punarvasu  and  others.  This,  it  is  said,  is 
one  opinion.  In  aphorism  22  above,  several  considerations  have  been  urged  for 
showing  how  this  Science  is  not  the  handiwork  of  any  one  individual. 

The  Universe  is  eternal,  having  no  beginning.  Both  human  beings  and  the 
objects  upon  which  they  depend  are  eternal.  The  heat  of  fire,  the  fluidity  of 
water,  and  the  attributes  of  other  objects,  are  eternal.  Men  using  heavy  articles 
find  the  property  of  heaviness  enhanced  and  lightness  diminished.  Particular 
things  are  beneficial  to  health  ;  particular  things  are  not  so.  Some  objects 
cause  maladies  ;  some  cure  maladies  when  they  invade  man.  The  Science  of 
Life  has  for  its  topics  considerations  of  health  and  disease.  Those  considera- 


432 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  MHITA. 


The  Science  of  Life  has  eight  limbs. 

They  are  as  follows  : — 

i.  Treatment  of  the  body  (by  administration  of  drugs', ;  2.  Sur¬ 
gical  operations  (with  the  aid  of  instruments)  ;  3.  Extraction  of 
weapons  (from  the  body)  j  4.  Alleviation  of  poisons  (of  quick 
effects),  of  poisons  which  are  slow  of  operation,  and  of  the  evil 
effects  of  the  injudicious  application  of  drugs  and  processes  ; 
5,  Knowledge  of  the  means  of  driving  away  evil  spirits  and 
Rakshasas ;  6.  Nurture  of  children  ;  7.  Preparation  of  drugs  by 
mixture  ;  and  8.  Administration  of  stimulants  and  aphrodisiacs. 

This  Science  should  be  studied  by  Brahmanas,  Kshatriyas,  and 
Vaifyas. 

Brahmans  should  learn  it  for  doing  good  to  all  creatures. 

Kshatriyas  should  learn  it  for  self-preservation. 

Vaifyas  should  learn  it  for  gain  (or  practice  as  a  profession). 

In  general,  all  may  study  this  Science  for  the  acquisition  of 
religious  merit,  wealth,  and  pleasure* 

In  this  connection,  the  care  that  one  takes  in  allaying  the 
ailments  of  men  that  are  conversant  with  the  Science  of  the  Soul, 
of  those  that  tread  in  the  path  of  righteousness,  of  those  that  are 
promulgators  of  religion,  as  also  of  mothers  and  fathers  and  bro¬ 
thers  and  kinsmen  and  seniors  and  preceptors,  and  the  study  that 
one  makes  of  the  Science  of  Life,  its  communication  to  others, 
and  the  writing  or  compiling  of  teatises  on  it,  represent  the  high 
religious  merit  that  this  Science  affords.f2* 

tions,  as  dependant  on  the  attributes  of  both  objects  and  human  beings,  are 
eternal.  The  indications  of  this  science,  therefore,  are  eternal. 

As  already  observed  (in  the  previous  note),  a  particular  treatise  bearing  on  the 
Science  of  Life  may  be  artificial  or  may  have  a  beginning  or  an  author.  But  the 
Science  itself,  its  topics,  and  the  knowers  of  the  Science,  are  all  eternal. — T. 

*  The  four  objects,  called  ‘  Purushartha  ’  or  the  purposes  of  existence,  are 
<  Dharma  ’  or  religious  merit,  ‘  Artha  ’  or  Wealth,  ‘  Kama  ’  or  Pleasure,  and 
•  Moksha  ’  or  Emancipation  from  re-birth  by  absorption  into  the  universal 
essence  of  Brahma.  It  is  shown  here  that  the  study  of  the  Science  of  Life  con¬ 
tributes  to  the  acquisition  of  three  of  these,  viz ,  Dharma,  Artha,  and  Kama. 
Its  importance,  therefore,  is  established  beyond  doubt. — T. 

f  Having  first  premised  that  this  Science  conduces  to  the  triple  aggregate 
ef  Life’s  purposes,  the  Rishi  points  out  wherein  or  whence  is  each  of  them.  The 


charaka-samhitA. 


423 


The  acquisition  of  different  kinds  of  wealth,  to  be  happily 
enjoyed,  from  kings  and  chiefs  or  men  of  wealth,  the  preservation 
of  one’s  own  self,  and  the  preservation  of  all  those  men  that  are 
one’s  dependants,  represent  the  wealth  that  this  Science  affords.25* 

That,  again,  which  consists  of  the  approbation  of  the  learned, 
of  fame,  of  the  status  of  being  looked  upon  as  the  refuge  of  all, 
of  the  general  respect  of  the  community,  of  the  obedience  and 
services  rendered  by  all,  and  of  the  restoration  to  health  effected 
of  persons  dear  and  beloved,  represents  the  pleasure  derivable  from 
this  Science.26! 

The  answers  have  now  been  given  in  full  according  to  the 
questions  proposed. 

Then  the  physician  (  having  made  these  answers  )  may  again 
be  asked  by  a  student  of  this  Science  these  eight  questions  from 
the  beginning.  They  are  these  : — 1.  Compilation,  2.  the  subject 
of  the  compilation,  3.  the  several  parts  or  divisions  of  the  com¬ 
pilation,  4.  the  subjects  of  the  several  parts  or  divisions,  5.  the 
lessons  that  compose  the  several  divisions,  6.  the  meanings  of 
the  lessons,  7.  (especial)  questions,  and  8.  the  answers  to  (especial) 
questions. J27 

When  the  physician  is  asked  about  these,  he  should  answer 
them  fully  by  1.  words,  2.  the  meanings  of  words,  and  3.  by 
expositions  of  especial  parts.  § 


Bengal  texts,  as  regards  the  latter  portion  of  24,  are  very  vicious.  B  th 
Gangadhara  and  Chakrapanidatta  read  “yachchayurveda  and  "anudhyayati, 
vedayati,  anuvidhiyate  &c.”  The  last  word  means  ‘  writes  treaties  &c.’  It  may 
include  ‘  assists  others  in  the  study  of  the  Science.” — T. 

*  Some  of  the  Bengal  texts  read  ‘  airthalavavaptih  ’  for  '  arthanamavaptih.' 
'  Avekshanancha  '  is  also  a  misreading  for  '  atmarakshanancha.' — T. 

f  The  Bengal  texts  have  '  samanafuijrusha  '  for  ‘  Sanmanaf ufrusha.' — T. 

%  The  questions  relate  to  these  several  subjects.  The  first  is: — what  compila¬ 
tions  exist  regarding  this  Science.  The  second  relates  to  the  subjects  of  the 
compilations.  Then  come  the  divisions  of  the  compilations ;  &c.  All  these 
have  been  explained  below. — T. 

§  The  explanations  should  have  reference  1.  to  the  language  used,  2.  to 
the  meaning  of  the  language,  and  3.  to  the  difficulties  involved  in  particular 
passages  or  portions.  Vide  aphorism  17  of  this  Lesson,  ante. — T. 


424 


CHA  RAKA-SA  M  HI  TA. 


As  regards  these,  (it  should  be  answered  that)  Ayurveda, 
Cakhavidya,  Sutrajnana,  Castralakshmanam,  and  Tantram  are  words 
expressive  of  the  same  meaning.* 

The  subject  of  the  compilation  has  been  explained  in  the 
definitions  and  observations  contained  in  it.  That  subject,  again, 
is  capable  of  being  understood  from  the  sections  of  the  compilation. 
Those  sections  are  ten  in  number.  They  are  i.  £ arira ,  2.  Vritti, 
3.  Hetu,  4.  Vyadhi,  5.  Karma,  6.  Karyya,  7.  Kala,  8.  Karttri, 
9.  Karma,  and  10.  ascertainment  of  Vidhi. 

These  ten  sections  (or  divisions  of  the  subject  )  have  been 
fully  expounded  in  the  compilation. a8t 

The  compilation  has  eight  divisions.  They  are,  1.  (jdoka, 
2.  Nidana,  3.  Vimana,  4.  £arira,  5.  Indriya,  6.  Chikitsa,  7.  Kalpa, 
and  8.  Siddhi. 

The  first  of  these,  i.  e.,  £loka,  comprises  thirty  Lessons. 

The  second,  the  third,  and  the  fourth,  viz.,  Nidana,  Vimana, 
and  £arira,  each  comprises  eight  Lesssons. 

*  Here  some  synonyms  of  Ayurveda  are  given.  1.  Ayurveda  is  Science 
of  Life  ;  2.  Cakhavidya  is  knowledge  of  a  (particular)  Qakha  or  branch  (of 
the  Vedas);  3.  Sutrajnana  is  conversance  with  the  aphorisms  (of  the  Science 
of  Life);  4.  Qastralakshanam  is  the  contents  of  the  treatises  (on  this  Science); 
and  Tantram  is  compilation  or  treatise.  It  should  be  noted  that  it  is  only  in  the 
lips  of  physicians  that  these  words  would  imply  the  Ayurveda. — T. 

f  The  Section  on  Qarira  explains  its  composition  as  made  up  of  the  five 
principal  elements. 

That  on  Vritti  treats  of  the  diverse  kinds  of  sustenance. 

Hetu  has  reference  to  the  causes  of  disease,  viz.,  injurious  food  and  practices. 

Vyadhi  is  the  absence  of  harmony  in  respect  of  the  constituent  elements 
(dhatu)  of  the  body. 

Karma  has  reference  to  the  application  of  remedial  operations,  i.e.,  treatment. 

Karyya  has  reference  to  the  restoration  of  an  ailing  person  to  health. 

Kala  treats  of  the  Seasons,  including  the  age  or  years  of  men. 

Karttri  has  reference  to  the  Agent  in  treatment,  i.e.,  the  physician. 

Karana  refers  to  drugs  and  other  curative  agents. 

Vidhi- vini?chaya  is  ascertainment  of  the  mode  of  combining  drugs  and 
remedial  agents  for  bringing  about  a  cure. 

The  latest  Bengali  translator  of  Charaka,  viz.,  Babu  Yasodanandan  Sircar, 
copying  an  earlier  erroneous  text,  has  committed  the  most  ridiculous  blunders  in 
his  version  of  this  aphorism. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  425 

The  division  in  respect  of  the  Indriyas  comprises  twelve 
Lessons. 

That  on  Chikitsa  comprises  thirty  Lessons. 

The  seventh  and  the  eighth,  viz,,  Kalpa  and  Siddhi,  each 
comprises  twelve  Lessons.’0*. 

Here  are  some  verses. 

Two  consist,  each,  of  thirty  Lessons  ;  three,  each,  of  twelve 
Lessons  j  and  three,  each,  of  eight  Lessons.  They  are  £loka  and 
Aushadha,  and  Arishta  and  Vikalpa  and  Siddhi,  and  Nidana  and 
Vimana  and  A9raya.!°f 

In  each  division  (or  sthana)  the  topics  have  been  set  forth 
that  form  its  subject. 


f  •  The  distinction  between  Prakarana,  which  has  been  spoken  of  in  the  fore¬ 
going  aphorism,  and  Sthana,  which  is  spoken  of  in  this,  should  be  understood. 
Prakarana  is  a  division  of  the  subject,  while  Sthana  is  a  division  of  the  treatise. 

The  first  division  of  this  treatise  (Charaka)  is  that  which  relates  to  Qlokas 
or  Sutras,  i.e.,  aphorisms.  The  reader  has,  by  this,  got  a  pretty  clear  idea  of 
what  the  contents  are  of  the  Qloka-  or  Sutra-sthana,  which  has  been  rendered 
‘  place  of  aphorisms.’  The  present  completes  the  thirty  lessons  of  this  Sthana 
or  place  or  division. 

The  division  called  Nidana  relates  to  the  primary  causes  of  disease,  such  as 
indulgence  in  practices  and  use  of  objects  which  are  destructive  of  the  harmony 
of  the  Dhatus  or  constituent  elements  of  the  body.  It  treats  also  of  those  faults 
of  the  understanding  which  bring  about  mental  diseases.  It  discusses  also  the 
symptoms,  preliminary  as  well  as  developed,  of  diseases  in  general. 

The  division  called  Vimana  treats  particularly  of  the  faults  and  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  objects  or  drugs  with  the  faults  as  regards  their  excitement  and 
alleviation. 

Qarira  treats  of  the  origin  of  the  body,  and  the  diverse  conditions  relating 
to  it. 

The  fifth  division,  called  Indriya,  treats  of  the  Senses  in  particular,  as 
regards  the  symptoms  they  discover  when  the  body  is  diseased. 

The  sixth,  called  Treatment,  refers  to  the  treatment  of  diseases  in  particular. 

The  seventh,  called  Kalpa,  treats  of  the  combinations  of  drugs  or  the  man¬ 
ner  in  which  drugs  are  to  be  employed  for  effecting  cures. 

The  eighth  division,  called  Siddhi,  refers  to  the  effects  of  the  application  of 
remedial  processes  and  drugs. — T. 

t  These  names  are  slightly  different  from  those  mentioned  before.  But 
there  is  no  difficulty  in  identifying  them. — T, 


54 


426 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  M  HI  TA. 


There  are,  in  all,  a  hundred  and  twenty  Lessons  in  these  divi¬ 
sions.  Hear  what  their  names  are  as  I  mention  them  one  after 
another. 

They  are  1.  Dirghanjivitiya,  2.  ApamSrga-tundaliya,  3.  Arag- 
badhiya,  and  4.  Shadvivekagraya,  These  four  have  drugs  for 
their  topic. 

Then  come  5.  Matragitiya,  and  6.  Tasyagitiya,  and  also  7. 
Navegandharaniya,  and  8.  Indriyopakramaniya.  These  four  treat 
of  (the  rules  of  preserving)  Health.'* 

Then  come  9.  Khuddakachatuspada,  10.  Mahachatuspada,  as 
also  11.  Tisraishaniya,  and  12.  Vatakalakaliya.  These  four,  the 
learned  should  understand,  deal  with  what  should  be  done  and  what 
avoided.'4 

Then  come  13.  the  lesson  on  Snehana,  and  14.  that  on 
Swedana,  and  15.  that  called  Upakalpana,  and  also  16.  that  called 
Chikitsapravritiya.  All  these  four  deal  with  the  mode  of  adminis¬ 
tering  remedial  agents.'8 

Then  come  17.  the  lesson  called  Kiyantagirasiya,  and  18.  that 
called  Trigothiya,  and  19.  that  called  Ashtodariya  and  20.  that 
called  Maharogadhyaya.  These  four  treat  of  diseases  in  especial." 

Then  come  21.  the  lesson  called  Ashtaninditiya,  and  22.  that 
called  Langhana,  and  23.  that  called  Tarpana,  and  24.  that  called 
Vidhigonitiya.  These  four  treat  of  the  application  of  drugs  to 
diseases.27 

Then  come  25.  Yajjapurushiya,  and  26.  that  called  Bhadra- 
k&pya,  and  27.  that  called  Annapaniya,  and  28.  that  called  Vividha- 
gitapitiya.  These  four  deal  with  the  ascertainment  of  food  and 
drink." 

Lastly  come  29.  the  lesson  called  Dagapranayataniya,  and 
30.  that  called  Arthedagamuliya.  These  two  deal  with  the  life- 
breaths  and  the  ducts  of  the  body  as  also  the  accomplishments 
of  physicians.89 

Thus  Drugs,  Health,  the  ascertainment  of  practices  proper 
and  improper,  method  of  administering  remedial  agents,  diseases, 


CHAR  A  RA-SA  MHITA. 


427 

and  application  of  medicines  for  effecting  cures,  these  six  topics 
have  been  treated  of  each  in  four  consecutive  lessons.  The 
seventh  topic  is  that  which  relates  to  food  and  drink.  (This  has 
been  treated  of  in  the  next  group  of  four  lessons).40 

The  remaining  two  lessons  deal  with  an  abstract  of  the  con¬ 
tents  of  the  previous  ones. 

The  tale  of  thirty  is  thus  complete,  of  the  division,  called 
£lokas  or  Sutras,  of  this  compilation.  Full  of  grave  import,  this 
auspicious  division  forms,  as  it  were,  the  very  head  of  the  com¬ 
pilation.41 

In  this  division  has  been  collected  together  groups  of  fours, 
each  of  grave  import.* 

This  division  has  been  called  <^lokasth§na  in  consequence 
of  its  contents  having  been  (generally)  presented  in  £lokas  or 
Verses.4®. 

The  division  called  NidSna  consists  of  eight  lessons.  They 
are  1.  the  Nidana  of  fever,  2.  that  of  Raktapitta,  3.  that  of  Gulma, 
4.  that  of  Meha,  5.  that  of  Kushtha,  6.  that  of  £osha,  7.  that  of 
Unmada,  and  8.  that  of  Apasmara.4Sf 

In  the  Division  called  Vimana,  the  great  Rishi  has  spoken  of 
these  eight  Vimanas,  of  different  kinds,  each  of  grave  import. 


*  These  groups  of  fours  have  all  been  mentioned  above. — T. 

1.  This  is  an  exhaustive  chapter  on  the  causes  of  Fevers. 

2.  Raktapitta  is  Bilious  Hemorrhage,  i.  e.,  effusions  of  blood  in  consequence 
of  the  excitement  of  the  bile. 

3.  Gulma  is  abdominal  tumours  with  or  without  pains. 

4.  Meha  is  diabetes  and  other  affections  connected  with  the  urine.  There 
are  more  than  sixteen  varieties  of  this  disease. 

5.  Kushtha  is  Leprosy  and  diverse  other  diseases  of  the  skin. 

6.  Qosha  is  pulmonary  consumption  and  other  inflammations  of  the  organs 
within  the  chest.  They  are  so  called  in  consequence  of  the  gradual  waste  or 
emaciation  that  sets  in  of  the  patient. 

7.  Unmada  is  Lunacy  in  general  as  well  as  those  forms  of  it  which  are 
believed  to  be  due  to  the  action  of  evil  spirits  and  Rakshasas. 

8.  Apasmara  is  Epilepsy  and  delusions  in  general  ;  particularly  those  delu¬ 
sions  which  show  the  patient  monsters  in  empty  space  and  deprive  him  of  con¬ 
sciousness. 


428 


CHA  RAKA-  SA  MH I TA. 


They  are  1.  Rasa-vimana,  2.  Kukshi-vimana  with  reference  to  the 
three  portions  of  the  Kukshi,  3.  the  Vim&na  that  relates  to  the 
destruction  of  inhabited  areas  (populous  villages  and  towns  and 
cities),  4.  the  Vimana  relating  to  the  three  methods  of  acquiring 
knowledge  of  disease,  5.  the  Vimana  relating  to  the  ducts,  6.  the 
Vimana  relating  to  Roganika,  7.  the  Vimana  that  relates  to  the 
form  or  symptoms  of  disease,  and  8.  the  Vimana  that  relates  to 
Rogabhishagjita.44-*5* 

*  It  should  be  remembered  that  the  division  on  Vimana  treats  of  the 
measures  of  both  faults  (  i.  e.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm)  and  medicines.  In  the 
division  called  Nidana,  the  causes  of  disease,  the  preliminary  symptoms  of 
disease,  the  forms  of  disease,  the  supervening  incidents,  &c.,  have  been  treated 
of.  In  the  present  division  the  Rishi  speaks  of  the  measure  of  the  excitement  of 
wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  as  also  of  medicines.  This  will  appear  clearly  from  the 
several  Lessons  included  in  it. 

1.  The  first  Lesson  treats  of  the  Tastes  and  their  connection  with  the  faults. 
The  Tastes, — sweet,  sour,  saline,  pungent,  astringent,  and  bitter, — contribute  to 
the  growth  of  the  body,  when  judiciously  used.  Injudicious  use,  however,  of  the 
Tastes  leads  to  excitements  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm.  The  Lesson  called  Rasa- 
vimana  treats  of  how  the  Tastes  affect  the  faults. 

a.  In  taking  food  the  stomach  should  be  regarded  as  divided  into  three 
parts.  One  of  these  parts  is  to  be  filled  with  solid  food  ;  another  with  such 
liquid  food  as  is  liqked  or  swallowed  ;  the  third  part  of  the  stomach  should  be  kept 
empty  for  movement  of  wind,  bile  and  phlegm.  Every  kind  of  food,  again,  does 
not  contribute  to  strength  or  health  This  Lesson  deals  with  the  effects  on  the 
wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  of  particular  kinds  of  food  taken  in  particular  measures, 
e.,  in  judicious  or  injudicious  measure. 

3.  Diseases  are  generated  by  general  and  especial  causes.  So  far  as 
general  causes  are  concerned,  they  relate  to  excitements  of  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm,  brought  on  by  diverse  considerations  explained  in  the  previous  Lesson. 
This  Lesson  deals  with  those  especial  causes  of  disease  which  are  connected  with 
the  vitiation  of  the  air,  the  water,  the  land,  &c.,  of  a  whole  realm  or  city  and 
which  bring  about  a  particular  disease  that  affects  a  large  number  of  human 
beings  of  both  sexes  and  all  ages  and  leads  to  the  devastation  of  a  pestilence. 

4.  The  three  methods  are  the  Instructions  of  the  wise,  experience  or  obser¬ 
vation,  and  Inference.  This  Lesson  treats  of  the  measure  of  each  of  these 
necessary  to  make  a  competent  physician. 

5.  There  are  diverse  ducts  or  channels  in  the  body  which  serve  diverse 
purposes  in  the  economy  of  the  human  frame.  Principally,  those  ducts  bear  or 
convey  from  place  to  place  the  life-breaths,  water,  food,  the  liquid  or  juice  into 
which  the  food  develops  a  little  while  after  its  being  taken,  blood,  flesh,  fat 
or  adeps,  bones,  marrow,  vital  seed,  urine,  faeces  and  perspiration.  What  is 


CHARAKA-SA  M  HIT  A. 


429 


The  following  are  the  eight  sub-divisions  or  Lessons,  of  the 
( third  or )  Carirasthana  as  indicated  by  that  sage,  viz.,  the 
son  of  Atri.  -They  are  1.  Katidhapurushiyam,  2.  Gotrenatulyam, 
3.  Khuddika-garbhavakranti,  4.  Mahati-garbhavakranti,  5.  Puru- 
shavichaya,  6.  Carira-vichaya,  7.  Carira-sankhya,  and  8.  Jati- 
sutriya.4'-47 

meant  by  ducts  bearing  flesh  and  bones  is  that  they  bear  the  substances  which 
afterwards  compose  those  solid  elements  of  the  body.  This  Lesson  treats  of 
these  various  ducts.  If  particular  ducts  become  diseased,  particular  parts  of 
the  body  or  particular  elements  become  diseased.  All  these  have  been  set  forth 
in  this  Lesson. 

6.  This  Lesson  treats  of  the  diversity  of  diseases  in  consequence  of  the  diver¬ 
sity  of  causes  that  produce  them.  Generally  speaking,  diseases  are  of  two  kinds, 
if  classed  according  to  their  energy  ;  they  are  curable  or  incurable.  According 
to  their  strength,  they  are  of  two  kinds  ;  viz.,  violent  and  mild.  According  to 
their  seats,  they  are  of  two  kinds  ;  viz.,  mental  and  physical.  According  to 
their  causes,  they  are  of  two  kinds  ;  viz.,  as  due  to  the  absence  of  harmony  in 
wind,  bile  and  phlegm,  or  of  the  several  elements  of  the  body,  and  as  due  to 
accidental  causes.  Diseases,  though  thus  divisible  into  two  classes  from  various 
points  of  view,  are  yet  either  infinite  or  very  large  in  number.  This  very 
large  variety  is  due  to  diverse  causes.  This  Lesson  treats  of  the  diversity  of 
diseases. 

7.  It  is  seen  that  some  one,  though  afflicted  by  a  violent  disease,  still,  in 
consequence  of  his  general  strength,  power  of  endurance,  vitality,  &c.,  presents 
the  aspect  of  a  person  afflicted  by  a  light  disease.  Some  one,  again,  though 
afflicted  by  a  light  disease,  still,  in  consequence  of  the  absence  of  strength, 
endurance,  vitality,  &c.,  presents  the  aspect  of  a  person  afflicted  by  a  violent 
disease.  The  physician  should  not  judge  by  general  appearances  alone.  This 
Lesson  sets  forth  the  diverse  considerations  by  which  the  true  form  of  a  disease 
is  to  be  ascertained. 

8.  This  Lesson  treats  of  the  general  features  of  the  scriptures  one  should 
study  that  is  desirous  of  becoming  a  good  physician  ;  the  kind  of  preceptor  he 
should  select,  the  formalities  both  preceptor  and  pupil  are  to  observe  before 
commencing  the  study,  and  similar  other  matters.  This  is  the  largest  of  all  the 
Lessons  in  this  division. 

1.  The  I  first  Lesson  deals  with  the  question — how  many  kinds  of  Purushas 
or  persons  there  are.  It  is  a  philosophical  disquisition  whose  nature  will  be 
best  understood  from  a  few  of  the  preliminary  questions  which  Agnivefa  asks. 
They  are  : — How  many  Purushas  are  there,  according  to  the  distinctions  or 
differences  of  Dhatus  or  constituent  elements  ?  Why  is  Purusha  regarded  as 
cause  ?  From  what  cause  does  Purusha  spring  1  Is  Purusha  intelligent  or 
unintelligent  1  Is  Purusha  eternal  or  non-eternal  ?  The  Self  is  said  to  be  action¬ 
less,  independent,  under  its  own  control,  omnipresent,  puissant,  knower  of 


43° 


CHA  RA  KA  -SA  M  HI  7  A. 


The  division  called  Indriyasthana,  as  expounded,  consists  of 
twelve  Lessons.  They  are  i.  Varna-swariya,  2.  that  called  Pushpa, 
3.  Parimarshana,  4.  Indriyanika,  5.  Paurvarupaka,  6.  Katamani- 
9aririya,  7.  Paunarupiya,  '8.  Avakgirasiya,  g.  Yasya-gyavanimittiya, 
10.  Sadyomarana,  11.  Anujyotis,  and  12.  Gomaya-churniya.48-50 


matter,  and  witness  (*'.  e.,  standing  aloof).  How  can  Self  be  said  to  be  action¬ 
less  when  we  see  it  engage  in  action  ?  How  can  we  say  that  it  is  independent 
when  we  see  it  take  birth  in  even  wretched  or  miserable  orders  of  existence  ? 
If  it  owns  no  control  except  its  own,  why  does  it  become  happy  and  miserable  ? 
If  it  is  omniscient  and  omnipresent,  why  does  it  not  perceive  what  is  on  the  other 
side  of  a  mountain  ?  &c.  These  and  similar  questions  have  been  answered  in 
this  Lesson. 

2.  The  second  Lesson  treats  of  Conception  and  the  matters  connected  with 
the  vital  seed  and  the  receptivity  of  women. 

3.  This  Lesson  deals,  in  brief,  with  some  matters  connected  with  Conception 
and  the  foetus. 

4.  This  Lesson  deals  with  the  same  subject,  expatiating  on  it  more  largely 
and  setting  forth  many  details  not  mentioned  before. 

5.  This  Lesson  shows  that  the  human  form  is  an  epitome  of  the  universe. 
The  observations,  though  rather  fanciful,  are  very  original. 

6.  This  Lesson  treats  of  the  several  elements  of  the  body.  A  knowledge  of 
these  elements  is  highly  necessary  for  a  successful  treatment  of  disease. 

7.  This  Lesson  treats  of  the  diverse  limbs  of  which  the  body  consists.  They 
are  numbered  and  described. 

8.  This  Lesson  treats  of  the  practices  which  a  healthy  couple  should  observe 
in  order  to  produce  good  offspring.  The  instructions  laid  down  all  relate  to  the 
maintenance  of  health  and  of  purity  of  behaviour.  The  use  of  mild  aphrodi¬ 
siacs  is  also  recommended.  Directions  are  laid  down  in  respect  of  food  and 
dress,  and  the  time  of  sexual  union. 

1.  It  has  heen  already  said  that  a  physician  should  depend  upon  the  In¬ 
structions  received  from  his  preceptor,  Observation,  and  Inference.  Relying 
upon  these  three,  he  should  well  mark  the  following  particulars  of  the  patient 
to  whose  bed-side  he  is  called,  vie.,  complexion,  voice,  smell,  taste,  touch,  eyes, 
nose,  tongue,  skin,  strength,  inclination  or  present  disposition,  habits,  purity 
or  impurity,  practices,  memory,  features,  and  diverse  other  particulars.  This 
Lesson  treats  of  these  various  particulars  beginning  with  'varna’  or  complexion, 
and  ‘swara’  or  voice. 

2.  In  the  vegetable  kingdom,  flowers  manifest  themselves  first  ;  from  them 
arise  fruits.  After  the  same  manner,  certain  symptoms,  called  'Arishta'  appear. 
These  are  followed  by  death.  ‘Arishtas’  are  infallible  indicators  of  dissolution. 
.Sometimes  physicians  mistake  innocent  symptoms  for  ‘Arishta’.  This  Lesson 
treats  of  ‘Arishtas’  in  general. 


iharaka-samhitA. 


431 


The  division  called  Chikitsa-sthana  consists  of  thirty  Lessons. 
They  are— 

1.  Abhayamalakiya,  2.  Pranakamiya,  3.  Karaprachitika,  and 
4.  Vedasamutthanam. 

These  four  are  classed  under  Rasayana. 


3.  This  Lesson  treats  largely  of  how  the  state  of  the  patient  may  be  ascer¬ 
tained  by  touching  his  person.  What  particular  facts  are  ascertainable 
by  touch,  and  how  those  facts  are  evidence  of  the  disease  that  is  afflicting 
the  patient  or  of  the  measure  of  such  disease,  form  the  subject  of  this  Lesson. 

4.  This  Lesson  deals  with  the  symptoms  which  the  several  senses  or  organs 
of  perception  manifest  in  a  person  whose  death  is  near.  Thus,  for  example, 
one  that  is  on  the  point  of  death  sees  the  welkin  peopled  with  diverse  objects 
and  the  Earth  as  perfectly  empty.  These  delusions  of  the  eye,  and  similar 
delusions  of  the  other  senses,  form  the  topic  of  this  Lesson. 

5.  This  Lesson  treats  of  the  preliminary  symptoms  of  incurable  diseases. 
It  takes  up  the  diseases  in  the  order  in  which  they  have  been  set  forth  in  the 
division  called  Nidana. 

6.  This  Lesson  sets  forth  the  kinds  of  bodies  in  which  treatment  does  not 
produce  any  effects. 

7.  This  Lesson  treats  of  those  patients  who  cannot  see  the  images  falling 
on  the  retina  of  other  people,  or  in  whose  retina  no  image  is  formed  of  objects 
placed  before  them. 

8.  This  Lesson  treats  of  certain  extraordinary  symptoms  that  are  sure  fore¬ 
runners  of  death. 

9.  This  Lesson  also  treats  of  similar  symptoms  that  forebode  death  with 
certainty. 

10.  This  Lesson  treats  of  those  symptoms  that  inevitably  terminate  in  im¬ 
mediate  death. 

11.  In  this  Lesson  the  Rishi  treats  of  those  symptoms  which  forebode  the 
occurrence  of  death  within  at  least  a  year. 

12.  This  Lesson  treats  of  certain  indications  which  forebode  the  occurrence 
of  death  within  a  month  or  earlier.  It  should  be  noted  that  in  naming  these 
several  Lessons,  the  name  of  that  particular  symptom  with  which  the  Lesson 
has  been  commenced  has  been  adopted. 

1 — 4.  The  first  Lesson,  ‘Abhayamalakiya’ treats  in  particular  of  the  medi¬ 
cinal  effects  of  Chebulic  myrobalans  and  Phyllanthus  Emblica.  Medicine  is  of 
two  kinds  :  those  that  are  administered  to  healthy  persons  for  strengthening 
their  health,  and  those  that  are  administered  to  the  diseased  for  cure  of  their 
disease.  Similarly,  among  non -medicines,  there  are  two  classes  :  1.  those 
that  produce  instantaneous  death,  and  2.  those  that  are  injurious  toihealth 
although  the  effects  are  visible  after  sometime. 


432 


CH  iraka-samhitA. 


5.  Samyogafaramuliyam,  6.  Asaktakshirakam,  7.  Mashaparna, 
numbering  the  third,  and  8.  Pumanjatavaladikam. 

These  eight  form  two  groups  of  Fours  ;  and  are,  in  this  com¬ 
putation,  regarded  as  two. 

Of  these  two  groups  of  four,  the  first  is  classed  under  RasSyana, 
and  the  second  under  Vajikarana.61-55 

Then  come  the  sections  on  Jwara  and  Raktapitta  numbered 
9  and  10  respectively. 


Those  medicines  that  strengthen  the  health  of  the  healthy  are  called  Vrishya. 
They  are  also  called  Rasayana.  The  latter  term  is  sometimes  used  to  imply  a 
certain  class  of  medicines  that  are  applied  to  diseased  persons  as  well. 

The?e  four  Lessons,  forming  one  group,  deal  with  medicines,  called  Rasa¬ 
yana,  their  constituents  and  virtue,  1.  with  especial  reference  to  Chebulic  myro- 
balans  and  Phyllanthus  Emblica,  2.  with  especial  reference  to  those  Rasayanas 
whichevery  one  desirous  of  longevity  should  use  ;  3.  with  especial  reference  to 
the  seeds  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica  bared  by  the  hand  of  the  kernel  surrounding 
them  ;  and  4.  with  reference  to  the  communication  (or  revival)  of  the  Ayurveda 
by  Indra  to  certain  Rishis  who  had  lost  their  health  through  long  residence  in 
a  town  and  through  their  having  taken  baneful  drugs. 

Si  This  Lesson  deals  with  what  is  called  Samyogafaramuliyam  ;  that  is, 
certain  approdisiacs  that  enhance  one’s  power  of  enjoyment.  Of  all  things, 
the  wife  is  held  to  be  the  dearest  of  possessions.  She  is  the  root  of  one’s  religious 
merit,  wealth  and  pleasure. 

6.  This  Lesson  treats  of  another  aphrodisiac  called  Asaktakhirakam,  com¬ 
prising  eight  different  combinations ;  also  of  another  aphrodisiac  under  the  head 
Mashaparniya,  comprising  fifteen  combinations,  and  numbered  7  in  the  above 
list  ;  and  another  aphrodisiac,  called  Pumanjatavaladika,  numbered  8  in  the  list. 
This  comprises  those  medicines  which  add  to  the  strength  of  men  and  make 
them  competent  for  obtaining  good  offspring. 

9.  This  Lesson  treats  of  Jwara  or  Fever.  What  is  fever,  how  it  is  to  be 
distinguished  from  the  healthy  or  normal  state  of  man,  the  two  kinds  of  fever, 
viz.,  fever  of  the  body  and  fever  of  mind,  and  many  other  particulars  are 
mentioned.  The  symptoms  of  different  species  of  fever  have  been  described 
almost  exhaustively. 

The  treatment  of  fever  has  also  been  dealt  with  in  this  chapter. 

10.  This  Lesson  treats  of  Raktapitta.  Through  diverse  causes  mentioned 
in  the  division  called  Nidana,  the  Pitta  of  Bile  becomes  excited  and  particularly 
affects  the:  blood  instead  of  the  other  component  ingredients  of  the  physical 
system.  The  disease  is  so  called  because  the  Bile  vitiates  the  blood,  and 
assumes  the  scent  and  colour  of  blood.  The  Spleen  and  the  Liver,  among 


LHARAKA-SAMHITA.  433 

Then  come  n.  Gulma,  12.  Meha,  13.  Kushtha,  14.  Cosha, 
15.  Arfas,  16.  Atisara,  17.  Visarpa,  18.  Madatyaya  ;64 

other  organs,  are  directly  connected  with  the  blood.  They  are,  again,  regarded 
as  the  foremost  of  those  ducts  which  convey  the  blood  into  different  parts  of 
the  body.  The  varieties  of  this  disease  and  the  treatment  are  laid  down  here. 

11.  This  Lesson  deals  with  the  diverse  species  of  Gulma  or  all  sorts  of  deep- 
seated  pains,  including  deep-seated  tumours.  The  cause  assigned  for  the  disease 
is  suppressed  wind. 

12.  This  Lesson  treats  of  Prameha  which  may  loosely  be  translated  as  dia¬ 
betes.  Among  the  causes  of  this  disease  are  mentioned  the  following  :  always 
sitting  idly  on  soft  seats  and  beds,  always  lying  on  soft  beds  for  sleep,  generally 
eating  curds  and  the  meat  of  domestic  animals  as  goat  and  sheep,  &c.,  eating 
also  the  meat  or  soup  of  aquatic  animals  or  those  living  in  marshes,  and  eating 
such  sweets  also  as  are  modifications  of  raw  sugar.  The  diverse  kinds  of 
Prameha  are  mentioned,  together  with  their  treatment. 

13.  This  Lesson  treats  of  Kushtha  or  Leprosy.  The  numerous  varieties 
of  Kushtha,  including  Leucoderma,  have  been  clearly  explained,  with  their 
causes,  and  symptoms,  and  treatment. 

14.  This  Lesson  treats  of  Raja-Yakshma  or  Phthisis.  The  Pauranic  story 
is  given  of  Chandramas,  the  deity  of  the  Moon,  having  caught  this  disease 
through  the  curse  of  his  father-in-law,  the  Rishi  Daksha.  The  lunar  deity  is 
regarded  as  the  king  of  Brahmanas.  Hence  the  disease  is  called  “  Raja- 
Yakshma  ”  or  “  Royal  Phthisis."  Another  etymology  of  the  name  is  that  it 
implies  the  most  fatal  of  all  diseases. 

Excessive  joy,  anxiety,  terror,  wrath,  grief,  generally  dry  up  the  humours  of 
the  body  as  also  its  other-  constituent  parts.  Excessive  indulgence  in  sexual 
intercourse  as  also  abstinence  from  nutritive  food,  diminish  the  vital  seed 
and  the  Ojas.  The  oily  ingredients  of  the  body  being  dried  up,  the  wind  in¬ 
creases,  and  agitates  the  bile  greatly,  inducing  the  dreadful  disease.  Its  prin¬ 
cipal  suggestion  is  inflammation  or  cavities  in  the  lungs. 

15.  This  Lesson  treats  of  Piles.  The  causes,  symptoms,  and  treatment  of 
this  malady  have  been  clearly  set  forth. 

16  &  17.  These  two  treat  respectively  of  Atisara  (  Diarrhoea)  and  Visarpa 
(Erysipelas). 

18.  This  Lesson  is  about  Madatyaya  or  those  maladies  which  are  brought 
about  by  excessive  indulgence  in  drinking,  particularly  delirium  tremens. 

The  diverse  qualities  of  wines  and  spiritous  liquors,  their  beneficial  effects  on 
the  human  system  when  taken  temperately  and  baneful  effects  when  indulged  to 
excess,  have  been  set  forth  clearly  and  eloquently.  The  diverse  diseases  to  which 
excessive  indulgence  in  wine  leads,  have  also  been  described  and  the  treatment 
to  be  followed  for  curing  them.  This  Lesson  may  be  read  by  every  one  with 
advantage  to  himself.  It  is  a  pity  that  none  of  the  Temperance  Societies  has  ever 
thought  it  proper  to  translate  this  portion  of  Charaka  for  circulation  in  India. 


55 


434  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

Then  come  19.  Dwivraniya,  20.  Unmada,  21.  Apasmara, 
22.  Kshata,  23.  Cotha,  24.  Udara,  25.  Graham',  and  26.  Pandu 

Then  come  27.  Hikka,  28.  Cwasa,  29.  Kasa,  30.  Cchardi', 
31.  Trishna,  32.  Yisha  ; 


19.  This  Lesson  treats  of  the  two  kinds  of  abscesses  or  local  Inflammations 
that  one  may  get. 

Those  which  are  due  to  disorders  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  fn  the  constitu¬ 
tion  are  called  Constitutional,  while  those  brought  about  by  wounds  and  falls  are 
called  Accidental. 

The  diverse  kinds  of  abscesses  and  the  consequences  cf  these  maladies,  and 
their  treatment  occur  in  full  in  this  Lesson.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  surgical 
operations  are  recommended  for  abecesses  of  certain  kinds  and  in  certain  stages. 

20.  This  Lesson  treats  of  Insanity.  The  diverse  causes  of  this  disease,  its 
many  varietiesand  symptoms  and  the  treatment  in  each  variety,  are  all  set  forth 
in  a  clear  and  intelligible  manner. 

21.  This  Lesson  treats  of  Apasmara  or  mental  Delusions  of  epileptic 
character. 

22.  This  Lesson  treats  of  Kshata  and  Kshina,  that  is,  of  dislocations  and 
derangements  of  anatomical  structure  brought  about  by  violent  exertion-*,  as  also 
of  weakness  and  debility  induced  by  the  same  and  similar  causes. 

23.  This  Lesson  treats  of  Cwayathu  or  Cotha,  that  is,  inflammations  and 
dropsical  swellings  of  diverse  kinds. 

24.  This  Lesson  treats  of  the  maladies  of  the  stomach  and  the  organs  of 
digestion. 

25.  This  Lesson  treats  of  the  diseases  of  the  principal  duct  called 
Grahani  that  is  connected  with  the  organs  of  digestion. 

26.  This  Lesson  treats  of  Jaundice,  Anaemia  and  Chlorosis. 

27  &  28.  These  Lessons  deal  with  hiccup  and  Asthma  and  other  diseases 
whose  principal  symptom  is  difficulty  of  breath. 

29.  This  Lesson  is  about  Consumption  in  general,  that  is,  inflammation  of 
the  lungs  with  other  symptoms.  When  consumption  induces  actual  sores  and 
cavities  in  the  respiratory  organ,  it  is  called  Raja-Yakshama  or  Phthisis. 

30.  This  Lesson  treats  of  Cchardi  or  nausea  and  vomiting.  The  diverse 
causes  and  symptoms,  with  treatment,  of  this  disagreeable  malady,  have  been 
set  forth  here. 

31.  This  Lesson  treats  of  abnormal  thirst. 

32.  This  Lesson  is  about  the  effects  of  diverse  kinds  of  poisons  on  the 
human  system. 


jharaka-samhitA. 


435 


Then  come  33.  the  three  vital  parts,  34.  Urustambha,  35.  Vata- 
£onita  with  excitement  of  the  wind,  and  36-  diseases  of  the  (female) 
genital  organs.*6* 

The  Division  called  Kalpa  consists  of  twelve  different  kinds  of 
Kalpas,  each  treated  of  in  one  Lesson.  They  are  1.  Phala,  2. 
Jimuta,  3.  Ikshaku,  4.  Dhamargava,  5.  Vastaka,  6.  Kritavedhana, 


33.  This  Lesson  deals  with  the  three  principal  limbs  or  parts  of  the  human 
body,  ■viz.,  the  anal  canal,  the  heart,  and  the  head.  Diverse  diseases  are  treated 
of  in  it,  and  it  covers  many  pages. 

34.  This  Lesson  treats  of  the  inflammation  of  the  thigh.  This  is  regarded  as 
a  separate  disease  in  consequence  of  the  usual  methods  of  treatment  followed  for 
allaying  other  kinds  of  inflammation  not  being  successful  in  this, 

35.  This  Lesson  treats  of  certain  maladies  which  arise  from  excitement  and 
obstruction  of  the  wind.  These  meladies  are  either  local  or  functional.  Vata- 
V°nita  is  otherwise  called  Vatarakta.  Caused  by  the  obstructed  course  of  the 
wind,  Vatarakta  is  sometimes  limited  to  mean  tubercular  Leprosy  and  that 
form  of  Leprosy  which  is  characterised  by  the  gradual  falling  off  of  the  fingers 
and  toes  and  the  appearance  of  sores  all  over  the  body. 

36.  This  Lesson  treats  of  those  maladies  which  affect  the  generative  organs 
of  females. 

*  Altogether  36  heads  are  mentioned.  Deducting  the  first  8  heads,  the 
balance  is  28.  The  first  8  heads,  however,  are  regarded  as  2  ;  hence  the  tale 
reaches  30. 

1.  This  Lesson  treats  of  the  various  ways  in  which  the  fruits  of  Randia 
dumeiorum  are  to  be  administered,  keeping  in  view  the  diverse  differences 
due  to  season,  soil,  maturity  or  otherwise,  and  constitution  of  the  patient,  and 
the  other  products  with  which  they  may  be  mixed.  The  fruits  are  regarded  as 
the  foremost  of  purgatives  for  their  innocence  and  efficacy. 

2.  The  second  Lesson  treats  of  the  administration  of  Jimutaka,  otherwise 
called  Devatada,  or  Detada  in  Bengali.  Elaborate  instructions  are  laid  down  as 
to  how  the  fruits  and  flowers,  as  also  the  exudation  and  sap,  &c.,  of  this  tree 
are  to  be  administered. 

3.  The  third  Lesson  treats  of  Ikshaku  or  Katutumbi,  It  is  a  species  of 
bitter  gourd,  called  in  Bengali  Tit-lau,  a  wild  variety  of  Lagenaria  Vulgaris. 

4.  The  fourth  Lesson  treats  of  Dhamagarva,  which  is  also  known  by  other 
names  such  as  Karkotaki,  Katuphala,  Mahajalini,  and  Rajakoshataki. 

5-  The  fifth  Lesson  treats  of  Vastaka.  Its  other  names  are  Kuta,  Cakra, 
Vrikshaka,  and  Girimallika.  Vatsaka  is  Halarrhena  antidysenterica,  Wall  ; 
syn.  Echites  antidysenterica,  Raxb. 

6.  The  sixth  Lesson  treats  of  Kritavedhana.  Its  other  names  are  KshedS, 
Kofataki,  and  Mridanga,  It  is  Luffa  amora,  Roxb . 


436 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  MHJ  TA. 


7.  £yamatrivrit,  8.  Chaturangula,  9.  Tilwaka,  10  Sudh9, 
11.  Saptala-5ankhini,  and  12.  Danti-Dravanti.*®7-59. 

The  Division  of  Siddhi  consists  of  twelve  kinds  of  Siddhis,  each 
treated,  in  one  Lesson.  They  are  1.  Kalpana,  2.  Pancha-karma, 

7.  The  seventh  Lesson  treats  of  Cyama-trivit.  It  is  the  plant  called 
Trivrit.  Its  other  names  are  Tribhandi,  Sarvada,  Kotara,  Sarvanubhuti,  and 
Suvaha.  It  is  the  Ipomasa  Turpethum  ;  syn.  Convolvulus  Turpethum,  Linn. 
There  are  two  varieties,  dark  and  red.  The  former  is  more  efficacious  as  a 
mild  but  certain  purgative. 

8.  The  eighth  Lesson  treats  of  Chaturangula.  Its  other  names  are  Arag- 
vadha,  Rajavriksha,  and  Avaghathaka. 

It  is  Cassia  fistula,  Linn  ;  syn.  Cathartocarpus  fistula,  Pers. 

9.  The  ninth  Lesson  treats  of  Tilwaka.  It  is  otherwise  called  Pattika  and 
Lodhra.  It  is  the  Symplocos  racemosa,  Roxb. 

10.  The  tenth  Lesson  treats  of  Sudha,  otherwise  called  Mahavriksha, 
Snuhi,  and  Manasa.  It  is  the  Euphorbia  neriifolia,  Linn. 

11.  The  eleventh  Lesson  treats  of  Saptala-cpankhini.  The  first  is  known 
under  some  other  names.  These  are  Charmakasha  and  Vahuphenarasa. 
(Jankhini  is  otherwise  called  Tiktala,  Yavatikta  and  Akshipidaka.  Both  are 
unidentified. 

12.  The  twelfth  Lesson  treats  of  Danti-Dravanti.  Danti  is  otherwise 
known  by  the  names  of  Udumvaraparni  Nikumbha,  and  Mukulaka. 

Dravanti  is  known  by  other  names,  viz.,  Chitra,  Nyagrodha,  and  Mushi- 
kahva.  The  first  is  the  Baliospermum  Montanum  ;  syn.  Croton  polyandrum 
Roxb. 

The  second  is  the  Salvinia  Cucullata,  Roxb. 

*  Kalpa,  as  has  been  previously  explained,  means  the  manner  of  combi¬ 
nation  and  the  way  of  administration  of  drugs  for  the  cure  of  ailments  or  pre¬ 
servation  of  health. 

The  first  Lesson  of  this  division  treats  of  Phala  or  Madan-phala,  that  is, 
the  fruits  of  Randia  dumetornm,  Lamk ;  syn.  Posoqueria  dumetorum,  Roxb. 
The  fact  is,  among  purgatives  and  emetics,  diverse  products  are  mentioned. 
The  same  product  may  have  different  varieties  in  consequence  of  the  difference 
in  place  of  its  growih,  the  difference  in  season,  the  difference  in  fulness  or 
maturity,  the  difference  in  respect  of  the  age  of  the  patient  to  whom  it  is  to 
be  administered,  the  difference  in  respect  of  the  measure  in  which  it  is  to  be 
administered. 

1.  A  fair  idea  of  the  contents  of  the  first  Lesson  of  this  Division  may  be 
had  from  the  following  questions  of  Agnivega  with  which  it  starts.  In  what 
forms  or  methods  should  emetics  and  purgatives  be  administered  ?  What  regu¬ 
lations  as  regards  diet  and  other  matters  should  be  observed  in  view  of  admi¬ 
nistering  them  ?  What  are  the  symptoms  of  sufficient  and  insufficient  admi¬ 
nistration  of  emetics  and  purgatives  ?  What  are  the  symptoms  of  excessive 


CIIA  RA  KA  -  SAM  HIT  A. 


437 


3,  Vastisutra,  Suchavyapadika,  5.  Netravyapfdika,  6.  the  two 
processes  of  £odhana,  ( viz,  Vamana  and  Virechana),  7.  Vasti, 
8.  Prasriti,  9.  that  going  by  the  name  of  Marma,  10.  Vastyafraya, 
11.  Phalamatra,  and  12.  Uttara.*60-63. 

administration  of  emetics  and  purgatives  ?  How  many  kinds  of  emetics  and 
purgatives  are  there  ?  What  are  the  virtues  of  each  kind  ?  What  is  the 
nature  of  enemata  ?  What  should  be  abstained  from  when  enemata  are  adminis¬ 
tered  ?  &c.  All  these  questions  have  been  fully  answered  by  the  son  of  Atri. 

2.  This  Lesson  treats  of  the  following  : — the  reasons  for  which  emetics  &c. 
should  be  administered  or  should  not  be  administered  to  men.  A  list  is  given 
of  men  that  should  not  be  treated.  They  are  as  follow  :  one  of  wrathful  or 
furious  temper ;  one  that  is  exceedingly  rash  ;  one  that  is  very  timid  ;  one  that 
is  ungrateful;  one  that  is  very  hasty ;  one  that  hates  physicians  and  kings  ;  &c. 
Men  not  stained  by  these  vices  should  be  taken  up  for  treatment.  A  list  then 
occurs  of  men  who  are  not  fitted  for  administration  of  emetics  and  purga¬ 
tives,  &c. 

3.  The  third  Lesson  treats  of  the  considerations  bearing  upon  the  admi¬ 
nistration  of  enemata. 

4.  The  fourth  Lesson  treats  of  the  consequences  of  insufficient  and  injudi¬ 
cious  administration  of  enemata  and  the  treatment  to  be  followed  for  alleviating 
them. 

5.  This  Lesson  treats  of  the  considerations  bearing  upon  the  subject  of  the 
tubes  to  be  used  for  administration  of  enemata.  The  kind  of  tubes  to  be  used, 
those  that  should  not  be  used,  the  evil  consequences  of  using  tubes  unfitted  for 
patients,  the  treatment  to  be  followed  for  alleviating  those  consequences,  have 
all  been  set  forth  here. 

6.  The  sixth  Lesson  treats  of  the  two  processes,  and  the  consequences  of 
insufficient  and  injudicious  administrations,  of  emetics  and  purgatives,  and  the 
treatment  to  be  adopted  for  their  alleviation  ;  as  also  of  the  regulations  bearing 
upon  these  two  processes  in  particular. 

7.  The  seventh  Lesson  treats  in  particular  of  the  diseases  that  may  arise 
from  the  improper  use  of  enemata  and  the  treatment  to  be  adopted  for  their 
alleviation  or  cure. 

8.  The  eighth  Lesson  treats  of  the  considerations  bearing  upon  the  adminis¬ 
tration,  measured  by  what  is  known  as  a  Prasrita,  of  enemeta  of  both  kinds,  i.e., 
both  that  which  is  oily  and  that  which  consists  of  what  is  called  Nirulia  or  juice 
of  astringent  objects. 

9.  The  ninth  Lesson  treats  of  the  three  vital  parts,  viz .,  the  head,  the 
heart,  and  the  lower  duct.  If  any  of  these  three  is  wounded,  how  those  wounds 
should  be  treated  has  also  been  set  forth  here.  It  is  a  very  long  one. 

10.  The  tenth  Lesson  treats  of  the  use  of  the  enema  in  especial.  In  what 
maladies  the  enema  should  be  resorted  to,  how  it  should  be  resorted  to,  what 


438 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


In  the  respective  Sthdnas,  as  also  in  the  respective  ' Adhydyas , 
the  topics  of  each  Adhydya  will  be  declared.  All  topics,  in  their 
entirety,  will  be  spoken  of,  in  their  respective  places,  together 
with  a  summary  ( at  the  end  of  each  Adhydya).63* 

An  enquiry,  arising  out.  of  this  compilation,  areeably  to  the 
matters  declared,  and  duly  put,  is  called  a  Question. 

A  determination,  with  the  aid  only  of  this  compilation,  agree¬ 
able  to  reason,  of  such  enquiry,  is  called  the  Answer  to  such 
Question. 

As  to  the  etymology  of  Tantra ,  it  is  so  called  because  of  topics 
having  been  wreathed  together  in  it.  Sthdna  is  so  called  because 
of  its  being  the  place  where  topics  occur.  That  which  has  been 
composed  with  especial  reference  to  topics  is  called  Adhydya. 

Thus  have  the  ( chief )  technical  words  been  established.64-e6t 


effects  may  be  expected  from  it,  and  various  other  considerations  bearing  upon 
it  have  been  fully  treated  here. 

11.  The  eleventh  Lesson  treats  of  the  fruits  that  should  be  used  in  the  com¬ 
position  of  enemala.  In  particular  diseases,  particular  fruits  are  to  be  preferred. 
The  observations  of  the  Rishi  on  the  qualities  of  the  different  fruits  used  in 
enemata  are  characterised  by  great  acuteness. 

12.  The  twelfth  Lesson  treats  of  the  treatment  that  should  be  adopted  for  a 
man  after  he  has  been  cured  of  his  maladies  by  proper  administration  of  emetics 
and  purgatives  but  before  he  has  been  thoroughly  restored  to  health.  Diverse 
methods  are  indicated  for  dispelling  the  patient’s  weakness.  Various  tonics  are 
laid  down. 

The  Division  called  Siddhi  is  highly  intersting.  No  abstract  can  possibly 
give  even  a  rough  idea  of  its  contents.  The  methods  of  treatment  indicated  are 
in  every  case  extremely  simple.  If  these  be  examined  by  European  physicians 
with  care,  European  Phamacopaa  will  certainly  be  improved.  Experiments  are 
being  made  with  the  drugs  mentioned  in  Charaka.  But  as  yet  they  can  scarcely 
be  said  to  be  conducted  systematically.  A  permanent  Committee  of  experts 
should  be  formed  and  it  should  work  under  the  liberal  patronage  of  the  State 
to  produce  satisfactory  results. 

*  In  the  original,  there  is  a  ‘cha’,  implying  ‘and’  after  ‘Adhyaya’.  The 
Commentators  think  that  the  sense  is  that  the  topics  will  be  declared  not  only 
in  -their  respective  Sthanas  and  Adhyayas,  but  also  in  other  Adhyayas  of  other 
Sthdnas,  so  that  certain  topics  will  be  found  discussed  in  unexpected  places. — T. 

f  ‘Tantranat  Tantram’  is  explained  differently  by  some.  Chakrapani 
thinks  ‘Tantranat’  means  ‘Qariradharanat.’  The  obvious  meaning,  however, 
of  the  word  should  be  'adopted,  especially  as  no  violence  is  done  to  the  word 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


43  9 


Thus  have  the  eight  questions,  in  their  entirety,  and  due  order, 
been  set  forth.  An  abstract,  well-arranged,  of  the  ( contents  of 
the )  entire  compilation  has  also  been  declared.66* 

There  are  such  things  as  real  calamities  caused  by  persons 
practising  the  physician's  calling  with  a  very  little  knowledge  of 
the  medical  scriptures.  They  cause  alarm  as  real  as  countless 
flights  of  little  birds  when  they  are  on  the  wing.67f 

Hence,  in  a  consultation,  the  physician  of  learning  should  ' 
always  refer  in  their  presence  to  these  eight  questions.  In  the 
matter  of  testing  superiority  and  inferiority,  the  strength  of 
persons  truly  conversant  with  (  medical )  science  lies  in  this.68 

Those  that  are  week  in  the  medical  scriptures,  and  not  masters 
of  medical  science,  as  soon  as  they  hear  the  very  sound  of  this 
compilation,  fly  away  like  little  birds  at  the  twang  of  the  bow- 
string.63t 


‘Tantra’  thereby.  A  ‘Tantra’  or  compilation  is  that  where  a  certain  number 
of  topics  has  been  wreathed  or  garlanded  together  as  flowers  on  a  string. 

The  etymology  given  by  Charaka  of  ‘Adhyaya’  seems  to  be  fanciful.  An 
‘Adhyaya’  is  understood  to  be  that  portion  of  a  book  which  is  capable  of  being 
read  at  one  sitting.  In  former  times,  writing  was  unknown.  The  pupils  were 
taught  by  preceptors  verbally.  Afterwards  when  writing  was  introduced,  and 
compilations  came  to  be  written  out,  they  were  naturally  divided  into  portions 
capable  of  being  read  at  one  sitting.  Hence,  ‘adhikritya  adhyayam’  is  too 
learned,  if  not  far-fetched. — T. 

*  The  ‘Prafnam  ashtakam’  or  ‘Prafnashtakam’  consists  of  these  eight 
questions: — 1.  What  is  Sths.no.  1  2.  What  is  Sthanarthat  3.  What  is 
Adhyaya  ?  4.  What  is  Adhysyartha  1  5.  What  is  Pra^na  1  6.  What  is 

Pra^nartha  ?  7.  What  is  Tantra  ?  and  8.  what  is  Tantrartha  ?  They  all 

relate  to  the  contents  of  the  compilation,  each  having  reference  to  a  special  or 
particular  view  of  those  contents.  Larger  divisions  are  called  Sthanas  ;  sub¬ 
divisions  are  called  Adhysyas  ;  &c. — T . 

f  ‘Pallavika’  is  one  who  is  conversant  with  only  a  limited  portion  of  the 
medical  scriptures.  Of  course,  quacks  are  implied.  The  calamities  caused  by 
quacks  are  compared  to  those  caused  by  flights  of  locusts  or  of  little  birds  who 
by  the  force  of  number  destroy  every  sort  of  vegetation  in  the  region  which  they 
visit.  The  sensible  are  alarmed  at  these  quacks  as  really  as  at  the  visitations  of 
locusts, •&C.---7’. 

+  ‘Ekadefika’  is  another  word  for  ‘Pallavika’.  The  simile  is,  no  doubt, 
original.  These  men  run  away  from  consultations  with- physicians  of  learning. 
The  very  sound  of  the  medical  scriptures  is  enough  to  scare  them. — T. 


440 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHI TA. 


In  consequence  of  the  general  weakness  of  a  herd  of  animals, 
some  animal  (  really  weak )  comes  to  be  regarded  as  a  wolf.  Such 
an  animal,  however,  encountering  a  wolf  possessed  of  strength, 
assumes  its  real  nature.70 

After  the  same  manner,  an  individual  really  ignorant  though 
boastful  in  words,  establishes  a  reputation  of  his  own  learning  in 
the  midst  of  only  those  that  are  ignorant.  Encountering,  however, 
a  man  of  real  learning  or  wisdom,  such  a  one’s  disguise  is  pene¬ 
trated.71* 

One  having  little  intelligence  and  little  learning,  resembles 
( in  the  midst  of  men  of  learning  and  wisdom  )  an  old  mungoose 
concealed  in  a  heap  of  wool.  What  can  such  a  person  say  in  a 
consultation  (  of  physicians  of  real  learning )  even  as  a  person, 
upon  whose  birth  there  is  a  stain  ( in  the  midst  of  men  of  stain¬ 
less  origin  )  ?7aJ 

With  a  physician  of  even  little  learning  but  of  good  behaviour, 
a  physician  o'  real  'earning  should  not  contend.  As  regards  others, 
viz.,  those  that  are  full  of  vanity,  he  should  demolish  them  by  the 
eight  questions.  77f 

*  ‘Bhidyate’  implies  ‘broken’.  It  is  better  to  take  the  word  as  signifying,  in 
this  connection,  ‘hath  his  disguise  penetrated,’  or  ‘hath  his  mask  torn  off’. — T. 

+  Some  texts  read  ‘Babhrurmudha  iva’.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  however, 
that  the  correct  reading  is  ‘gudha  iva.’  The  idea  of  an  ignorant  man  sitting 
silent  and  shrinking  from  prominence  in  an  assembly  of  the  learned  and  wise, 
is  most  natural.  He  would  never  open  his  mouth.  His  resemblance,  therefore, 
to  an  old  mungoose  concealed  in  a  heap  of  wool,  is  very  natural.  A  man,  again, 
of  stained  birth,  sitting  silent  in  an  assembly  of  persons  of  unstained  blood, 
offers  another  simile  to  the  author  for  illustrating  the  position  of  a  quack  in 
the  midst  of  learned  physicians. 

Another  construction  of  72  is  proposed  by  Chakrapani.  It  is  to  take  the 
words ‘babhrurmudha  iva  urnabhih’ with  the  last  part  of  the  second  line  of  71. 
The  meaning  then  will  be, — “Such  a  man,  encountering  a  person  of  real  learn¬ 
ing,  is  soon  pierced  or  gored  through  like  a  foolish,  mungoose  by  horned  rams 
if  he  ventures  into  their  company.”  This  is,  no  doubt,  ingenious,  but  it  is  far¬ 
fetched. — T. 

t  The  sense  of  the  first  line  is  that  if  one  practising  the  medical  science 
and  possessing  only  a  little  knowledge  of  it,  happens  to  to  be  of  good  behaviour, 
the  physician  of  real  learning  should  not  expose  or  demolish  him  by  a  discussion 
on  the  medical  scriptures.  A  practitioner  of  an  opposite  character  should  not 
receive  such  consideration. — T. 


CM  A  RA  KA-SA  M  HI  TA. 


441 

Those  that  are  insolent,  talkative  and  ignorant,  indulge  in 
copious  twaddle.  Those,  on  the  other  hand,  that  are  sweet- 
speeched  and  good,  very  generally  speak  little,  and  that  little  is 
always  to  the  purpose/4 

For  extending  the  knowledge  of  (medical)  science,  physicians, 
without  having  recourse  to  arrogance,  should  never  tolerate  such 
disputants  as  are  of  small  calibre,  ignorant,  and  characterised  by 
boastful  twaddle/5* * * § 

These  persons,  who  are  endued  with  great  compassion  for  all 
creatures,  and  who  in  consequence  of  a  knowledge  of  the  truth 
have  become  filled  with  illimitable  mercy,  feel  disposed  to  put 
down  wrong  expositions  of  science/5+ 

Those  men  who  have  adopted  the  side  of  error,  or  who  postpone 
answers  to  enquiries  by  alleging  their  inopportuneness  or  their  own 
illness  (  such  as  head-ache  and  the  rest),  or  who  are  boastful  and 
insolent  in  speech,  and  disposed  to  speak  ill  of  others,  never  succeed 
in  obtaining  a  mastery  of  their  science/8:}: 

One  should  avoid  that  man  who  speaks  disrespectfully  of  the 
(  medical )  scriptures,  even  as  one  should  avoid  the  net  which 
Time  throws  for  enmeshing  living  creatures. 

Only  those  foremost  of  physicians  who  are  characterised  by 
coolness,  by  knowledge,  and  by  science,  should  be  adored/8§ 


*  The  true  reading  is  ‘marijayet’  and  not  ‘darfayet’.  The  meaning, 
of  course,  is  that  ignorant  physicians  should,  without  being  tolerated,  be  ex¬ 
posed. — T. 

f  The  object  of  this  verse  is  to  show  that  the  desire  to  put  down  wrong 
expositions  of  science,  instead  of  implying  any  cruelty,  really  proceeds  from 
illimitable  mercy  to  all  creatures.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  mercy  or  consideration 
shown  to  quacks  and  wrong-headed  practitioners  is  really  tantamount  to  cruelty 
or  indifference  to  all  living  creatures. — T. 

t  Having  counselled  the  advisability  of  exposing  the  ignorant  and  boast¬ 
ful,  the  Rishi  utters  a  word  of  caution  to  the  profession.  If  anybody  becomes 
proud  and  harsh  of  speech  and  so  prejudiced  as  to  adopt  the  side  of  untruth 
and  to  always  put  off  answering  legitimate  questions,  he  never  succeeds  in 
obtaining  a  mastery  of  the  science.  Habituated  to  speak  ill  of  others,  he  loses 
all  opportunities  of  improvement. — T. 

§  ‘Time’  is  another  name  for  Death.  "It  is  Time  that  creates  and  Time 
that  kills.  Time  is  all  powerful.  The  universe  itself  melts  away  in  Time  and 

56 


442 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  M  HIT  A. 


All  misery  which,  having  two  for  support,  comes  upon  us,  is"  due 
to  Ignorance.  All  happiness  is  established  on  clear  Knowledge.73* 
This  compilation,  fraught  with  excellent  import,  and  capable  of 
enlightening  the  ignorant,  is  as  the  solar  disc  unto  those  whose 
organ  of  vision  has  been  dimmed.80 

Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary. 

Ten  principal  ducts  rising  from  the  Heart,  the  names  bestowed 
upon  them,  the  tale  of  the  six  foremost  ones  ending  with  Ayana 
6r  course  of  life,  the  characteristics  of  those  cognisant  of  the 
(medical)  scriptures,  the  tale  of  seven  and  that  of  eight  questions 
with  the  determination  of  each,  how  these  should  be  answered 
and  for  what  end,  the  six  kinds  of  unlearned  physicians,  have  all 
been  declared  in  this  Lesson  called  “Arthe  Da^a  Mahamula.’7  In 
this  Lesson  an  abstract  also  has  been  given  of  all  the  lessons  in 
this  compilation.1-st 


re-appears  again.  The  sway  of  Time  is  owned  by  all  ;  the  very  gods  are  not 
above  it  ;  only  Eternal  Brahma  is  above  it.”  The  identity  of  Time  and  Death 
or  dissolution  is  thus  made  out.  The  net  of  Time  or  Death  (  Kalapa?a )  is  a 
Common  saying  in  India. — T. 

*  This  is  one  of  those  aphorisms  that  will  remain  true  to  the  end  of  time. 
Pain  or  misery  is  due  only  to  ignorance  ;  while  pleasure  or  happiness  is  due  to 
clear  or  stainless  knowledge.  This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Sankhya  system  of 
philosophy.  The  knowledge  by  which  ignorance  is  to  be  conquered  and  its 
consequence  misery,  is  knowledge  of  Self,  or  realising  the  Self’s  perfect  inde¬ 
pendence  of  Prakriti  or  Nature.  Self  is  distinct  from  the  body.  When  this 
is  realised,  there  can  be  no  further  sorrow.  Agnive?a,  however,  in  referring  to 
these  effects  of  ignorance  and  knowledge,  does  not  recommend  the  SUnkhya 
Philosophy  particularly.  He  uses  the  words  Ignorance  and  Knowledge  in  their 
ordinary  acceptation. 

“Having  two  for  its  support”  means  physical  and  mental  ;  or,  appertain¬ 
ing  to  this  world  and  the  next.  I  prefer  the  first  interpretation. — T. 

j-  First  occur,  in  this  Lesson,  the  statements  about  the  ten  principal  ducts 
rising  from  ‘Artha’  or  the  Heart.  Then  come  the  different  names  by  which 
those  ducts  are  known,  viz.,  'Dhamani',  ‘Qrotas’,  ‘Siras’,  (vide  verse  u  ante). 
Tnen  comes  the  tale  of  the  six  foremost  things,  ending  with  ‘Ayana’  or  mode  of 
life,  (vide  aphorism  14  ante).  As  regards  the  characteristics  of  those  conver¬ 
sant  with  the  medical  scriptures,  (  vide  aphorism  15  ante).  Gangadhara  blunders 
in  his  gloss  on  this,  by  saying  that  physicians  that  help  life,  those  that  help 
disease,  those  that  move  about  in  the  guise  of  physicians,  &c.,'are  implied.  He 
forgets  that  the  characteristics  of,  not  physicians,  but  of  good  physicians  only, 


CH.  4  RA  I<A  -  SA  M  HI  TA. 


443 


As  a  thread  is  needed  for  garlanding  together  a  number  of 
flowers,  even  so  this  abstract  has  been  compiled  by  the  Rishi 
for  putting  together  in  brief  the  diverse  topics.4 

At  this  point  ends  the  Sutra-sthana  in  the  compilation  of 
Agnive^a  as  revised  by  Charaka.5 

Thus  ends  the  Thirtieth  Lesson  called  “Arthe  Dapa  Maha- 
muliya”  in  Agnive^a’s  treatise  as  revised  by  Charaka.* 


are  referred  to.  Hence,  aphorism  15  is  referred  to.  The  seven  questions  are 
those  indicated  in  aphorism  17.  They  begin  with  “what  is  Life  ?”  and  end  with 
“for  what  object  should  the  medical  scriptures  be  studied  ?”  The  eight  ques¬ 
tions  are  those  that  relate  to  verses  63  to  66  ante.  They  are  Tantra,  Tantrartha, 
Sthana,  Sthanartha,  Adhyaya,  Adhyayartha,  and  Pra<;na,  Praijnartha. 

By  ‘Ekadefika’  is  meant  one  conversant  with  only  a  portion  of  the  scriptures. 
Of  course,  a  sciolist  is  implied. — T. 

*  The  abstract  ( 1 — 3  )  consists  of  couplets.  The  4th  also  is  so  ;  the  5th, 
about  the  termination  of  Sutrasthana,  is  a  couplet  though  some  Bengal  texts 
print  it  as  prose. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 

TRA  NS  LA  TED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


PUBLISHED  BY 

AYINASTI  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita  (in  original)  with 
Commentaries;  Bengali  and  Hindi  Translator  of  Charaka- 
Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita';  Editor  of  Chikitsa- 
Sammilani  (Medical  Journal  in  Bengali)  ;  Prac¬ 
titioner  of  the  Hindu  System  of 
Medicine,  &c.,  &c.,  &c. 

CALCUTTA: 

Printed  by  Girish  Chandra  Chakravarti, 

“Deva  Press”,  27  College  Street, 
and 

Published  at 

200,  Cornwallis’  Street. 


(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved. ) 
- — -  .  ’ 


ABSTRACT  OP  CONTENTS. 


The  contents  of  this  fasciculus  are  varied  and  interesting.  - 

The  division  on  Vimanam  begins. 

The  object  of  Vimanam  is  to  help  the  physician  to  acquire 
a  knowledge  of  the  analyses  of  the  several  tastes  and  the  rest.  7  Stag 

Then  are  enumerated  the  tastes,  the  articles  of  food  and  drink, 
the  faults  (wind,  bile  and  phlegm),  and  diseases,  in  respect  of  their 
potencies. 

Those  articles,  again,  that  should  not.  be  taken  in,  large* 
measure,  are  indicated. 

The  three  kinds  of  suitability  and  the  eight  principal  considera¬ 
tions  regarding  food  and  drink,  and  their  importance,  have  also,: 
been  treated  of  in  the  first  Lesson. 

The  second  Lesson  treats  of  the  three  divisions  of  the  stomach.-  v' 

The  indications  of  a  person  who  eats  according  to  proper > 
measure,  the  consequences  of  such  eating,  the  indications  of  one 
who  does  not  eat  according  to  proper  measure,  the  consequences  of 
such  eating,  and  how  one  should  eat,  have  been  discussed  in  it. 

Lesson  III  treats  of  how  the  destruction  of  cities  and  towns 
and  villages  are  brought  about. 

The  indications  are  laid  down  of  the  vitiation  of  such  natural 
agents  as  the  soil,  air,  water,  &c. 

The  contents  are  highly  interesting.  They  prove  what  the 
view  was  which  the  Rishis  took  of  the  causes  of  the  destructive 
plagues  that  very  often  occurred  in  ancient  India. 


THE  PlM  OF  VI. MAN  AH. 

LESSON  I. 

After  this  we  shall  explain  the  knowledge  of  the  Tastes  * 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.1 

Without  doubt,  having  carefully  noticed  the  particulars  relating 
to  inducing  causes,  premonitory  indications,  symptoms,  applicability 
of  medicine,  diet  and  course  of  conduct,  the  varieties  of  diseases, 
the  predominance  of  wind  or  bile  or  phlegm  in  diseases,  the  class 
under  which  the  disease  falls,  the  precise  measures  in  which  the 
faults  have  been  excited,  strength,  and  age  or  season,  the  physi¬ 
cian,  with  concentrated  mind,  should  specially  attend  to  the  know¬ 
ledge  (analysis)  of  the  tastes,  articles,  faults,  derangements,  medi¬ 
cine,  country,  season,  strength,  body,  diet,  predominance  of  con¬ 
stituent  elements  (of  the  body,  such  as  skin,  blood,  &c.),  assimilabi- 
lity,  mind,  constitution,  and  age,  because  of  the  dependance  of 
curative  operations  on  a  conversance  with  such  analysis  of  the 
tastes  and  the  rest. 

A  physician  that  is  unacquainted  with  the  analysis  of  the  tastes 
and  the  rest,  is  never  competent  to  allay  disease. 

Hence,  O  Agnivefa,  we  shall  expound  the  division  on  Vimanam 
for  the  sake  of  such  conversance  with  the  analysis  of  the  tastes 
and  the  rest. 

In  this  connection  we  shall,  at  the  outset,  declare  the  incidents 
of  the  tastes,  articles,  faults,  derangements,  and  potency.f2 


*  ‘  Vimanam  ’  comes  from  the  prefix  '  vi  ’  and  the  root  ‘  ma  ’  to  measure  or 
ascertain.  The  Commentators  explain  it  as  ‘  miyate  jnayate  anena  iti,'  that  is, 
that  by  which  something  is  measured  or  ascertained.  Hence,  '  Vimanam  '  is 
equivalent  to  science  or  knowledge  or  analysis.  Instead  of  using  the  word 
‘  science,’  I  think  it  would  be  better  to  employ  ‘  knowledge  ’  or  ‘  analysis  '  as  its 
English  equivalent.  In  particular  connections,  ‘examination,’  ‘investigation,’ 
or  ‘  study  ’  may  be  used. 

t  Some  texts  read  “  dosha-bheshaja  &c.”  for  “  rasa-dravya-dosha-vikara. 
bheshaja  & c  ”  in  the  first  sentence,  and  “doshadi  ”  for  “  rashadi  ”  in  the  last 


57 


446 


CHAR  AKA-SA  MH1 TA. 


The  tastes  are  six.  They  are  sweet,  sour,  saline,  pungent, 
bitter,  and  astringent. 

Properly  used,  they  nourish  the  body. 

Improperly  used,  they  verily  lead  to  the  provocation  (  excite¬ 
ment  )  of  the  faults.*3 

The  faults  are  three.  They  are  Wind,  Bile,  and  Phlegm. 

When  they  are  in  their  normal  state,  they  are  beneficial  to  the 
body.  When,  however,  they  become  disordered,  verily  they  afflict 
the  body  with  diseases  of  diverse  kinds. 4t 


clause  of  the  first  sentence,  the  second  sentence,  and  the  third  sentence.  Chakra- 
pani  seems  to  read  “  dosha-bheshaja  &c.”  and  “  doshadi.”  Gangadhara’s 
text  is  correct  ;  but  curiously  enough,  in  his  commentary,  he  refers  to  the 
vicious  readings. 

By  ‘  Nimitta  ’  is  meant  all  inducing  causes,  such  as  exposure  to  cold  in  the 
case  of  fevers. 

•  Purva-rupa  ’  includes  all  premonitory  indications. 

‘  Rupa  ’  implies  all  developed  symptoms,  including  even  those  that  are 
super-induced  by  accidental  causes  or  circumstances. 

■<  Upaijaya  ’  implies  the  applicability  of  medicine,  diet,  and  course  of  conduct, 
to  Individual  constitutions.  All  medicines  do  not  suit  all  men.  The  same 
diet,  and  same  course  of  conduct,  again,  do  not  suit  all  men.  The  suitability 
of  medicine,  of  diet,  and  of  course  of  conduct,  is  called  “  upa?aya.’  The  physi¬ 
cian  should  attend  particularly  to  ‘  upa?aya  ’  if  he  is  to  succeed. 

‘  Pradhanya  ’  has  reference  to  the  predominance  of  particular  faults  (wind 
bile  and  phlegm)  in  particular  diseases. 

'Vidhi  1  has  reference  to  the  class  under  which  a  malady  falls,  i.  «.,  whether 
constitutional  or  accidental,  or  whether  born  of  wind,  or  bile,  or  phlegm,  or 
whether  curable  or  incurable,  or  mild  or  violent. 

‘  Vikalpa  ’  is  ascertainment  of  the  precise  measure  in  which  the  faults  have 
been  excited. 

‘  Dosha,  as  has  been  explained  several  times  in  the  place  of  Aphorisms, 
means  Wind,  Bile  and  Phlegm. 

<  Prabhava  ’  is  potency.  It  has  been  explained  in  the  Place  of  Aphorisms. 

The  above  are  all  technical  terms  which  the  Rishi  has  himself  explained  in 
the  previous  portion  of  his  work. 

*  “  Improperly  used  "  has  reference  to  both  excessive  use  and  the  absence 
of  use  to  the  desireable  extent. — T. 

■f  "Disease  of  diverse  kinds  here  the  word  'vidhaih'  (kinds)  implies  cons¬ 
titutional  or  accidental,  &c.  The  word  *  vidhi,’  as  already  explained,  is  a 
technical  term. — T. 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  MHITA . 


447 


Among  tkese,  groups  of  threes  excite,  and  groups  of  threes  allay, 
the  three  faults. 

Pungent,  bitter,  and  astringent  excite  the  Wind, 

Sweet,  sour,  and  saline  allay  it. 

Sweet,  sour,  and  saline  excite  the  Phlegm, 

Pungent,  bitter,  and  astringent  allay  it,* 

When  tastes  and  faults  come  together,  It  is  seen  that  those 
tastes  excite  those  faults  with  which  they  correspond  entirely, 
or  very  largely,  in  respect  of  qualities. 

Those  tastes,  again,  allay,  when  repeatedly  taken,  those  faults 
to  which  their  qualities  are  wholly  antagonistic,  or  very  lagely  so. 

For  tl>e  sake  of  only  expediency  it  is  laid  down  that  the  tastes, 
as  unconnected  with  one  another,  are  six,  and  that  the  faults,  as 
unconnected  with  one  another,  are  three. 

Infinite  Is  the  assemblage  of  the  variety  of  combinations  in 
which  the  tastes  and  the  faults  may  occur,  since  the  distinctions  of 
variety  are  Innumerable,8* 

Without  doubt,  in  this  connection  it  should  be  stated  that  in  the 
case  of  articles  endued  with  more  than  one  taste,  and  in  the  case 
of  diseases  characterised  by  the  excitement  of  more  than  one  fault, 
the  potency  of  particular  tastes  and  particular  faults  should  be 
first  carefully  ascertained :  then  should  the  inquiry  be  taken  up 
about  the  potency  of  the  articles  and  the  diseases  themselves. 
This  procedure,  however,  does  not  apply  everywhere. 

In  this  matter  ( it  should  be  said  that)  in  things  which  have- 
many  tastes  and  in  diseases  characterised  by  (the  excitement  of.) 
many  faults,  the  power  of  tastes  and  faults  should  at  first  be  as¬ 
certained  singly  and  then  the  power  of  the  things  and  the  diseases 
should  be  settled.f 

*  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  the  tastes  may  occur  in- innumerable  combina¬ 
tions  ;  tile  faults  also  may  occur  in  innumerable  combinations.  The  subjects  are 
thus  unmanageable.  For  the  sake  of  expediency  or  convenience,  it  is  said  that 
there  are  six  tastes  as  existing  independently  of  one  another.  —  T. 

f  What  is  stated  here  is.  this  :  there  are  many  objects  in  which  more  than 
one  taste  exists,  as  there  are  many  diseases  in  which  more  than  one  fault  has 
been  excited.  The  question  is  how  to  ascertain  the  power  of  these  objects  and  of 


448 


CHAU  AKA  SAM  I-IIT A. 


This  (  procedure),  however,  does  not  apply  in  all  cases. 

Indeed,  in  the  case  of  those  ( articles  and  diseases )  which 
represent  combinations  that  are  unnatural  or  unequal,  or  both 
unnatural  and  unequal,  or  which  represent  combinations  of  in¬ 
gredients  that  neutralise  one  another,  or  which  represent  combina¬ 
tions  of  ingredients  in  different  forms,  it  is  not  possible  to  settle 
what  the  truth  about  the  virtue  ( or  force,  or  potency  )  is  of  the 
whole  from  an  ascertainment  of  the  virtue  (  or  force,  or  potency  ) 
of  the  ingredients  constituting  the  whole.7* 


these  diseases.  The  Rishi’s  answer  is  that  when  an  object  is  found  to  possess 
many  tastes,  the  power  of  each  taste  should  first  be  separately  ascertained.  From 
such  separate  ascertainment,  the  power  of  the  object  should  be  known.  An  object 
may  be  sweet,  astringent,  and  bitter.  The  properties  of  sweetness,  of  astrin- 
gency,  and  of  bitterness  should  first  be  studied.  By  this,  the  virtue  of  the 
object  which  contains  those  tastes  in  a  combined  state,  may  be  known. 

Similarly,  a  disease  may  be  due  to  an  excitement  of  bile,  or  of  wind,  or  of 
phlegm,  qr  of  any  two  of  these,  or  of  all  the  three.  The  qualities  should  first 
be  ascertained  of  each  fault,  and  then  the  force  or  character  of  the  disease  may 
be  known. 

In  brief,  the  Rishi  says,  that  an  examination  of  each  detail  separately  as 
regards  its  virtues  qr  power  or  potency,  is  needed  for  ascertaining  the  virtue  or 
power  or  potency  of  that  which  is  the  result  of  the  combination  of  those  details. 
— T. 

*  The  second  portion  of  this  aphorism  uses  some  technical  terms  which 
require  explanation.  “Vikriti-yishama-samavatanam”  is  “combinations  that 
are  unnatural  or  unequal."  Chakrapani  gives  ‘  Madhura-Tanduliyaka  ’  as  an 
example  qf  the  first  and  '  Tila  ’  as  that  of  the  secoud.  The  first  is  the  Ama- 
ranthus  spinosus,  Linn.  It  is  the  Bengali  Kanta-natiya.  Things  sweet  have 
the  virtues  of  being  oijy  and  nutritve.  The  sweetness,  however,  that  exists  in 
the  Amaranthus  spinosus  is  not  so.  Hence  the  combination  of  sweetness  here 
is  unnatural,  failing  as  that  sweetness  does  to  produce  its  natural  action.  The 
second  (Tila)  is  sesame.  It  is  astringent,  pungent,  bitter,  and  sweet.  If 
these  tastes  had  existed  in  equal  measures,  sesame  could  have  been  destructive 
pf  bile  and  phlegm,  or  of  all  the  three  faults.  But  these  tastes  exist  ip  it  in 
Unequal  measures.  Hence,  it  is  provocative  of  bile  and  phlegm,  The  separate 
mention  of  ff  nanatmakinam  ”  indicates  combinations  that  are  both  unnatural 
p.nd  unequal, 

“  Parashparena  upahatanam  ’  is  easy.  These  are  such  combinations  in  which 
the  ingredients,  being  hostile  tq  one  another,  neutralise  one  another.  In  the  case 
pf  articles,  it  is  easy  to  understan4  how  tastes  may  be  hostile.  In  the  case  of 
cjiseases,  however,  the  meaning  is  difficult  to  catch,  for  there  are  only  three 


CI-IA  RA  KA  -  SA  M  HI  TA . 


449 


In  aggregates  thus  made  up,  ascertaining  the  truth  about  the 
virtue  of  the  aggregates  themselves,  should  the  truth  be  taught 
about  the  virtue  of  both  things  and  diseases. 

Hence,  we  shall  declare  the  truth,  arguing  from  the  virtues  or 
potency  of  tastes,  from  the  virtues  or  potency  of  things,  from  the 
potency  of  the  faults,  and  from  the  potency  of  diseases. 

As  regards  this,  the  virtues  or  potency  of  tastes  is  ( first ) 
taught. 

The  virtues  or  potency  of  things  we  shall  then  declare.* 

Oil  (  of  mustard  seeds  ),  Ghee  (  of  vaccine  milk  ),  and  honey 
are  alleviatives  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm. 

Here  ( it  should  be  said  that )  Oil,  in  consequence  of  being 
endued  with  the  properties  of  moisture  and  heat  and  heaviness, 
subjugates  wind,  when  constantly  used. 

The  wind,  being  endued  with  dryness,  coolness,  and  lightness, 
is  viewed  as  possessed  of  attributes  contrary  to  those  of  Oil. 

When  things  of  contrary  virtues  come  together,  the  great 
conquer  the  less.  Hence,  Oil  continually  used,  subjugates  the 
wind.8* 

faults  and  these,  instead  of  neutralising  each  other,  are  always  seen  to  exist  side 
by  side,  or  together  in  an  excited  state.  Bile  and  wind,  or  bile  and  phlegm, 
or  wind  and  phlegm,  or  bile,  wind,  and  phlegm,  may  be  excited  together. 
Hence,  Chakrapani  explains  that  when  the  Rishi  means  the  expression  to  apply 
to  diseases  as  well  as  to  objects,  it  should  be  understood  that  there  may  be  cases 
of  distempers  in  which,  through  unknown  causes,  one  fault  may  neutralise 
another. 

“  Anyai9cha  vikalpanairvikalpitanam  ”  means  combinations  of  ingredients 
in  different  forms  ;  such  as  the  siaarasa  (juice)  of  certain  things  may  be  taken 
for  the  mixture,  or  the  kalka  (pulp)  of  those  very  things  may  be  taken.  In  the 
case  of  diseases,  the  expression  would  imply  faults  excited  in  different  parts  of 
the  physical  organism  such  as  wind  excited  in  the  abdomen  or  in  the  arms,  or 
in  the  lungs  or  in  the  head,  &c, — T. 

*  Oil  subjugates  wind,  Ghee  subjugates  bile,  and  honey  subjugates  phlegm. 
The  attributes  of  oil  are  set  forth  ;  those  of  wind  also  are  set  forth.  The  two 
sets  of  attributes  are  opposed  to  each  other.  That  set  which  is  powerful 
must  prevail  over  or  subjugate  the  other.  By  being  constantly  used,  the  attri¬ 
butes  of  oil  gain  in  strength.  Hence,  frequently  used,  oil  is  an  antidote  [to 
excited  wind.  “  Bhuyasa  alpamavajiyate  ”  is  a  law  of  Nature.  The  power¬ 
ful  must  prevail  over  the  weak.  The  physician’s  science  supplies  him  with 


45°  CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHlTA 

Similarly  Ghee  subjugates  bile,  in  consequence  of  its  being 
possessed  of  the  properties  of  sweetness,  coolness,  and  mildness  ; 
since  bile  is  not  sweet,  hot,  and  fiery. 

And  Honey  subjugates  phlegm,  in  consequence  of  its  being 
possessed  of  the  properties  of  dryness,  fieriness,  and  astringency 
of  taste.  Phlegm  is  oily,  mild,  and  sweet. i° 

Whatever  other  object  there  is  that  is  contrary  to  wind,  or  bile, 
or  phlegm  in  respect  of  its  properties,  sujugates  these,  by  being 
repeatedly  used.11 

Without  doubt,  these  three  articles  should  not  be  used  in  larger 
measure  than  others.  They  are  Pippali  ( Piper  longuvi,  Linn  ; 
syn.  Chaivca  Roxburghii );  Kshara  (alkaline  ashes)  ;  and  Lavana 
{salty* 

Pippalis  are  pungent,  and  very  soon  become  sweet  upon  assi¬ 
milation.  They  are  not  very  heavy.  They  are  oily  and  hot,  and 
they  generate  impurities.  They  are  much  approved  by  physicians 
(as  a  remedy  in  many  diseases).  They  very  soon  become  pro¬ 
ductive  of  beneficial  and  baneful  effects. 

They  are,  as  regards  their  preliminary  effects,  beneficial,  owing 
to  the  good  results  they  produce  when  used  sparingly  as  regards, 
both  time  and  measure.  Used  frequently,  they  produce,  without 
doubt,  the  consequence  of  exciting  the  faults. 

In  consequence  of  their  being  heavy  and  capable  of  generating 
impurities,  they  excite  phlegm. 

In  consequence  of  their  property  of  heat,  they  excite  bile. 

In  Consequence  of  their  being  only  slightly  oily  and  hot,  they 
are  not  calculated  to  be  useful  as  alleviatives  of  wind. 

They  are  used  as  media  or  vehicles  for  other  medicines  (in 
which  case  they  are  beneficial). 

For  these  reasons,  one  should  not  use  Pippali  in  large  mea¬ 
sures.  >3* 


articles  which  by  repeated  application  or  use  he  contrives  to  make  powerful. 
Medicines  conquer  disease  by  repetition.  In  the  case  of  medicines,  however, 
that  are  powerful,  they  at  once  conquer  the  disease. — T. 

*  Most  of  the  printed  texts  of  this  passage  are  vicious,  Chakrapani  says 


CIIA  RA  KA-SA  M  HIT  A.  451 

Alkaline  ashes  are  endued  with  the  properties  of  heat,  keen¬ 
ness,  and  lightness. 

At  first  they  produce  certain  impurities.  Then  they  correct 
the  system  (by  removing  them). 

They  are  used  for  purposes  of  Pachana,  for  causing  burns,  and 
for  purging.* 

If  used  frequently  and  in  large  measure,  they  become  produc¬ 
tive  of  injurious  consequences  to  the  hair,  eye,  heart,  and  virility. 

Those  villagers  and  townsmen  and  denizens  of  cities  and 
provinces  who  use  alkaline  ashes  frequently  and  in  large  measure 
become  affected  with  dimness  (or  loss)  of  vision,  loss  of  virility, 
baldness  of  the  head,  and  whiteness  of  hair.  Such  men  become 
also  subject  to  that  disease  in  which  the  heart  is  felt  as  being  cut 
away :  for  example,  may  be  cited  the  Easterners  and  the  Chins. 

Hence,  alkaline  ashes  should  not  be  used  frequently  and  in 
large  measure. 

Salt  is  endued  with  the  properties  of  heat  and  keenness  •  it 
is  not  very  heavy  nor  very  moist  (or  oily). 

It  produces  impurities,  and  operates  as  a  Sransana.t 

It  creates  a  liking  for  food  (by  adding  a  relish  to  it). 

It  is  beneficial,  so  far  as  its  immediate  consequences  are  con¬ 
cerned,  if  used  in  small  measure. 


that  there  is  a  stop  after  ‘  sadyah.’  In  that  case,  the  '  tah  ’  preceding  it  would 
seem  to  be  superfluous.  We  have  not  that  text  before  us  upon  which  Chakra- 
pani  commented  ;  it  is  difficult  to  settle  it  from  the  commentary  alone. 

'  Prayoga-sama-sadgunyat  ’  implies  “  owing  to  the  good  effects  of  a  use 
that  is  sparing  in  respect  of  both  time  and  measure.’ — T. 

*  By  1  pachana  ’  is  meant,  as  has  been  explained  in  Sutrasthana,  that 
which  assists  in  digesting  undigested  food,  without  increasing  the  appetite. 

'  Bhedana  ’  is  that  which  purges  the  bowels  without  producing  watery 
motions. 

Alkaline  ashes  are  used  for  producing  burns,  that  is,  as  caustics.  It  is  diffi¬ 
cult  to  understand  what  the  disease  is  that  is  called  “  Hridayopakartana”.  It  is 
explained  by  the  Commentator  to  be  some  disease  in  which  the  heart  is  felt  to 
be  cut  or  pieced  by  some  sharp  instrument. — T. 

f  'Sransana’  is  that  which  hurries  the  chyle  or  materials  for  digestion, 
without  allowing  them  to  be  properly  digested. — T. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


452 

It  leads  to  a  storage  of  (excited)  faults  as  its  secondary  or 
supervening  consequences. 

It  is  used  for  adding  relish  to  food,  for  bringing  about  the 
digestion  of  undigested  food,  and  extracting  impurities,  and  lot 
hurrying  the  chyle  and  other  materials  for  digestion. 

If  used  frequently  and  in  large  measure,  it  leads  to  pain  (loss 
of  cheerfulness),  relaxation  of  flesh  and  limbs,  weakness  and 
other  diseases  of  the  body.  Those  villages,  townsmen,  denizens 
of  cities  and  provinces  who  use  it  excessively,  become  very  cheer¬ 
less,  and  their  flesh  and  blood  lose  compactness.  They  become 
Unable  to  bear  the  slightest  exertion.  As  examples  of  this  may 
be  cited  the  Valhikas,  the  Saurashtrakas,  the  Saindhavas,  and  the 
Sauvirakas.  These  people  eat  salt  with  even  milk, 

In  those  regions  of  the  earth  where  the  soil  is  exceedingly 
saline,  neither  herbs,  nor  Creepers,  nor  large  trees  grow,*  Or,  if 
they  grow,  they  never  become  vigorous, 

This  is  due  to  the  soil  being  largely  saturated  with  salt. 

Hence,  salt  should  never  be  taken  in  excessive  measure. 

Those  men  who  are  habituated  to  excessive  measures  of  salt, 
suffer  from  absence  of  hair,  baldness  (partial  or  entire)  of  head, 
whiteness  of  hair,  and  relaxation  of  the  flesh.  All  these  occur  long 
before  maturity  of  years  comes  in. 

Hence,  such  men  should  gradually  withdraw  from  their  habit 
for  their  own  good. '4 

A  gradual  withdrawal  from  that  to  which  one  has  been  habi¬ 
tuated  becomes  either  not  at  all  injurious  or,  if  injurious,  very 
slightly  so. 

One  is  said  to  be  habituated  to  something  when  that  something 
agrees  with  one  when  repeatedly  taken. 

That  which  is  implied  sdmya  is  implied  also  by  upagaya. 


*  ‘  Vanaspati  ’  is  such  a  tree  as  produces  fruit  without  having  flowered  ; 
While  ‘  Vanaspatya  ’  is  that  tree  which  flowers  first  and  then  produces  fruit. 
The  fact  is,  the  knowledge  cf  Botany  in  the  days  of  Charaka  was  very  limited. 
Trees  must  flower  to  produce  fruits.  In  the  case  of  some  trees,  the  flowers  are 
not  distinguishable. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  453 

Sdtmya  (or  upa£aya)  is  of  three  kinds  :  viz.,  superior,  inferior, 
and  middling,  according  to  the  classification. 

It  is,  again,  of  seven  kinds,  having  regard  to  each  of  the  six 
tastes  (severally)  and  to  all  the  six  tastes  (jointly). 

Of  these,  that  Sdtmya  which  has  reference  to  all  the  tastes  is 
called  superior :  that  which  has  reference  to  only  one  taste  is 
inferior.  That  is  called  middling  Sdtmya  which  lies  between  the 
superior  and  the  inferior  ( that  is,  which  has  reference  neither 
to  all  the  tastes,  nor  to  one,  but  to  two  or  three  or  four,  &c.) 

One  should,  by  inferior  and  middling  Sdtmya ,  gradually 
attain  to  that  which  is  superior.  Even  when  one  has  attained  to 
that  Sdtmya  which  has  reference  to  all  the  tastes,  one  should 
pursue  only  that  which  is  beneficial  by  a  thorough  examination  of 
the  ordinances  with  respect  to  food,  the  especial  rules  or  excep¬ 
tions,  and  the  reasons  thereof.*15 


*  What  is  stated  in  this  aphorism  is  this  :  one  accustoms  oneself  to  various 
things, — that  is,  articles  lof  food  and  drink,  or  practices.  By  repeated  use  or 
indulgence,  these  cease  to  be  productive  of  those  injurious  consequences  which 
they  are  capable  of  otherwise  producing.  This  agreement  of  a  thing 
or  practice  with  one’s  constitution  is  known  by  the  technical  word  satmya. 
There  is  another  technical  word,  upagaya.  Both  these  have  the  same  sense,  for 
both  imply  the  agreement  or  suitability  of  articles  of  diet  and  practices  with  or 
to  individual  constitutions. 

This  agreement  is,  necessarily,  of  three  kinds,  viz.,  superior,  inferior,  and 
middling  :  for  in  the  case  of  some  articles,  the  agreement,  in  point  of  degree, 
is  great  or  less,  or  between  the  two.  Some  articles  may  agree  very  well,  some 
not  so  well,  and  some  tolerably  Well. 

Having  reference  to  the  objects  themselves,  the  agreement  may  be  spoken 
of  as  of  seven  kinds  ;  that  is,  as  regards  each  of  the  six  tastes  individually,  and 
as  regards  all  the  tastes  collectively.  Things  sweet  agree  with  one  ;  with 
another,  only  that  which  is  bitter  agrees  ;  with  a  third,  only  that  which  is 
pungent  agrees  ;  &c.,  while  in  the  case  of  some,  all  the  tastes  agree.  It  is 
obvious  that  that  agreement  which  has  reference  to  all  the  tastes  must  be  spoken 
of  as  superior.  That,  again,  which  has  reference  to  any  one  of  the  tastes,  must 
be  inferior.  While,  an  agreement  with  two  tastes,  or  with  three,  or  four,  or 
five,  must  occupy  a  middle  position  in  point  of  excellence. 

It  goes  without  saying  that  when  in  the  case  of  one  there  is  either  inferior 
agreement  or  a  middling  one,  that  is,  when  one  is  accustomed  to  only  one  taste 
or  a  few,  one  should  strive  to  accustom  oneself  to  all  the  tastes.  That  would 

58 


454  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

In  this  matter,  verily,  there  are  these  eight  considerations  rela* 
ting  to  the  ordinances  about  food  and  drink  and  their  exceptions 
or  limitations,* 

They  are  as  follows  : — i.  Prakriti  (Nature),  2.  Karana 
(  Transmutation  ),  3.  Samyoga  (  combination ),  4.  Ragi  (  Measure  ), 
5.  Dega  ( place  of  origin  &c.),  6.  Kctla  (season  and  age ),  7. 

Upayoga-Samstha  ( conditions  of  use  ),  and  8.  Upayoktri  ( taker 
himself  of  food  and  drink  ).fls 

These  are  the  eight  considerations. 

Among  these,  that  is  called  Prakriti  which  is  Nature.  The 
nature,  again,  of  articles  of  food  and  drugs  implies  the  natural 
attributes  of  heaviness  and  the  rest  inhering  in  them:  such  as 
those  of  Masha  and  Mudga,  or  of  the  boar  and  the  deer.17J 

That,  again,  is  called  Karana  which  is  a.  transmutation  or 
improvement  of  the  products  of  Nature.  Verily,  the  super-inducing 
of  other  attributes  is  said  to  be  Transmutation  or  Improvement. 
Those  attributes  are  induced  by  the  refinenent  brought  about  by 
contact  with  water  and  fire,  by  churning,  by  (virtue  of )  place 
and  time,  and  perfuming,  steeping,  &c,  as  also  by  excellence 


secure  perfect  health.  Lastly,  even,  when  one  has  accustomed  oneself  to  alt 
the  tastes,  one  cannot,  without  injury,  actually  always  indulge  in  all  the  tastes.. 
When  one,  for  example,  is  feverish,  one  must  avoid  some  of  the  tastes.  At 
other  times  other  tastes  should  be  avoided.  The  fact  is,  bearing  the 
ordinances  in  respect  of  food  and  drink  in  mind,  the  especial  rules  or  exceptions, 
and  the  reasons  whereupon  those  ordinances  and  those  exceptions  depend,  one 
should  eat  and  drink  particular  things  even  though  one  may  be  accustomed  to 
all  kinds  of  tastes. 

The  word  ‘ayatana,’  as  explained  by  Chakrapani,  means  here  ‘hetu’  or 
reasons. — T. 

*  The  word  'ayatana’  implies,  as  already  explained,  'hetu'  or  reasons. 
Hence,  ‘consideration’  would  be  better. — T. 

f  Each  of  these  terms  has  been  fully  explained  below.  The  English 
equivalents  given  express  their  senses  approximately.  They  are  not  to  be  taken 
as  exact  renderings. — T. 

+  Masha  is  the  Phaseolus  radiatus,  Roxb.  Mudga  is  Phaseolus  Mungo , 
Linn.  The  former  is  heavy,  the  latter  light  ;  so  also,  the  boar,  i.  e.,  pork,  is 
heavy  ;  white  the  flesh  of  the  deer  is  light.— T . 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  455 

through  length  of  time,  and  ( use  of  dfferent  kinds  of )  vessels  and 
the  rest.*1** 

Samyoga  is  the  state  of  union  of  two  or  more  articles. 

This  produces  especial  consequences  which  the  articles,  exis¬ 
ting  separately,  do  not  produce. 

As  examples  may  be  cited  the  union  of  honey  and  ghee,,  or  of 
honey,  fish,  and  milk.t^ 

Ragi  is  the  measure  ( of  food,  drink,  and  medicine  )  in  the 
aggregate  and  severally.  Its  object  is  the  ascertainment  of  the 


*  By  'sanskara'  is  meant  improvement  of  a  natural  product,  i.  e.,  the 
super-inducing  of  some  attribute  that  does  not  belong  to  it  in  a  natural  state. 
As  an  example  of  “the  refinement  brought  about  by  contact  with  water  and 
fire’'’  is  cited  the  case  of  boiled  rice.  Paddy  or  raw  rice  is  naturally  heavy. 
By  proper  washing  and  boiling  and  keeping  it  warm,  it  becomes  endued  with, 
the  property  of  lightness.  By  churning,  curds,  which  are  naturally  heavy 
become  light.  What  is  implied  by  the  virtue  of  place  is,  as  explained  by  the 
commentator,  the  placing  of  an  article  covered  with  hot  or  cold  ashes.  As  an 
example  of  the  virtue  of  time  may  be  cited  the  case  of  articles  used  after  being 
kept  for  sometime.  Tamarind  that  is  fresh  has  certain  properties  ;  while 
tamarind  that  is  old  possesses  other  properties.  By  ‘vasana’  is  meant  the  act 
of  rendering  an  article  fragrant  by  admixture  with  some  agreeable  and  harmless, 
perfume  or  with  some  perfumed'  object. 

Chakrapani  reads  ‘vasana’.  Gangadhara's  text  is  incorrect. 

By  ‘Bhavana’  is  meant  the  continued  steeping  of  an  article  successively 
for  several  days.  By  this  means  new  properties  are  superinduced.  With 
reference  to  Amlaka  ( Phyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn.),  the  fruits  are  continually 
steeped  in  the  juice  of  others  of  their  kind  and  exposed  to  the  sun  for  drying. 
They  are  again  similarly  steeped,  and  the  process  goes  on  from  day  to  day. 
As  an  instance  of  the  excellence  brought  about  through  length  of  time,  that  of. 
diverse  kinds  of  sauces  may  be  given.  The  more  the  number  of  days  they  are 
kept,  the  better  they  become  as  aids  to  digestion. 

The  difference  of  vessels  used  for  cooking  or  keep  of  articles  causes  difference 
of  properties.  Certain  things  keep  well  in  earthen  pots  and  jars.  They  would 
be  spoiled  if  kept  in  metallic,  particularly  copper  or  brass  vessels. — T. 

f  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  certain  articles,  existing  separately,  produce 
certain  consequences.  These,  if  united  together,  produce  consequences  of 
another  kind.  Thus  honey  and  ghee  are  each  wholesome.  If  united  together, 
the  combination  acts  as  poison.  Similarly,  honey,  fish,  and  milk,  are  each 
nutritive.  Combined  together,  the  mixture  becomes  highly  deleterious,  capable 
of  producing  even  leprosy. — T. 


456 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


consequences  of  due  measure,  as  also  of  undue  measure  (/.  e 
measure  that  is  insufficient  or  excessive  ). 

That  is  measure  in  the  aggregate  which  concerns  itself  with  the 
ascertainment  in  a  lump  of  the  entire  quality  of  food  and  drink 
(  one  is  to  take  ). 

That  is,  again,  measure  (  taken  )  severally  which  consists  in  the 
ascertainment,  distributively,  of  each  article  qf  food  and  drink- 
Measure  in  the  aggregate  (  Sarvagrahah )  is  the  taking  of  the  whole 
(  Sarvasya  grahah ). 

While  measure  (taken)  severally  ( Parigrahah )  is  taking 
each  ingredient  distributively  from  the  whole  ( Sarvatah 
grahah).*10 

By  Dega,  again,  is  meant  the  place  or  region  where  articles  are 
produced.  The  place  or  region  also  where  animals  move  about  for 
feed,  is  called  by  the  same  name.t?* 

Verily,  Kala  (Time  )  is  (  i  )  that  which  is  ever-running  and 
(  2  )  that  which  is  conditional  and  depends  upon  changes  (  in  the 
physical  organism  ). 

Time  that  is  ever-running  concerns  itself  with  the  suitabi¬ 
lity  of  (  or  otherwise)  of  seasons  (  with  the  physical  organism  ).2at 


*  Rafi,  as  explained  above  by  the  Rishi,  is  measure.  The  measure,  how¬ 
ever,  of  food  and  drink  (the  corpmenfators  add,  of  medicine  also),  may  be  qf 
the  entire  lump  that  one  may  take  of  different  kinds,  such  as  rice  or  wheat, 
water,  ghee,  milk,  curds,  meat,  fish,  honey,  &c,  Such  measure,  however,  is 
not  the  only  consideration,  for  unless  and  until  the  measure  of  each  ingredient 
composing  the  lump  is  laid  down,  one  may  injure  one’s  health.  Hence,  measure 
jn  the  aggregate,  as  also  distributively,  should  be  laid  down  by  the  physician, 
jf  he  is  to  be  of  real  service  to  men. — T. 

•j-  Articles  of  food  are  heavy  or  light  according  to  their  place  of  origin, 
As  regards  animals  also,  their  flesh  is  heavy  or  light  according  to  the  nature 
of  the  ground  on  which  they  move  about  for  feed.  Such  as  the  buffalo  or  the 
boar,  living  in  marshy  regions,  yields  meat  that  is  heavy.  The  deer,  feeding 
on  dry  pasture  lands,  yields  meat  that  is  light.  Altogether,  the  Dega  of  food  is 
a  consideration  that  is  as  important  as  the  others. — T, 

J  In  the  place  of  Aphorisms  a  similar  distinction  has  been  made  with 
respect  to  Time.  Nitayaga  or  that  which  is  ever-running,  consists  of  days  and 
Weeks  and  months  and  seasons  and  years. 


CHARA  KA-SA  MI-I  IT  A 


457 


By  Upayoga-Samstka  is  implied  the  conditions  in  respect  of 
the  taking  of  food  and  drink.  These  depend  upon  the  indications 
of  digestion*. 

Upayoktri,  again,  is  he  that  takes  food,  viz .,  he  upon  whom 
depends  the  suitability  of  food.f28 

These  are  the  eight  considerations  bearing  upon  the  ordinances 
about  food  and  their  exceptions. 

Of  these  there  are  special  circumstances  which  become  pro¬ 
ductive  of  results  beneficial  or  baneful.  They  also  contribute 
to  each  other’s  excellence.  These  should,  therefore,  be  determined. 

Having  understood  them,  on  should  seek  one’s  own  good.  One 
should  not,  through  heedlessness  or  error,  indulge  in  such  articles 
of  food,  or  such  practices,  which,  though  agreeable,  are  baneful 
or  productive  of  evil  consequences  afterwards.24! 

As  connected  with  the  considerations  about  food  and  drink,  it  is,  of  course, 
well-known  that  pertain  kinds  of  food  and  drink  are  beneficial  or  baneful  in 
certain  seasons.  As  regards  time  that  is  called  Conditional,  it  depends  on 
changes  in  the  physical  system,  such  as  Infancy,  Youth,  Old  age,  &c.,  or  disease 
and  health.  Food  and  drink  should  depend  on  age  as  also  on  health  or 
disease. — T. 

*  Food  is  to  be  taken  for  the  support  of  the  system.  But  then  it  cannot  be 
taken,  without  injury,  at  any  time  and  every  time.  There  are  conditions  or 
rules  irj  respect  of  its  taking.  When  digestion  has  taken  place  as  indicated  by 
its  well-known  symptoms,  then  only  should  one  replenish  one’s  system  with  a 
fresh  supply  of  food  and  drink. — T. 

f  The  last  consideration  with  respect  to  food  is  the  person  himself  that 
is  to  take  it.  He  may  be  one  who  has  accustomed  himself  to  heavy  food,  or 
one  \vho  has  always  abstained  from  such  food.  He  may  be  one  that  eats  much 
at  a  time  and  frequently  j  or,  he  may  be  one  that  eats  sparingly  and  that  at 
long  intervals.  The  kind  of  food  and  its  quality  also  must,  therefore,  depend 
upon  the  taker,  i.  e.,  his  character.— T, 

%  ‘Vi^eshah’  implies  especial  circumstances.  The  Rishi  first  names  the 
eight  considerations  that  bear  on  the  question  of  diet.  He  then  declares  that 
especial  circumstances  connected  with  those  considerations  become  productive 
of  good  or  bad  results.  Thus,  of  the  first  consideration  called  Prakriti  or 
Nature,  the  especial  circumstances  are  these  :  flesh  that  is  light  is  beneficial, 
while  flesh  that  is  heavy  is  not  so. 

As  regards  the  several  considerations  aiding  each  other,  it  is  seen  that 
‘Karana’  or  cooking  aids  ‘Prakriti,’  for  heavy  food  may  be  made  light  by 
subjecting  it  to  the  needful  processes. — T. 


458 


CHAR  A  KA -SA  MHITA 


The  following  provisions  relating  to  the  ordinances  of  food  are 
beneficial  for  the  hale  as  also  for  those  that  are  diseased.  As  regards 
some  persons  these  become  most  beneficial  at  certain  seasons 
in  consequence  of  the  very  nature  of  those  persons.  Food  that  is 
warm,  oily,  and  according  to  the  proper  measure,  should  be  taken. 
It  should  also  be  taken  after  that  previously  taken  has  been 
properly  digested. 

It  should  also  consist  of  such  ingredients  as  would  not  form 
a  compound  of  hostile  potencies. 

One  should  take  one’s  food  in  a  place  that  is  agreeable,  (z.  e.,. 
not  repulsive). 

The  food  one  takes  should,  again,  consist  of  dishes  every  one 
of  which  is  agreeable  One  should  not  eat  with  haste  ;  or  taking 
up  a  long  time  ;  or  talking,  or  laughing  the  while. 

While  eating,  one  should  eat  with  attention  concentrated 
thereon. 

Lastly,  one  should  eat  after  a  proper  survey  of  oneself.25 

We  shall  next  lay  down  instructions  on  the  excellence  of 
these  kinds  of  food. 

One  should  take  food  that  is  warm,  for  warm  food,,  while 
being  taken,  causes  perspiration.  When  taken  it  assists  the  diges¬ 
tive  fire,  and  is  soon  digested.  Such  food  causes  the  wind  to. 
move  in  its  natural  directions,  and  dries  up  the  phlegm. 

For  these  reasons  we  should  eat  food  that  is  warm.25 

One  should  take  food  that  is  oily. 

Food  that  is  oily,  while  being  eaten,  causes  perspiration  - 
when  the  eating  is  over,  it  excites  the  digestive  fire. 

Such  food  is  soon  digested  ;  causes  the  wind  to  move  in  its 
natural  directions.  It  renders  the  growth  of  the  body  stable  (or 
unsusceptible  of  change).  It  generates  growth  of  strength  ;  as 
also  excellence  of  complexion. 


*  What  is  meant  by  a  survey  of  oneself  is  attention  to  one’s  state  of  health. 
Thus,  after  recovery  from  a  fever,  one  should  not  eat  curds  or  fish  too  much, 
or,  if  one  has  a  rheumatic  tendency,  one  should  avoid  liquid  and  cool  food,  or 
indulge  in  it  very  sparingly, — T. 


charaka-samhitA. 


459 


For  these  reasons  one  should  take  food  that  is  oily.27 

One  should  take  food  according  to  the  proper  measure  ;  since 
food  taken  according  to  the  proper  measure,  without  afflicting 
wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  increases  the  period  of  life  in  evey  case. 

Food  taken  according  to  proper  measure  is  easily  transformed 
into  faeces  and  passes  into  the  anal  canal.  It  does  not  injure 
the  digestive  fire.  It  is,  again,  digested  without  difficulty  (  i.  e.r 
easily). 

For  these  reasons,  one  should  take  food  according  to  the 
proper  measure.28 

One  should  take  food  after  that  taken  previously  has  been, 
digested. 

Of  the  person  that  eats  before  the  food  previously  taken  has 
been  properly  digested,  the  juice,  still  undeveloped,  of  the  food' 
previously  taken,  mingling  with  the  juice  of  the  food  taken  sub¬ 
sequently,  very  soon  excities  all  the  faults. 

Of  the  person  that  eats  after  the  food  previously  taken  has 
been  properly  digested,  it  is  seen  that  the  faults  being  in  their  res¬ 
pective  places,  the  digestive  fire  being  inflamed,  the  appetite  being 
excited,  the  mouths  of  all  the  ducts  being  opened  (or  unclosed), 
the  eructations  being  pure  (i,  e.,  not  characterised  by  any  bad 
odor),  the  action  of  the  heart  being  unobstructed,  the  wind 
moving  in  natural  directions,  the  urgings  of  wind,  urine,  and  stools 
being  satisfied,  the  food  that  is  taken,  without  injuring  any  of 
the  constituent  elements  of  the  body,  increases  the  period  of  life 
in  every  case. 

For  these  reasons,,  one  should  eat  after  the  food  previously 
taken  has  been  digested.28* 


*  For  understanding  what  is  meant  by  ‘aharasya  rasam’  or  ‘the  juice  of 
food/  vide  p.  392,  Lesson  XXVIII  of  Sutrasthanam,  ante.  The  food  we  take 
yields  a  juice  as  also  a  refuse.  The  former  becomes  changed  into  blood  and 
other  invigorating  substances. 

By  ‘faults/  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  explain,  is  meant  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm. 

What  is  stated  in  the  second  part  of  the  aphorism  is  this  :  when  digestion 
has  taken  place,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  move  about  in  their  respective  places  ; 


46o  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

One  should  not  take  food  that  is  so  made  up  as  to  be  of  hostile 
potencies. 

The  person  that  takes  food  that  is  not  so  made  up  as  to  be  of 
hostile  potencies,  is  never  affected  by  such  diseases  as  are  generated 
by  food  of  hostile  potencies. 

For  these  reasons  one  should  take  such  food  us  is  not  of  hostile 
potency.*30 

One  should  take  one’s  food,  (  sitting  )  in  an  agreeable  place. 
The  person  that  takes  his  food  in  an  agreeable  place,  never 
experiences  any  shock  in  consequence  of  those  feelings  of  repug* 
nance  which  are  generated  by  disagreeable  spots. 

So  also  one  should  eat  food  that  consists  of  ingredients  every 
one  of  which  is  agreeable. 

For  these  reasons  one  should  eat  in  an  agreeable  place  food 
that  consists  of  ingredients  every  one  of  which  is  agreeable.31 

One  should  not  eat  too  quickly. 

Of  one  that  eats  too  quickly  the  food  taken  conies  upwards, 
causes  a  cheerlessness,  and  does  not  reach  the  proper  receptacle.t 
Besides,  the  faults  and  merits  of  the  food  are  not  ( in  the  case 
of  one  that  eats  too  quickly  )  always  perceived.  Hence,  one  should 
not  eat  too  quickly. 


the  digestive  fire  is  inflamed  ;  appetite  is  felt  ;  the  diverse  ducts  of  the  body 
become  unobstructed  ;  &c.,  &c,  ;  accordingly,  the  food  that  is  then  taken, 
becomes  really  beneficial. — T. 

*  Food  that  is  so  made  up  as  to  become  endued  with  hostile  potencies  has 
been  explained  in  Sutrasthanam.  Honey  and  ghee,  or  milk  and  meat,  may 
be  cited  as  examples.  The  diseases  that  are  generated  by  food  so  made  up 
as  to  be  of  hostile  potencies  have  been  indicated  in  the  Lesson  called  Bhadra- 
kapyiya  of  Sutrasthanam. — T. 

j-  ‘Utsnehanam’  is  explained  by  Chakrapani  is  equivalent  to  ‘unmarga- 
gamanam,’  i.  e.,  coming  upwards. 

‘Avasadanam’  is  explained  as  implying  ‘causing  cheerlessness  i.  <?.,  not 
promoting  cheerfulness.  Food,  when  taken,  ought  to  make  one  cheerful. 

What  is  meant  by  the  food  not  reaching  its  proper  place,  is,  as  explained  by 
Chakrapani,  this  :  food  taken  too  quickly  remains  in  the  upper  part  of  the 
body  without  reaching  the  ‘Koshtha’  or  the  region  of  digestion. — T. 

%  ‘Dosha-sadgunya,’  as  explained  by  Chakrapani,  implies  ‘Doshanam, 
ke^adinam,  sadgunyasyacha,  swadutwaditi,’  i.  e.  faults,  such  as  the  presence 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  461 

One  should  not  eat  very  slowly  ( so  as  to  occupy  a  large 
measure  of  time  in  finishing  a  meal), 

One  that  eats  too  slowly  never  feels  gratification.  Such  a 
person  eats  milch.  His  food  also  becomes  cold.  The  digestion 
of  such  a  man  never  becomes  equable.  Hence,  one  should  not 
eat  too  slowly.88* 

One  should  eat  without  talking  or  laughing  the  while,  but  with 
attention  concentrated  on  the  act.  In  the  case  of  one  that  eats 
talking  or  laughing  the  while,  or  without  concentrated  attention, 
the  same  baneful  results  happen  that  have  been  declared  in  the 
case  of  him  that  eats  too  quickly. 

Hence,  one  should  eat  without  talking  or  laughing  the  while, 
but  with  attention  concentrated  on  the  act.84 

One  should  eat  after  an  adequate  survey  of  oneself ;  (noting 
that)  this  is  suitable  to  me  and  this  not  so.  Verily,  what  is  suitable 
to  one’s  constitution  is  known  to  oneself. 

Hence,  one  should  eat  after  an  adequate  survey  of  one’s 
Own  self.85f 

(Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  Summary) . 

He  is  regarded  as  a  physician  that  is  conversant  with  the 
Tastes,  all  articles  (of  food  and  drink),  the  faults,  and  diseases, 
in  respect  of  their  potency  (or  virtues),  and  that  knows  (the 
virtues  of)  place  and  time  as  also  the  body  (i.  e.,  the  elements  that 
make  it  up  and  their  respective  functions).8' 


of  hair,  &C.,  and  merits,  such  as  savduriness,  &c.  ‘Na  niyata,’  i.e.,  ‘kad&chit 
upalabhate,  kadachinneti,’  or,  as  put  above,  ‘is  not  always  perceived.’  It 
should  be  stated  here  that  according  to  Hindu  ideas,  the  presence  of  a  single 
hair  in  food  makes  it  impure.  Persons  eating  quickly  can  seldom  detect  such 
faults. — T. 

*  What  is  meant  by  the  digestion  not  becoming  equable  is  this  :  the  food 
that  is  eaten  at  the  outset,  mingles  with  that  which  is  eaten  hours  after,  for 
the  eating  goes  on  for  hours  together.  Hence,  the  entire  quantity  of  food  taken 
is  never  equally  digested.— T. 

f  What  is  implied  by  the  statement  that  one  knows  what  is  suitable  to 
oneself  is  that  no  instruction  is  needed  on  the  subject. — T. 

59 


462 


charakasamhitA. 


In  this  Lesson,  called  Rasa-Vimanam,  have  been  declared  the 
following,  viz.,  the  object  of  the  science  called  Vimilnam  ;  the  tastes, 
articles  (of  food  and  drink),  faults,  and  diseases,  in  respect  of 
their  potencies  ;  those  articles  that  should  not  be  taken  in  large 
measures  ;  the  three  kinds  of  Satmya  or  suitability  ;  the  eight 
(considerations  in  respect  of  the  ordinances  about  food  and  drink)  ; 
and  the  beneficial  character  of  those  considerations  about  food 
and  drink.1-2* 

Thus  ends  the  first  lesson,  called  Rasa-Vimanam,  in  the  place 
of  Vimanam,  in  the  treatise  of  Agnive£a  as  revised  by  Ckaraka. 


LESSON  II. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  Vimanam  of  the  three 
divisions  relating  to  the  Kukshi  or  stomach.  Thus  said  the  illustri¬ 
ous  son  of  Atri.1 

A  person,  while  eating,  should,  for  achieving  the  end  of  food, 
(mentally)  divide  his  stomach  into  three  compartments. 

They  are  as  follows ;  one  of  these  compartments  should  be 
for  solid  food  and  its  modifications  j  another  for  liquid  food  ; 
and  the  last  for  (the  free  play  of)  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm. 2t 


*  The  object  of  the  science  of  Vimanam  is  explained  in  aphorisms  2  to  5 
of  this  lesson  ;  the  tastes,  &c.,  in  respect  of  their  potenciss  are  declared  in 
aphorisms  6  to  1 1  ;  articles  that  should  not  be  taken  in  large  measures  are 
declared  in  aphorisms  12  to  14  ;  the  three  kinds  of  SStmya  are  declared  in 
aphorism  15  ;  the  eight  considerations  in  respect  of  the  ordinances  about  food  and 
drink  are  set  forth  in  aphorisms  16  to  24 ;  the  beneficial  character  of  those 
considerations  is  set  forth  in  aphorisms  to  end  of  the  lesson.— A 

f  The  genetive  ‘  &h3xasya,’  Chakrapani  explains,  means  1  Hhara-nimit- 
tam,’  i.  e.,  for  (achieving)  the  end  of  food,  viz, ,  good  digestion  and  health. 

*  Avaka^a '  here  means  space  or  room  or  compartment.  It  is  the  same 
as  ‘  aka^a.’  The  '  ang^as  ’  or  parts  need  not  be  equal,  observes  Chakrapani. 
By  the  word  ‘  murta  ’  is  meant  that  which  has  form  ;  hence,  solid.  It  is  con¬ 
tradistinguished  from  ‘  drava  ’  or  liquid,  which  has  no  form  of  its  own,  for 
it  takes  the  form  of  the  vessel  in  which  it  is  kept  for  the  time  being. 

The  division  of  the  stomach  into  three  compartments,  is,  as  observed  by 
Chakrapani,  an  instance  of  ‘  Adhyaropa  ’  or  imaginary  division.  The  case 


CHAR  AKA-  S  A  M HIT A 


463 


A  person.  that  takes  food  according  to  such  measure  is  never 
afflicted1  with  those  baneful  consequences  that  arise  from;  foodi 
taken;  not  according  to  measure.8* 

It  should!  be-  noted:  that  one  is  not  able  to  attain-  to-  all  the  bene>- 
ficial  consequences  of  food  (or  eating)  by  observing  (only  the 
proper  measure  of  food  (in  eating).  This  is  so.  because  of  the 
especial  results  of  the  eight  considferations  appertaining  to  the 
ordinances,,  with- their  limitations,  relating  to  food,,  such  as.  Prakriti 
(nature)  and  the  rest.4t 

Iln.  this-  matter,,  verify,,  the-  results  of  proper  and'  improper  measure 
have  been-  lafd-  dbwn-  (in  this  lesson),  guided  by  the  consideration, 
called  Ra9i  (quantum  of  food)  :6J 

since  propriety  of  measure  and  impropriety  of  measure  are- 
nothing  more  than  the  ordinances,,  with  their  exceptions,  in  respect 
of  the  Ra9i;  (quantum)  of  food.  Of  these  (two),  the  propriety  of. 
measure  has  been;  already  explained  by  the  remarks  on  the  division- 
of  the  stomach,  into,  compartments.8 

This  (vis,  the  property  of  measure)  we  shall  again  expound 
in  detail. 


of  astronomers  dividing,  the  ecliptic,  which  is  the  Earth’s  orbit  round'  the  sun;, 
into  twelve  parts  or  signs,  is  an  instance  of  Adhyaropa.  The  Commentator 
further  observes  that  though  the  stomach  is  not  the  part  of  body  which  is  the 
seat  of  wind  or  bile  or  phlegm,  yet  what  is  meant  by  a  portion  of  it  being  left 
empty  for  the  free  play  of  these,  is  that  the  food  and  drink  taken  generate  wind,, 
bile,  and  phlegm.  These  must,,  in  the  first  instance,  have  free  space  in  the 
stomach  before  they  reach  their  especial  seats  Or  abodes,  in  the  physical 
organism. — T. 

*  Food  not  according  to  measure  implies  food,  that  is  either  inadequate 
or  excessive,  i.  e.,  less  or  more  than  the  proper  measure, — 7Y 

t  What  is  stated  in  this  aphorism;  is  this  :  one,  by  attending  to  only  the 
proper  measure  of  food,  does  not  attain  to  all  the  beneficial  results  of  eating, 
for  measure  is  not  the  only  question  :  the  eight  previous  considerations,  number¬ 
ing  Nature  and  the  rest,  require  also  to  be  attended  to, — T. 

+  In  the  previous  Lesson,  among  the  eight  considerations  relating  to  food, 
occurs  that  on  Rs$i  or  measure.  The  results  of  proper  measure  and  improper 
measure,  including  inadequate  and  excessive  measure,  have  been  laid  down, 
as  a  continuation  of  the  consideration  o£  Raqi. — T. 


464 


CHAR  AKA  SA  MBIT  A. 


That  is  as  follows  :  of  food  taken  according  to  measure,  the 
following  are  the  indications,  viz.,  lightness  of  the  stomach  after 
eating,  absence  of  the  sensation  of  obstruction  in  the  chest,  absence 
of  pain  in  the  flanks,  absence  of  aggravated  heaviness  in  the 
abdomen,  cheerfulness  of  the  senses,  gratification  of  hunger  and 
thirst,  absence  of  discomfort  in  standing,-  sitting,  lying,  moving, 
inhaling  and  exhaling,  laughing,  and  conversing,  passing  of  stools 
with  ease  morning  and  evening,  and  accession  of  strength,  com¬ 
plexion,  and  growth.7 

As  regards  impropriety  of  measure,  it  is  said  to  be  of  two 
kinds,  viz.,  insufficiency  and  over-sufficiency  of  measure. 

Amongst  these  (two),  insufficiency  of  measure,  in  respect  of 
the  quantum  of  food,  causes  loss  of  strength,  complexion,  and 
growth  ;  does  not  lead  to  gratification,  produces  those  diseases 
that  are  generated  by  a  suppression  of  the  wind  ;  leads  to  decrease 
of  semen  (or  deterioration  of  virility),  decrease  of  period  of  life, 
and  loss  of  energy  ;  injures  the  mind,  intelligence,  and  the  senses  ; 
causes  a  deterioration  of  those  constituent  elements  of  the  body 
which  are  set  down  in  the  Lesson  on  sara  (called  Roga-vishak- 
jitiya) ;  inducing  inauspiciousness  ;  and  is,  lastly,  said  to  be  the 
abode  of  the  eighty  kinds  of  diseases  having  disorders  of  the  wind 
for  their  causes.8 

They  that  are  versed  in  all  things  say  that  over-sufficiency  of 
measure  is  capable  of  exciting  all  the  faults.8 

Of  the  person  who,  having  first  eaten  solid  food  in  all  its 
modifications  to  his  fill  afterwards  gratifies  himself  with  liquid 
food  (or  drinks),  it  is  seen  that  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  generated 
in  the  stomach  and  being  exceedingly  afflicted  by  over-sufficiency 
of  food,  become  simultaneously  excited.10 

*  The  word  ‘  Sauhityam’  as  used  here,  may  not  mean  ‘  satiety  ’  but  only 

<  triptimatram  ’  as  explained  in  the  note  in  p.  51  of  Sutrasthanam.  So  also 

<  tripti  ’  means  only  gratification.  What  is  meant,  however,  by  one  having  first 
attained  to  ‘  sauhjtya  ’  by  eating  solid  food  and  then  gratifying  oneself  with 
drinks  or  liquid  food,  is  indulgence  in  satiety  or  over-sufficiency  of  food 
measure, 

By  '  ama?aya  ’  is  meant  that  part  of  the  body  below  the  chest,  in  which 
the  food  eaten  is  deposited  in  the  first  stage.  Etymologically,  it  is  the  receptacle 
of  raw  food. — T. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITA . 


465 


The  faults,  (thus)  excited,  entering  the  undigested  quantity  of 
food,  and  taking  refuge  in  a  particular  part  of  the  stomach, 
become  moveless,  or  suddenly  escaping  through  the  upper  and 
the  lower  ducts,  cause  diverse  diseases  in  the  person  that  indulges 
in  over-sufficiency  of  measure  as  regards  food.1** 

Amongst  them,  the  wind  (thus  circumstanced)  causes  deep- 
seated  pains,  epistasis  and  the  like,  heaviness  (attended  with 
pain)  of  the  whole  body,  dryness  of  the  mouth,  swoons,  delusions, 
irregularity  of  the  appetite,  contractions  of  muscles  and  nerves,  as 
also  the  suppression  of  their  functions.^ 

The  bile  (thus  circumstanced)  causes  fever,  diarrhoea  with 
fever,  burning  sensation  within  the  body,  thirst,  inebriation, 
delusions,  and  delirium  or  incoherence  of  speech. '3 

The  phlegm  (thus  circumstanced)  causes  vomiting,  disgust  for 
food,  indigestion,  agues,  langour,  and  heaviness  of  body.«4 

Those  conversant  with  everything  say  that,  without  doubt, 
it  is  not  over-sufficiency  of  measure  in  respect  of  food,  that  causes 
diseases  owing  to  indigestion  ;  for,  verily,  food  and  drink  that  are 
heayy,  or  unmoist,  or  cold,  or  dry,  or  disgusting,  or  constipating, 
or  productive  of  burning  sensations,  or  unclean,  or  hostile  (as 
regards  combination),  taken  unseasonably,  lead  to  the  same  result. 

That  food  and  drink  also  which  are  taken  with  a  mind  burning 
with  lust  and  wrath,  and  cupidity,  and  distraction,  and  envy,  and 
shame,  and  grief,  and  avarice,  and  anxiety,  and  fear,  lead  to 
similar  disorders  born  of  indigestion. *5+ 


*  ‘Aparinatam’,  is  immature  or  undeveloped,  meaning,  of  course,  un¬ 
digested  ;  that  is,  food  that  has  not  yet  been  converted  to  its  proper  uses. 

‘Ekade5ama9rit|h’  is  read  by  some.  Chakrapani  reads  ‘ekadesamanna- 
.9.ritSh\  This  is  almost  the  same.  'Suddenly  escaping  through  the  upper  and 
the  lower  (ducts)’  implies  escape  in  the  form  of  vomit  or  stools,  or  eructations  or 
wind  with  foetid  odor. — T. 

f  The  first  five  words  beginning  with  'Kama’  and  ending  with  ‘Irsha’  are 
the  names  of  the  evil  passions  mentioned  in  all  scriptural  works.  'Lobha’  occurs 
again.  This  may  be  a  misreading,  or,  it  may  imply  ‘avarice’  as  I  have  put  it, 
Chakrapani  explains  ‘Sma-pradoshakara’  as  meaning  diseases  born  of  indige- 
tion.— T, 


466 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MBIT  A 


There  occurs  a  verse  here  : 

Even  food  that  is  prescribable  and  that  is  taken  according  to 
proper  measure  is  not  digested  in  consequence  of  anxiety,  grief, 
fear,  wrath,  misery,  (the  inactivity  of  continuous)  lying  down,  and 
wakefulness.16.* 

Physicians  say  that  the  diseases  born  of  undigested  food  are 
of  two  kinds.  These  are  Visuchika  and  Alasaka.  Of  these,  that 
disorder  born  of  undigested  food  should  be  known  as  Visuchika 
which  has  an  upward  and  downward  tendency  of  the  kind  already 
referred  to.17.f 

We  shall  now  explain  what  is  meant  by  Alasaka.  Of  one  that  is 
weak,  of  a  weak  digestive  fire,  and  of  excess  of  phlegm,  that 
suppresses  the  urgings  of  wind,  urine,  and  stools,  and  that  takes 
food  that  is  solid,  heavy,  beyond  measure,  unmoist,  cold  and  dry, 
such  food  and  drink,  oppressed  by  wind,  and  having  its  outlets  of 
escape  closed  up  by  phlegm,  become  exceedingly  compressed,  and 
in  consequence  of  their  movelessness,  lose  the  power  of  escaping 
out  (®f  the  system). 184 

After  this,  Alasaka  discovers,  in  excess,  all  the  symptoms  of 
undigested  food  (and  drink)  except  vomiting  and  purging. 

Then  the  faults  (wind,  bile,  and  phlegm)  aggravated  in  a  large 
measure,  and  having  their  outlets  closed  up  by  the  undigested  food 
(and  drink),  begin  to  move  in  transverse  directions,  and  some¬ 
times  cause  the  patient’s  body  to  become  as  rigid  as  a  stake  of 
wood. 

This  (aggravated)  from  of  Alasaka  is  said  to  be  incurable.1’. 


*  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  even  food  that  is  'pathya’  or  proper,  (that 
is,  prescribable  for  a  person  in  view  of  his  especial  circumstances  or  condition) 
and  that  is  taken  according  to  proper  measure,  does  not  undergo  digestion 
if  there  is  mental  anxiety,  &c.  The  Rishi  wishes  to  inculcate  that  propriety 
of  measure  is  not  everything  or  the  only  consideration. — T. 

f  ‘Visuchika’  is  identified  with  the  modern  cholera.  Its  chief  symptoms, 
as  here  declared,  are  vomiting  and  purging.  ‘Yathoktarupam’  refers  to  what 
has  been  said  in  aphorism  u  ante.—T. 

%  The  disease  called  Alasaka  has  been  identified  with  Tympanitis. — T. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


467 


Again,  of  one  that  takes  such  food  as  is  compounded  of  hostile 
ingredients,  or  that  takes  food  after  a  previous  stuffing  of  the 
stomach  with  food,  or  that  takes  food  anew  before  the  food  taken 
previously  has  been  digested,  the  (excited)  faults  are  spoken  of 
by  physicians  as  “the  poison  of  undigested  food/’  in  consequence 
of  their  symptoms  being  similar  to  those  of  poison. 

When  such  has  been  the  case,  it  becomes  incurable,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  rapidity  of  its  action  and  the  hostile  character  of 
the  treatment  (that  is  deducible  from  the  ordinances).20* * * § 

As  regards  that  undigested  food  which  has  led  to  Alasaka 
and  which  is  capable  of  treatment  (or  cure),  it  should  be  expelled 
out  by  causing  hot  water  mixed  with  salt  to  be  drunk.  Then 
the  patient  should  be  treated  by  the  application  of  diaphoretics 
and  by  insertion  of  medicated  wicks  (into  the  anal  canal).  The 
patient  should  also  be  made  to  fast.2t+ 

In  the  case  of  Visuchika,  fasting  should  be  prescribed  at  the 
outset.  Subsequently  the  patient  should  be  treated  like  one  that 
has  been  purged  (by  the  proper  application  of  purgatives)22^ 

When  disorders  due  to  undigested  food  have  occurred  and 
when  the  usual  hour  comes  of  the  patient’s  eating,  if  it  is  seen  that 
the  patient  has  his  stomach  still  affected  by  the  faults  or  that 
he  has  his  stomach  still  dull  and  heavy,  or  that  he  has  no  liking 
for  food,  then  for  digesting  that  portion  of  the  faults  which  still 
remains,  and  for  exciting  his  digestive  fire,  he  should  be  made  to 
drink  some  medicine,  care  being  taken  to  see  that  the  food  in  the 
stomach  has  been  already  digested.  In  no  case  should  such  a 
patient  be  made  to  take  any  medicine  if  the  food  in  his  stomach 
is  still  undigested ;  since  the  (digestive)  fire,  which  has  been 
weakened  by  undigested  food  in  the  stomach,  cannot  simulta¬ 
neously  digest  both  the  medicine  (that  is  administered)  and  the 
undigested  food  tin  the  stomach).28§ 


*  What  is  meant  by  ‘Viruddhopakrama’  is  this  :  the  symptoms  exhibited 
are  such  that  the  treatment  laid  down  for  allaying  one  aggravates  another. — T. 

f  ‘Ullekha'  implies  scraping,  that  is,  cutting  and  separating.  Here  it 
means  vomiting. — T. 

J  Vide  Lesson - ante,  Sutrasthanam. — T. 

§  This  is  a  very  important  aphorism.  What  the  Rishi  says  here  is  this  : 


468  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

Then  also  the  confusion  that  sets  in  through  disorders  born 
of  undigested  food,  the  food  the  patient  takes  anew,  and  me,dicine 
(administered  by  the  physician),  in  consequence  of  its  potency  as 
a  cause,  suddenly  destroys  the  life  of  the  sufferer  whose  digestive 
fire  is  weak  and  who  is  already  afflicted  and  strengthless.24* 

Again,  of  all  disorders  born  of  undigested  food,  the  alleviation 
happens  through  only  abstention  from  food 

If  a  portion  of  the  complaint  still  remains  ( notwithstanding 
the  adoption  of  this  method  of  treatment ),  then  for  conquering  the 
disorders  of  the  person  that  has  been  made  to  abstain  from  food, 
the  physician,  disregarding  medicines  whose  operation  is  contrary 
to  the  cause,  should  administer  such  medicines  as  are  contrary  to 
the  symptoms  of  the  particular  disease  under  treatment. 

In  the  conquest  of  all  diseases,  physicians  possessed  of  skill 
desire  such  medicines  as  are  contrary  to  both  the  original  cause 
as  also  the  symptoms  (  of  those  diseases  ),  or  contrary  to  either  of 
them.25 


when  disorders  caused  by  undigested  food  have  already  taken  place,  how  is 
the  patient  to  be  treated  ?  The  answer  is,  that  no  medicine  should  be  ad¬ 
ministered  if  the  food  in  the  stomach  is  still  undigested.  Indeed,  the  physician 
should  wait  for  some  time  ;  till,  in  fact,  digestion  has  taken  place  and  and  the 
food  has  passed  from  the  ‘amaoaya’  to  the  ‘koshtha.’  I  have  rendered  both 
the  words  as  ‘stomach.’  The  first,  however,  means  that  division  of  the  stomach 
in  which  the  food  eaten  first  finds  its  way  ;  while  the  second  means  that  apart¬ 
ment  of  the  stomach  into  which  the  food  passes  in  its  second  stage.--  T. 

*  In  the  previous  aphorism,  it  has  been  said  that  one  afflicted  by  ‘5ma- 
prodosha’  should  never  take  any  medicine  when  the  food  he  has  taken  has  not 
been  digested.  Here  the  consequence  is  shown  more  plainly  of  the  taking  of 
food  and  of  medicine  by  one  who  is  suffering  from  ‘amaprodosha’.  The 
original  ailment,  the  new  food  taken,  and  the  medicine  administered  before 
such  food  is  digested,  together  form  a  cause  of  power  or  potency  which 
brings  on  immediate  death  ;  the  patient  being  already  weak  and  of  a  weak 
appetite,  succumbs  to  death  more  readily. — T. 

t  By  ‘Apatarpana’  is  meant  the  reverse  of  ‘Santarpana’.  The  latter 
implies  the  use  of  such  medicines  and  diet  as  are  of  sedative  or  cooling,  as 
also  nutritive,  effects.  Hence,  ‘Apatarpana’  is  abstention  from  such  food  and 
such  medicines.  ( Vide  Lesson  XXI,  Sutrasthanam,  p.  233  ;  particularly,  the 
last  note  in  p.  336).  Here  ‘Apatarpana’  has  been  used  in  a  limited  sense,  for 
it  means  only  fasting.  This  treatment  stands  to  reason,  for  when  disordesr 


CH A  RA  RASA  M  HI  TA. 


469 


Of  oile  in  whom  the  disorders  born  of  undigested  food  have 
hot  yet  been  developed,  as  also  of  one  in  whom  such  disorders 
having  already  shown  themselves  have  attained  the  stage  of 
fnaturity,  the  treatment  that  should  be  followed,  when  the  digestive 
fire  is  not  weak,  consists  of  the  judicious  adoption  of  these,  viz., 
the  nibbing  of  (medicated)  oils,  enemata  dry  or  oily,  and  drinking 
of  oils  agreeably  to  the  ordinances  governing  the  practice. 

This,  howevet,  should  be  done  after  a  careful  and  proper 
survey  of  the  especial  circumstances  connected  with  the  faults 
(i.  e.,  the  precise  measure  of  excitement  which  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm  have  undergone),  medicine,  place,  time,  strength,  food, 
suitability  (of  food  and  drink  and  medicine  to  the  constitution), 
constitutional  peculiarity,  Nature.,  and  age  or  years,  as  also  the 
character  of  the  diseases  themselves.26* 


have  been  generated  by  undigested  food,-  the  patient,  instead  of  taking  more 
food,  should  practise  abstinence.  Absolute  fast  may  not  be  prescribed.  What 
is  wanted  is  light  food  taken  sparingly. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  treatment,  viz.,  (1)  ‘Nimltta-viparitam’  and 
(2)  ‘atanka-viparitam’.  The  first  means  such  treatment  as  is  addressed  to 
removal  of  the  original  cause  of  the  disorder  treated  ;  the  second  means  such 
treatment  as  seeks  to  alleviate  the  Symptoms  and  thus  effect  a  cure  generally. 

Wise  physicians  seek  to  use  such  medicines  as  are  contrary  to  both  the  cause 
and  the  symptoms.  If  there  be  no  such  medicine,  only  then  they  select  such  as 
are  alleviative  of  either  the  cause  or  of  the  symptoms.  Both  methods  are 
scientific. — T. 

*  ‘  Anudriktamapradosha  ’  is  one  in  whom  the  disorders  born  of  undigested 
food  have  not  yet  manifested  themselves  or  are  in  an  incipient  state. 
‘  Paripakkadosha  ’  is  one  in  whom  the  faults  of  ‘  ama  ’  or  undigested  food 
have,  through  either  time  or  treatment,  become  ‘  cooked  ’  or  brought  into  a 
stage  near  cure. 

What  the  Rishi  says  is  that  with  regard  to  both  those  classes  of  persons  the 
treatment  indicated  here  should  be  followed.  That  treatment  consists  of  the 
use  of  oils  for  rubbing,  of  enemata  dry  or  oily,  and  the  drinking  of  oils 
agreeably  to  the  ordinances  already  laid  down  in  Sutrasthanam. 

In  following  this  treatment,  however,  care  should  be  taken  in  properly 
considering  the  ‘  avasthantarani,’  i.  e.,  the  changes  in  respect  of  circumstances, 
about  the  faults  (wind,  bile,  and  phlegm),  that  is,  the  precise  measure  in 
which  each  has  been  excited,  the  potency  of  the  medicines,  that  is,  of  oils  or 
enemata  used,  &c.,  &c.,  ‘  Satwa  ’  is  probably  ‘  Sara’  ;  some  men  are 

‘  Raktasara,  i.  e.,  have  blood  predominating  in  their  constitutions ;  some 
60 


47°  CHARAKA-SAMHITA - 

Here  occur  some  verses. 

Where  (in  what  particular  part  of  the  physical  organism)  are 
edibles  swallowed,  chewed,  drunk  and  licked,  digested  ?  This  is 
what  we  ask  thee,  O  wise  one  1 

Do  thou  answer  us,  O  thou  that  art  endued  with  (great)  in¬ 
telligence  !27 

Thus  questioned  by  his  disciples  having  Agnivefa  as  their 
foremost  one,  Punarvasu  declared  unto  them  the  place  where  the 
food  taken  is  digested.28 

That  portion  of  a  living  creature’s  body  which  is  between  the 
navel  and  the  breasts  is  known  by  the  name  of  Ama^aya.  It  is 
there  that  edibles  swallowed,  chewed,  drunk,  and  licked,  are 
digested.23 

The  food  taken  first  goes  into  the  ctmagaya  :  undergoing  only 
digestion  there,  it  subsequently,  when  digested,  reaches  every 
part  of  the  body  through  the  arteries  and  veins.30* 

(  Here  are  two  verses  containing  a  Summary .) 

In  this  Lesson  the  indications  have  been  duly  laid  down  of  a 
person  who  eats  according  to  due  measure,  as  also  the  conse¬ 
quences  of  such  eating. 

Similarly,  the  indications  of  one  who  does  not  eat  according 
to  measure  have  been  laid  down,  as  also  the  consequences  of  such 
eating,  agreeably  .to  the  divisions  of  the  subject.31 

Having  carefully  attended  to  the  eight  considerations  con¬ 
nected  with  the  ordinances  in  respect  of  food,  one  should  address 
oneself  to  one’s  own  good. 

are  ‘twak-sara,’  i.  e.,  have  more  skin  than  anything-  else  ;  some  are  ‘  asthi- 
sara,  i.  e.,  have  more  bones  than  anything  else.,  & c. 

‘  Prakriti  ’  or  Nature  should  be  understood  as  explained  in  aphorism  17  in 
Lesson  1  ante  of  1  Vimanam.' — T. 

*  1  Dhamanis,'  as  explained  before,  are  those  channels  which  produce  a 

sound  as  that  of  something  beating  against  another  thing.  They  are,  there¬ 
fore,  the  arteries  through  which  the  blood  flows  and  against  which  the  blood, 
as  it  flows,  beats  constantly.  Whether  the  distinction  between  arteries  and 
veins  was  understood  by  the  Rishis  cannot  be  precisely  ascertained.  But  ir* 
rendering  1  dhamani  ’  it  is  better  to  use  the  words  arteries  and  veins, — T. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITA , 


47' 


If  there  is  any  other  way,  as  regards  this  (topic),  fit  for  achiev¬ 
ing  one’s  good,  that  also,  should,  be  adopted.82 

Thus  ends  the  second  Lesson,,  called  Trividha-kukshiya-vima- 
nam,  in  the  Place  of  Vimanamy  in,  the  treatise  of  Agnivefa  as 
revised  by  Charaka.. 


LESSON  III. 

We  shall  next  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  Destruction  of  towns 
and  large  villages. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  l1' 

In  the  capital  known  as  Kampilya,  situate  in  the  region  called 
Panchala,  that  teemed  with  clusters  of  villages,  and  that  was 
inhabited  by  many  foremost  of  regenerate  persons,  the  illustrious 
Punarvasu,  the  son  of  Atri,  surrounded  by  disciples,,  towards  the 
close  of  the  month  of  sweat,  while  engaged  in  a  walk  in  the  woods 
on  the  banks  of  Ganga,  addressed  his  disciple  Agnivefa,  (and 
said)  :2* 

Verily,  O  amiable  one,,  of  the  constellations,  the  planets,  the 
moon,  the  sun,  the  atmosphere,  and  fire,  as  also  of  the  points  of 
the  compass,  as  existing  in  their  natural  state,  conditions  are 
observable  causing  perverse  symptoms  of  season. 

From  this,  very  soon,  the  soil  also  will  not  duly  impart  unto 
the  herbs  juice,  energy,  assimilable  virtue,  and  potency. 

Through  absence  of  these,  an  epidemic  outbreak  is  certain  to. 
follow. 


*  The  kingdom  of  Panchala  should  be  identified  with,  the  modern. 
Raj putana.  In  the  Mahhaharata  it  is  said  that  the  province  of  Panchala  was 
divided  nearly  equally,  by  the  river  Charmanwati,  the  modern  Chambal,  over- 
the  eastern  portion  of  which  reigned  Drona,  the  preceptor  in  arms  of  the 
Kuru  princes,  .  and  over  the  western,  Drupada,  the  father-in-law  of  the 
Pandavas. — T. 

‘  Gharme  mase  ’  is  literally,  the  month  of  sweat,  i.  e.,  Summer.  From 
the  adjective  ‘  pa9chime  '  it  would  seem  that  the  month  of  Jyaishtha  is  implied. 
It  corresponds  with  the  middle  of  May  to  the  middle  of. June. — T. 


47  2 


CI-IA  RA  KA  -  SA  M  HI  TA 


Hence,  before  destruction  sets  in  and  before  the  soil  is  im¬ 
poverished,  do  thou,  O  amiable  one,  now  gather  the  herbs  (thou 
mayst  need)  that  they  may  not  be  wanting  in  juice,  energy,  assi¬ 
milable  virtue,  and  potency  ! 

We  shall  administer  these  (herbs  possessed  of)  juice,  energy, 
assimilable  virtue,  and  potency,  unto  those  who  will  seek  us  or 
those  whom  we  will  seek. 

Since,  if  the  medicinal  herbs  are  properly  gathered,  properly 
administered  and  properly  prepared,  no  pomp  of  treatment  would 
be  necessary  for  (allaying)  the  diseases  that  break  out  for  the 
destruction  of  towns  and  villages.8* 

Unto  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri,  that  said  so,  Agnive£a  said  ; 

O  illustrious  one,  suppose  the  medicinal  herbs  have  already 
been  gathered,  and  properly  administered,  after  having  been  pro¬ 
perly  sought  out. 

The  question,  however,  is, — How  can  the  habitations  of  men 
who  differ  in  nature,  food,  body,  strength,  capacity  of  bearing  par- 


*  The  correct  reading  of  the  first  sentence  is  ‘  prakritibhutanSm  ’  and  not 
‘  prakritibhutS.’  The  statement,  however,  is  made  in  a  rather  round  about 
way.  Stated  plainly,  it  amounts  to  this  :  conditions  are  seen  of  the  constellations. 
See.,  which  have  altered  the  natural  indications  of  the  season.  Chakrapan! 
observes  that  in  summer  the  planets,  See.,  should  all  appear  bright  and  distinct. 
If,  however,  they  appear  otherwise  in  consequence  of  vapours  or  fogs,  the  true 
indication  of  the  season  disappears. 

‘  Rasa  ’  means  juice  j  ‘  Viryya  '  implies  energy  ;  by  ‘  Vipaka  '  is  meant 
what  may  be  called  assimilable  virtue.  Thus  things  sweet  to  the  taste,  when 
they  enter  the  stomach  or  when  assimilation  begins,  become  sour.  This 
sourness  of  sweet  things  is  their  ‘  Vipaka  ’.  ‘  Prabhava  ’  is  potency.  For  fuller 

explanations  of  these  terms,  vide  Sutrasthanam,  Lesson  XXVI,  pp.  301,  319 
and  320. 

‘  Atankaprayata  ’  is  a  general  outbreak  of  a  particular  disease,  or  the 
appearance  of  diverse  diseases  at  the  same  time. 

The  last  sentence  has  beenmisunderstood  by  the  Bengali  translators  :  what  is 
meant  by  ‘  Fratikara-gaurava  ’  is  .  pomp  of  treatment.  The  physician  comes 
and  orders  many  things,  such  as  a  change  of  room  or  climate,  several  medicines 
with  several  vehicles,  a  bath,  a  plaster,  a  rubbing  of  medicinal  oils,  &c., 
All  this  would  not  be  needed  if  the  Rishi's  directions  about  the  culling  of 
drugs  be  attended  to, — T. 


CHAR  A  KA -SAM  HIT  A. 


473 


ticular  things  and  practices,  mind,  and  age,  be  simultaneously 
destroyed  by  one  disease  ?** 

Unto  him  answered  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  : 

O  Agnivega,  of  men  differing  from  one  another  in  these  parti¬ 
culars,  viz.,  the  circumstances  of  nature  and  the  rest,  there  are 
other  circumstances  that  are  common  (or  similar)  ;  these  last 
being  perverted,  diseases  agreeing  in  point  of  time  and  of  symp¬ 
toms,  break  out  and  become  destructive  of  habitations. 

Verily,  there  are  these  circumstances  that  are  common  to 
human  habitations,  viz.,  atmosphere,  water,  soil,  and  time  (season)5f 
Amongst  them,  when  the  atmosphere  becomes  as  follows,  it 
should  be  known  as  destructive  of  health  :  viz.,  contrary  to  (what  is 
proper  for)  the  season  ;  exceedingly  moist  ;  exceedingly  changeful 
(as  regards  direction),  exceedingly  keen,  exceedingly  cold  or 
exceedingly  warm,  exceedingly  dry,  constantly  pouring  vapours, 
fraught  with  awful  roars,  blowing  from  different  directions  and 
counteracted  in  respect  of  its  currents,  blowing  in  whirls,  and 
fraught  with  disagreeable  scent  or  vapour  or  sand  or  dust  or 
smoke.6 

When  the  water  becomes  exceedingly  foul  in  scent,  colour, 
taste,  and  touch,  full  of  impurities,  deserted  by  aquatic  fowl, 
almost  dried  up  in  its  receptacle,  and  disagreeable,  it  should  be 
known  as  reft  of  its  proper  virtues.7 


*  ‘  Uddhritam  ’  implies,  as  explained  by  Chakrapani,  ‘kartavye 

kritam,  '  i.  e.,  the  past  is  used  for  the  future.  Hence,  the  meaning  is, — 
1  suppose  this  has  been  done,'  or  ‘  grant  that  this  has  been  done.’ 

What  is  asked  is,  how  can  destruction,  through  one  particular  disease, 
simultaneously  overtake  men  when  the  latter  differ  widely  from  one  another  in 
nature,  food,  &c.? 

By  ‘  Satmya  ’  is  meant  the  suitability  of  particular  things  to  particular 
constitutions.-- r. 

f  What  the  Rishi  says  is  this  :  it  is  very  ue  that  men  differ  in  the  particu¬ 
lars  mentioned  by  Agniveca.  But  then  there  are  some  circumstances  in  which 
they  must  all  agree.  For  example,  all  have  to  breathe,  all  have  to  drink,  all 
have  to  expose  themselves  to  the  same  sun  and  the  same  moon  and  the  same 
constellations ;  &c.  It  is  when  these  circumstances,  which  are  common  to 
all  men,  become  perverse  that  plagues  set  in,  destroying  cities  and  towns  and 
villages. — T, 


474 


CHA  RA  KA  -  SA  M  HI  T A. 


The  soil  (of  a  region),  again,  should  be  known  as  baneful  when, 
as  regards  its  nature,  it  has  become  foul  in  colour,  scent,  taste,  and 
touch  ;  full  ol  impurities,  afflicted  by  reptiles,  and  wild  beasts, 
and  gnats,  and  insects  (such  as  locusts  and  other  leaf-eating  ones), 
and  flies,  and  mice,  and  owls,  and  such  vultures  and  jackals  and 
other  animals  as  live  in  crematoria  (or  subsist  on  carrion)  ;  when 
it  abounds  with  high  grass  and  saccharum  cylindricum  and  bushes, 
teems  with  creepers  of  every  kind,  full  of  abandoned  (uncultivated) 
fields,  and  is  disfigured  with  dried  up  and  lost  crops  ;  when  its 
atmosphere  has  become  smoky  ;  when  it  resounds  continually  with 
the  cries  of  birds  and  barking  of  dogs  ;  when  agitated  animals  in 
crowds  and  birds  in  flocks  are  seen  to  run  and  fly  over  it  in  different 
directions  ;  when  its  cities  and  towns  and  villages  have  abandoned, 
or  become  reft  of,  piety,  truth,  modesty,  established  usages,  good 
conduct,  and  other  merits  j  when  its  receptacles  of  water  are  con¬ 
tinually  agitated  ;  when  meteors  and  thunderbolts  are  constantly 
seen  to  fall  and  earth-quakes  are  frequent  ;  when  it  constantly 
echoes  with  loud  noises  ;  when  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  stars, 
are  frequently  covered  by  masses  of  clouds  that  are  dry  or  coppery 
or  red  or  white  ;  when  the  inhabitants  are  always  agitated  by 
anxiety  or  fear,  and  when  cries  of  grief  seem  to  come  from 
every  side  ;  when  a  darkness  seems  to  overspread  the  whole  area 
when  night-wanderers  and  ghosts  seem  to  stalk  over  every  place 
and  when  cries  and  loud  noises  of  various  kinds  seem  to  come 
from  every  direction.8* 

As  regards  Time,  that  should  be  known  as  baneful  which  dis¬ 
covers  symptoms  contrary  to  those  which  properly  belong  to  the 
season  (that  is  running),  or  symptoms  that  are  aggravated  or 
attenuated  in  comparison  thereto.8 

They  that  are  possessed  of  knowledge  and  experience  say  that 
these  four,  when  existing  with  such  conditions,  become  destructive 
of  cities  and  towns  and  villages. 


*  The  curious  reader  should  compare  this  passage  with  the  description 
given,  in  the  Mahabharata,  of  the  omens  and  prognostications  that  were  noti¬ 
ceable  in  Dwaraka  immediately  before  the  carnage  of  the  Yadavas,  the 
Andhakas,  and  the  Vrishnis,  on  the  field  of  Prabhasa.  The  Mussulman- 
historians  also  have  recorded  many  similar  phenomena  in  Bagdad  and  the 


CHARAkA-SA  MBIT  A. 


475 


When  these  four  are  otherwise,  they  are  said  to  be  beneficial.1’ 
Even  when  these  four  become  invested  with  perverse  virtues 
and  (thereby)  destructive  of  cities  and  towns  and  villages,  if  the 
inhabitants  be  treated  with  proper  medicines,  no  cause  of  fear 
from  disease  need  exist.11 

Here  occur  some  verses. 

Among  these  four,  viz .,  Place,  Time,  Atmosphere,  and  Water, 
when  they  have  all  become  perverted,  explanations  are  subjoined 
as  to  which  is  more  potent  than  which  and  for  what  reasons.1® 

Guided  by  the  consideration  of  unavoidability,  one  conversant 
with  the  topic  should  hold  that  Water  is  a  more  potent  cause 
than  Air  ;  Place  a  more  potent  cause  than  Water  ;  and  Time  a 
more  potent  cause  than  Place,  by  nature.18* 

One  endued  with  especial  knowledge  should  regard  that  one 
among  the  evils,  as  mentioned  above,  in  air  and  the  rest,  as 
lighter  (than  the  others)  of  which  the  remedy  is  easier.14t 

Even  if  all  the  four  ending  with  Time  become  vitiated,  still  if 
men  be  treated  with  (proper)  medicines,  they  are  not  likely  to  be 
afflicted.15 


country  surrounding  it  a  little  before  the  destruction  of  that  great  city  by  the 
Moguls  under  Houlagu  Khan. — T. 

*  Both  the  vernacular  translators  have  misunderstood  this  verse.  The 
sense,  however,  is  plain.  Chakrapani  explains  it  with  considerable  wealth  of 
illustration.  Water  is  regarded  as  a  more  potent  cause  than  air ;  for  air,  if 
vitiated,  may  be  avoided  by  one  living  in  a  proper  house  or  a  proper 
spot,  such  as  a  hill  or  a  mountain,  taking  care,  again,  to  purify  it  by  burning 
incense  and  other  scents.  Place  is  a  more  potent  cause  than  water  ;  for 
Water,  if  vitiated,  may  be  avoided  by  one  drinking  only  the  liquid  found  within 
such  fruits  as  cocoanuts, — or  beer,  or  soda-water,  or  lemonade,  to  adopt  illus¬ 
trations  from  modern  times.  Then  Time  is  a  more  potent  cause  than  Place, 
for  one  may  avoid  a  place  by  leaving  it  and  going  to  another ;  but  Time, 
meaning  season,  is  such  that  no  one  can  avoid  it. 

Wherever  one  may  go  or  however  one  may  live,  one  cannot  rise  superior 
to  Time. — T. 

t  What  the  Rishi  says  here  is  not  different  from  what  has  been  said  in  the 
previous  verse.  Only,  the  same  proposition  is  laid  down  from  a  different .; 
point  of  view. — T. 


476 


caaraka-samhitA. 


Of  men  not  subject  to  death  as  their  common  fate  dr  not 
characterised  by  commonness  of  acts,  medicine  consisting  of  the 
five  operations  is  said  to  be  the  highest  remedy;16* 

In  such  cases  the  due  administration  of  Rasdyanai  is  highly 
spoken  of,  as  also  the  support  of  the  body,  with  the  aid  of  the 
medicinal  plants  culled  beforehand.17 

In  such  times,  the  practice  of  truthfulness,  of  compassion  to  all 
creatures,  and  of  gifts,  offerings  made  unto  the  deities,  worship 
of  the  deities,  accomplishment  of  acts  of  piety,  and  the  adoption 
of  tranquillity,  are  regarded  as  means  of  self-preservation.18 

The  practice  of  all  such  acts  as  may  be  beneficial  for  cities  and 
towns  and  villages  (thus  threatened),  as  also  of  such  rites  and  acts 
as  are  of  an  auspicious  character,  observance  of  Brahmacharyya , 
worship  of  those  that  are  Brahmachdrins,  scriptural  recitals  and 
conversations,  narrations  of  the  acts  of  great  Rishis  with  souls 
under  complete  control,  and  association  with  pious  men  wedded 
to  the  quality  of  satwa  and  reverenced  by  the  aged  :13_2° 

These  have  been  spoken  of  as  medicine,  these  have  been 
regarded  as  means  for  preserving  life,  for  those  whose  deaths  are 
not  inevitable  at  such  awful  times.“t 

Having  heard  from  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  these  causes  of  the 
destruction  of  cities  and  towns  and  villages,  Agniveya  once  more 


*  What  the  Rishi  says  here  is  this  :  death  takes  place  as  the  result  of 
one’s  acts  of  both  this  and  previous  lives.  The  very  disease  that  is  to  kill  is 
determined  by  such  acts.  When  all  the  men  inhabiting  a  particular  area  where 
the  four  have  been  vitiated  are  such  that,  in  consequence  of  a  commonness  of 
acts  in  both  their  present  and  past  lives,  they  have  become  liable  to  a  common 
form  of  death  at  the  same  time,  medical  treatment  cannot  afford  them  any 
relief.  If,  however,  no  such  commonness  of  fate  is  in  store  for  them,  or  if  all 
of  them  have  not  a  common  store  of  acts,  then  they  may  attain  relief  through 
proper  medical  treatment.  The  five  operations  here  adverted  to  are  the  adminis¬ 
tration  of  emetics,  of  purgatives,  of  enemata  of  two  kinds,  i.  e.,  oily  and  dry, 
and  of  errhines  or  cerebral  purgatives.- — T. 

j-  ‘Hitam  janapadanam’  means  such  acts  as  are  beneficial  to  cities  and 
towns,  &c.,  i.  e.,  all  such  acts  as  contribute  to  lessen  their  filth  and  other  causes 
of  disease.  ‘  Brahmacharyya  ’  includes  such  acts  as  abstention  from  all  kinds 
of  intemperance.  The  first  word  in  the  20th  verse  is  ‘  samkatha.’  The  Bengal 
texts  print  '  sankaya  ’  which  is  unmeaning. — T. 


^cr*TTCTfafH- 

wrTOftifecrr  ^^rr^rf%gi?T^3£r^cr:  ^fhfag  ^m: 
^fTcflcn:,  *T  ^ 

^<sm:  *?cr:?  f^ftfrnr  cT^wTcmis^m- 

cTtfT  W 

n^TTSm^Tt^cf^F  ^T¥f^g^g^%eW^:?  ^ 

flRgW  srerTTPSTO  ft^T%cT§W“ 

TTfq  ^rwras  TSfxwm  f^WcRTS^T  *r*r^sr  fasr^- 
srraTg^rrg  irferg  g  fsr^T€§ra^^faFreT: 

ts%^M  ^tiiwmitw  ssm 

^Tcfr[  ^WFT  cF^cFcT  ^W3nf9TWg?  3T^3ST 

tt  ^r%?r  cr*rT*sfawfa  ^rsrfagJTSfarsrsr- 
^RTS^"Tf*«fFT:,  fWST  ^  3pH  flag^fH^fTcWJ^R 
g^ST^cF  fa^ffc^Tg,  ^35  ^oSnfTrUJ^T- 

f%^j  ij^^wNretsfa  sm:  ;  ^ 

T}cg5RTf^rfr^^#f%cFRT:  wiN  *m*R  ^m^T- 
fW3TW^ffciT*TT:  nifire 

^reg^TTfa  ^  ^Tg*rfa  ^\w r*j ;  ^ 

cff^ft^gt  ^TT^rmftr:  WT3«T^3p?wfH^f^T' 

sig  ii 


•V  t-  f  f 


W-- 


part  xvi.  47357 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


PUBLISHED  BY 

A  YIN  ASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita  (in  original)  with 
Commentaries;  Bengali  and  Hindi  Translator  of  Charaka- 
Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita  ;  Editor  of  Chikitsa- 
SammIlanI  (Medical  Journal  in  Bengali)  ;  Prac¬ 
titioner  of  the  Hindu  System  of 
Medicine,  &c.,  &c.,  &c.  , 


CALCUTTA: 

Printed  by  Girish  Chandra  Chakravarti, 
“Deya  Press”,  27  College  Street, 
and 

Published  at 

200,  Cornwallis’  Street. 


(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved.  J 


ife- 


OPINIONS, 


(  From  Raja  Peary  Mohan  Mukerji,  M.A.,  B.L.,  C.S.I.  &c. 

-  UttaRpara  : 

25th  August,  i8g6. 

My  dear  Sir. — Thanks  for  the  15th  part  of  the  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita, 
which!  I  have  just  received.  This  part  is  exceedingly  valuable  by  reason  of  its  dealing 
with  a  subject  which  is  of  vital  importance  to  the  public.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the 
work  is  not  more  widely  patronised.  I  have  no  doubt  that  everybody  who  reads  it  is 
much  benefited  by  it. 

Yours  very  truly, 

(Sd.)  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji. 

(  From  G.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C.  S. ) 

Bankipore. 

My  dear  Sir, — I  have  to  thank  you  for  Part  XV  of  your  very  useful  translation 
of  Charaka. 

I  quite  agree  with  you  that  Charaka' s  work  can  be  read  by  laymen  with  great 
interest.  It  is  by  no  means  a  book  which  is  to  be  read  only  by  professional  medical 

Yours  truly, 

(Sd.)  G.  A.  Grierson. 


(  From  the  Medical  Age.  ) 

The  Charaka-Samhita.  By  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna.  Part  XIV,  Octavo ; 
pp.  38.  The  Deva  Press,  Calcutta. 

The  contents  of  this  fasciculus  are  varied  and  interesting.  The  functions  of  the 
heart  are  described,  and  the  “ten  great  ducts  arising  therefrom”  explained.  Nex. 
are  elaborated  and  discussed  the  “five  things  essential  to  prolong  life,”  viz  : — 
Universal  compassion  ;  increase  of  energy  ;  subjugation  of  the  senses  ;  knowledge  of 
Brahma:  and  the  practice  of  Brahmacharyya.  Also  are  carefully  pointed  out  the 
characteristics  that  accrue  to  those  that  are  truly  conversant  with  medical  scriptures. 
The  seven  principal  questions  relating  to  life,  and  errors  concerning  them,  follow  ; 
finally  is  a  dissertation  on  the  conduct  of  good  physicians  towards  charlatans. 

No  medical  man  interested  in  the  archaeology  of  his  profession  shoitld  lose  the 
opportunity  of  subscribing  for  this  work,  which  is  both  unique  and  remarkable,  giving 
evidence  that  all  of  civilisation  and  of  medicine  does  not  pertain  to  the  Christian  or 
any  other  era. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS. 


The  general  causes  (  with  their  respective  characteristics  )  of 
destructive  plagues,  &c.,  having  been  expounded,  the  root  of  those 
causes  is  explained  in  this  fasciculus. 

The  observations  of  the  Rishi  on  the  vitiation  of  air,  water, 
land,  &c.,  are  fraught  with  deep  interest  and  deserve  to  be  read  by 

The  first  origin  of  disease  is  adverted  to. 

The  progression  of  decay  as  regards  the  period  of  life  (  from 
Yuga  to  Yuga  )  is  explained. 

What  death  is  timely  and  what  death  untimely,  how  timely 
death  and  how  untimely  death  happens,  are  explained. 

How  sjpdicine  should  be  administered  in  order  to  become 
efficacious,  tthe  person  to  whom  medicines  are  not  to  be  prescribed, 
with  the  reasons  therefor,  have  also  been  explained  in  Lesson  III. 

Lesson  IV  treats  of  the  three  especial  means  for  ascertaining 
disease.  They  are  Instructions  of  the  Inspired,  Observation,  and 
Inference. 

The  matters  about  which  the  Inspired  lay  down  instructions, 
the  matters  which  are  apprehended  by  Observation,  and  the 
matters  which  are  to  be  ascertained  by  Inference,  and  the  manner 
in  which  they  are  to  be  known,  have  also  been  fully  expounded 
in  this  Lesson. 

Lesson  V  treats  of  the  several  ducts  of  the  body,  the  ingredients 
they  bear,  and  the  indications  of  their  vitiation. 

The  contents  of  both  IV  and  V  are  exceedingly  interesting. 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA 


477 


asked  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri,  saying, — O  illustrious  one,  from 
what  does  the  root  arise  of  the  perversity  of  air  and  the  rest, 
■characterised  by  which  these  destroy  cities  and  towns  and 
villages?22* 

Unto  him  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said, — O  Agnivefa,  the 
perversity  that  arises  of  all  these,  viz.,  air  and  the  rest,  has  unright¬ 
eousness  for  its  root.  That  unrighteousness  has  for  its  root  sinful 
acts  committed  before.  The  source  of  both  these  (  vis.,  unrighte¬ 
ousness  and  sinful  acts),  is  faults  of  the  understanding.28! 

They  are  as  follows :  when  the  foremost  inhabitants  of  the 
Country,  cities,  towns  and  villages,  transgressing  righteousness,  set 
the  example  of  unrighteousness,  at  that  time,  their  dependants  and 
those  that  depend  on  the  latter,  living  in  cities  and  provinces,  and 
those  that  make  the  law  their  profession,  enhance  that  unrighteous- 
ness.24! 

Then  that  unrighteousness  violently  causes  the  disappearance 
of  righteousness.  Upon  this,  the  people,  bereft  of  righteousness, 


*  ‘Yena’  refers  to  ‘vaigunyena’.  The  nominative  of  ‘uddhamsayanti’  is 
‘vayyadayah’  understood.  Agnivefa  wishes  to  know  what  the  original  cause 
is  of  that  perversity  of  air,  &c.,  which  brings  about  the  destruction  of  human 
habitations. — T. 

f  By  ‘prajnaparadhah’  is  meant  faults  of  the  understanding.  ‘Prajna’ 
means  wisdom,  or,  rather,  the  faculty  by  which  one  judges  of  things  correctly. 
‘Aparadha’  of  this,  therefore,  must  imply  all  instances  of  erroneous  judgment 
or  incorrect  apprehension.  Compare  Charaka,  Qarirasthana,  Lesson  I, — 46. 
Compare  Gita,  where  it  is  said, — 

“From  wrath  arises  heedlessness  ;  from  heedlessness,  loss  of  memory  ;  from 
loss  of  memory,  loss  of  understanding  ;  from  loss  of  understanding,  one  becomes 
ruined’’.— 63,  Lesson  II. 

So,  it  is  loss  (or  fault)  of  the  understanding  or  judgment  through  which  one 
is  overtaken  by  ruin. — T. 

t  ‘Adharmena  prajam  varttayanti’  means  ‘set  the  example  of  unright¬ 
eousness’. 

‘Afrita’  is  a  dependant  ;  ‘upafrita’  is  one  that  depends  on  a  dependant. 

‘Vyavaharopojivinah’  are  persons  that  make  the  law  their  profession.  These 
men  have  always  been  regarded  in  India  as  the  pests  of  society  notwithstanding 
their  usefulness  when  disputes  arise  about  property.  The  class  is  especially 
mentioned  in  Sukra  Niti.  A  reference  occurs  to  them  in  the  drama  called 
Mrichcchakatikam  or  the  Toy-cart. _ T. 

61 


47  8  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

are  abandoned  by  the  deities.  Unto  those  persons  thus  bereft  of' 
righteousness,  having  unrighteousness  for  their  principal  charac¬ 
teristic,  and  abandoned  by  the  deities,,  the  seasons  become  per¬ 
verted. 

Through  this,  the  deities  do  not  pour  rain  (unto  them)  in  due 
time,  or  (if  they  pour  )  pour  rain  perversely. 

The  air  does  not  blow  properly  ;  the  earth,  discovers  preverse 
conditions  y  the  water  (in  rivers,  canals,  and  tanks  )  dries  up  f 
(medicinal)  herbs,  abandoning  their  own  nature,  become  preverted.. 
In  consequence  of  this,  cities  and  towns  and  villages  become 
destroyed  through  touch  and  use.25* 

So  also,  of  the  destruction  (of  cities  and  towns  and  villages) 
that  is  due  to  weapons,  unrighteousness  is  the  cause.  People,  with 
cupidity  and  wrath  and  boastfulness  and  pride  all  greatly  excited, 
disregarding  those  that  are  weak,  attack  one  another  with  weapons 
for  killing  kinsmen  and  relatives  and  enemies.  They  attack  foes 
or  are  attacked  by  them,  or,  are  destroyed  by  ■  Rakshasas  and 
hordes  of  diverse  kinds  of  ghostly  beings  who  take  advantage  of 
that  unrighteousness  or  other  acts  of  transgression. 

So  also,  unrighteousness  is  the  cause  of  curses  (that  destroy 
cities  and  towns  and  villages.)26t 

People,  reft  of  righteousness,  and  swerving  from  it,  disregard 
preceptors  and  seniors,  those  that  are  venerable  for  years,  those: 
that  are  crowned  with  success  (through  penances),  and  those  that 
are  deserving  of  worship,  and  perpetrate  acts  resulting  in  injury  to 
themselves.27^ 


*  ‘Touch  and  use'  ;  touch,  as  in  the  case  of  air  ;  touch  and  use,  as  in  the 
ease  of  drinks  and  food.  There  is  no  case  of  use  without  touch. — T. 

■jr  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  if  war  be  the  cause  of  destruction,  then  that 
war  has  for  its  cause  either  cupidity  or  wrath  or  boastfulness,  or  pride  or  alt 
these  evil  passions-.  War  may  take  place  with  either  foreign  or  domestic  foes- 
The  destruction-  caused  by  both  kinds  of  war  is  referred  to. 

The  destruction  caused  by  invisible  beings  of  great  power  is,  it  is  said  here, 
due  to  unrighteousness.  Cities  and  towns  may  also  be  destroyed  by  the  curses 
©f  the  potent.  These  curses  are  brought  about  by  the  unrighteousness  of  the; 
cursed.— T. 

X  It  should  be  noted  that  ‘dhartna1,  as  used,  in  these  passages,  means  the 


CHA  RA  RASA  MB l  TA, 


479 


These  people,  cursed  by  preceptors  and  seniors  and  the  rest, 
become  quickly  consumed  into  ashes,  leading  to  a' destruction. of  the- 
devoted,  through  contact  with  a  special  cause ;  others,,  undevoted,, 
through  contact  with  a  general  cause.29* 

In  even  remote  times  no  evil  could  arise  from  any  other  source- 
than  unrighteousness.  In  the  Krita  age,  verily,  men  were  endued' 
with  energy  equal  unto  that  of  the  very  sons  of  Aditi,  with  puis¬ 
sance  stainless  and  abundant,  capable  in  the  flesh  of  beholding  the 
deities  and  the  celestial  Rishis,  competent  to  ordain  rules  in 
respect  of  piety  of  conduct  and  sacrifices,  with  bodies  unacquainted 
with  change  and  as  compact  as  Himalayan  adamant,,  with  agreeable, 
complexion  and  senses  competent  to  discharge  their  functions, 
with  strength,  speed,  and  prowess  like  those  of  the  deity  of  wind, 
with  handsome  hips,  of  agreeable  stature  and  lineaments  and 
excellent  suppleness  and  growth,  possessed  of  truth,  sincerity, 
compassion,  charity,  and  self-restraint,  observant  of  regulations  of 
conduct,  penances,  fasts,  Brahmacharyya ,  and  vows,  and  freed 
from  fear,  attachment,  malice,  stupefaction  of  judgment,  cupidity, 
wrath,  grief,  pride,  disease,  sleep,  langour,  fatigue,  weariness, 
sloth,  and  all  surroundings  (  in  the  form  of  family  and  property). 
In  consequence,  they  all  attained  to  unlimited  length  of  life.29t 

duties  ordained  in  the  Scriptures.  It  may  be  rendered  ‘piety’,  although  righte¬ 
ousness  would  be  better. — T. 

*  The  last  portion  of  this  aphorism  is  worded  in  a  peculiar  way.  The 
sense  is  this  :  through  the  curse  of  seniors  and  preceptors,  destruction  quickly 
overtakes  all  men.  Those  that  are  devoted  to  destruction  by  the  curse  de¬ 
nounced,  die  in  consequence  of  the  virtue  of  the  curse,  which  is,  of  course,  an. 
especial  cause  ;  those  not  born,  though  not  cursed,  do  not  take  birth.  Hence,, 
the  destruction  of  the  province  becomes  complete. 

Here  the  word  ‘Niyatah’  implies  those  devoted  to  destruction  by  the  curse:. 
‘Pratyaya’  is  cause,  ‘Upalambha’  is  a  getting  or  contact.  The  ‘Niyatah!  die: 
in  consequence  of  a  cause  that  is  especial,,  viz.,  the  curse.  The  ‘Aniyatah’, 
implying,  the  unborn  children  of  the  cursed  ones,  become  consumed ;  that  is,, 
they  do  not  take  birth.  The  curse  afflicting  the  fathers  falls  upon  their  unborn- 
children  also,  like  the  curse  on  Adam  falling  upon  his  unhorn  children. 

This  is  just  the  idea  regarding  the  efficacy  of  a  Brahmana’s  curse. — T. 
t  ‘Adikala’  is  the  first  age  of  the  world,  called  the  ‘Krita’..  ‘Aditisutah! 
implies  the  deities,  for  they  are  sons,  of  Aditi.  Their  opponents,  the  Daityas,. 
are  the  children  of  Diti.  Diti  and  Aditi  are  sisters,  having  the  celestial  RishL 
Kajyapa  for  their  husband. 


480 


CM  A  RA  KA  -  SA  M  HI  TA 


For  those  people  endued  with  high  minds  and  virtues  and 
deeds,  the  crops  that  arose  were  enriched  with  inconceivable 
properties  of  taste  and  energy  and  assimilability  and  potency. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  Krita  age  this  was  so  in  consequence  of 
the  land  and  the  rest  having  been  enriched  with  all  the  virtues. 

When  the  Krita  age  was  expiring,  in  consequence  of  a  few  of  • 
the  well-to-do  haying  become  covetous  their  bodies  became 
heavy, 

In  consequence  of  the  heaviness  of  the  constituents  of  the  body, 
fatigue  appeared  (as  the  result  of  labour). 

From  fatigue  came  sloth, 

From  sloth  came  the  laying  up  of  stores, 

From  the  laying  up  of  stores  came  the  desire  to  have  as  much 
as  possible  from  all  sources. 

From  the  desire  to  have  as  much  as  possible  came  cupidity  or 
covetousness.80^ 


The  people  of  the  Krita  age  could  behold  the  deities  and  the  celestial  Rishis 
in  consequence  of  their  righteousness.  ‘Dharma-yajna-vidhi-vidhanah’  implies 
ordaxners  of  regulations  in  respect  of  both  piety  of  conduct  and  sacrifices. 
It  may  also  mean  those  that  follow  such  regulations. 

‘Qailendra’  is  the  prince  of  mountains,  i.  e.,  Himavat.  ‘Charusphich’  means 
‘of  handsome  hips’.  It  seems  that  this  part  of  the  aphorism  is  vitiated.  Some¬ 
thing,  it  is  evident,  is  wanting.  Why  should  hips  alone  be  referred  to  ?  In 
describing  the  human  form,  many  other  parts  would  need  mention. 

By  ‘prasada’  is  meant  the  competence  of  the  limbs  to  discharge  their  res^ 
pective  functions. 

‘Anricamsya’  is  abstention  from  injury  of  all  kinds  ;  hence,  universal  com, 
passion. 

‘Brahmacharyya’  is  absence  of  sexual  intemperance.  A  married  man  may 
be  a  Brahmacharin  by  abstaining  from  intemperate  sexual  communion. 

‘Parigraha’  in  such  connections,  means  those  surroundings  of  a  man  to 
which  he  is  attached,  such  as  wife  and  children  and  kinsmen  and  wealth  and 
houses  and  fields  and  cattle,  &c. — T. 

*  ‘UdarasatvagunakarmananT  may  be  interpreted  variously. 

‘The  land  and  the  rest’  implies  land,  water,  air  and  time. 

‘Sampannika’  means  a  well-to-do  man.  Chakraparii  reads  'Sampatlikq' 
which  means  the  same  thing. — T. 


C/JA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


481 

Then,  when  the  Krita  age  expired  and  the  Treta  came,  from 
covetousness  arose  rivalry. 

From  rivalry  arose  untruthfulness  of  speech. 

From  untruthfulness  of  speech  arose  lust,  wrath,  pride, 
animosity,  harshness  of  conduct,  hostilities,  fear,  heart-burning, 
grief,  and  anxiety  of  heart  and  other  evils.81 

In  the  Treta  age,  righteousness  diminished  by  a  quarter. 

Through  the  disappearance  of  righteousness  by  a  quarter,  the 
virtues  of  land  and  the  rest  also  disappeared  by  a  quarter. 

In  consequence  of  this  loss,  a  loss  took  place,  by  a  quarter,  of 
the  properties  of  oiliness,  purity,  taste,  energy,  assimilability,  and 
potency,'2 

Through  this,  the  physical  frames  of  human  beings,  not  pro¬ 
perly  supported  as  before  by  the  crops  that  grew,  owing  to  these 
having  lost  by  a  quarter  their  full  virtues,  as  also  by  food  and 
sports  which  were  losing  by  a  quarter  their  efficacy,  became 
surcharged  with  heat  and  wind  and  a  prey,  at  the  very  outset, 
to  diseases  and  decrepitude. 

Hence,  living  creatures  gradually  sustained  a  diminution  of 
the  period  of  life,33 

(  Here  occur  some  verses  ). 

In  every  yuga  righteousness  diminishes  by  a  quarter  in  this 
way.  The  merits  of  living  creatures  also  do  the  same.  Even 
thus  the  Creation  comes  to  a  dissolution.84 

At  the  expiration  of  each  century  the  period  of  life,  as  deter¬ 
mined  for  each  yuga,  of  living  creatures,  diminishes  by  one  year.35* 


*  A  limit  is  assigned  by  the  Scriptures  to  the  period  of  man’s  life.  That 
limit  varies  with  each  yuga.  In  the  first  or  the  Krita  yuga,  the  limit  of  man’s 
life  is  400  years.  In  the  second  or  the  Treta  yuga,  the  limit  is  300  years. 
In  the  third  or  the  Dwapara  yuga,  it  is  200  years.  In  the  fourth  ,  or  the  Kali 
age,  it  is  100  years.  What  the  Rishi  says  here  is  this  :  on  the  expiry  of  each 
hundred  years,  the  limit  of  man’s  life  suffers  a  diminution  by  one  year.  Thus, 
four  thousand  years  of  the  fourth  or  the  Kali  age  have  passed  away.  As  a 
consequence  thereof,  the  period  of  man’s  life  in  Kali  has  sustained  a  diminution 
of  40  years.  Hence,  a  man  can  hope  to  live  now  for  sixty  years.  This,  it  should 


482 


CA  A  RA  KA  -SA  MH  l  TA . 


Even  this  is  what  is  said  regarding  the  cause  of  the  first 
origin  of  disease. 

Unto  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  who  was  telling  so,  Agnivega 
said, — Which,  verily,  O  illustrious  one,  (of  the  two)  is  the  fact  ? 
Has  all  life  an  ordained  limit  of  time  ?  Or,  has  it  not  ? 

The  illustrious  one  said, — In  this  matter,  O  Agnive9a,  (it  is 
seen  that)  the  life  of  living  creatures  depends  upon  a  union  (of 
both  destiny  and  exertion).86 

Truly,  the  strength  or  weakness  of  the  period  of  life  rests  on 
both  destiny  and  exertion.  That  should  be  known  as  destiny 
which  consists  of  the  acts  done  by  oneself  in  a  previous  life. 
That,  again,  has  been  called  exertion  which  consists  of  the  acts 
done  in  this  life. 

As  regards  both  these  species  of  acts  there  is  difference  of 
strength  and  weakness.8' 

It  is  seen  that  acts  are  of  three  kinds  :  bad,  middling,  and 
good. 

A  union  of  destiny  and  exertion,  when  both  are  of  the  foremost 
kind,  is  the  cause  of  a  long  and  happy  life  of  the  usual  run. 

A  union  of  an  opposite  character  (that  is,  of  destiny  and  exer¬ 
tion  when  both  are  bad)  is  the  cause  of  a  life  of  an  opposite  charac¬ 
ter  (that  is,  short  and  miserable). 

A  union  of  a  middling  kind  is  regarded  as  the  cause  of  a  life 
that  is  of  a  middling  character  (that  is,  neither  very  short,  nor  very 
miserable.)  Listen  now  to  another  reason.88”83 

When  destiny  is  weak,  it  may  be  overcome  by  exertion.  So 
also,  when  exertion  is  otherwise  (that  is,  weak),  it  is  overcome  by 
destiny  that  is  strong.40 


be  known,  is  only  the  average.  Some  individual  may  attain  to  the  age  of  70,  or 
80,  or  go,  or  even  100.  Others,  however,  would  die  at  10  or  20,  or  30,  or  40.. 
Speaking  of  the  whole  race  of  man,  three  score  years  should  now  be  assigned 
as  the  limit  of  age.  this  is  less  by  ten  than  what  the  Hebrew  psalmist  as¬ 
signed.  But  then,  a  Hindu  would  argue,  that  several  centuries  have  elapsed 
from  the  time  of  the  Hebrew  psalmist.— T. 


CHA  R  A  KA-SA  M  HI  TA. 


483 


Beholding  this,  one  class  of  persons  regard  that  the  period  of 
life  is  fixed, 

Some  acts  of  a  mighty  nature,  sometimes,  are  seen  to  have  a 
certain  result  when  the  time  comes  for  their  fruition. 

Others  are  not  endued  with  certitude  of  results.  They  are 
awakened  to  fruition  by  adventitious  causes.11* 

Even  such  is  the  case. 

Hence,  seeing  both  these,  the  adoption  of  one  of  these  (views) 
is  not  proper. 

We  shall  here  cite  certain  convincing  considerations.  If  all 
life  were  fixed  as  regards  period  of  time,  then  mantras,  medicinal 
herbs,  jewels  and  gems,  auspicious  rites,  sacrifices,  offerings  unto 
the  deities,  Homa,  observances,  expiations,  fasts,  propitiatory  rites, 
bows  and  prostrations  (unto  the  deities  and  other  superiors),  pil¬ 
grimages  (to  shrines  and  sacred  waters),  and  those  religious  rites 
which  go  by  the  name  of  Ishti,  would  not  be  needed  by  those  that 
are  desirous  of  length  of  life.12 

Then  also  frightened  and  furious  and  restive  bulls  and  cows, 
and  elephants,  and  camels,  and  asses,  and  horses,  and  buffaloes,  as 
also  storms  and  hurricanes,  would  not  be  eschewable. 

Cataracts  and  precipices,  and  (steep)  mountains,  uneven 
regions,  forest  fastnesses,  and  (strong)  currents  of  water  would 
not  also  be  eschewable. 


*-  ‘Nidarcanam’,  as  explained  by  the  Commentators,  is  this  :  ‘nirdifyate, 
abhimatapaksha  sadhyate,  anena  iti hence,  convincing  considerations  or 

‘Mantras’  are  sacred  texts  of  especial  efficacy. 

‘Mani’  implies  jewels  and  gems.  These  have  in  all  countries  been  regarded 
as  possessing  especial  virtues,  particularly  in  warding  off  evil. 

‘Vali'  Iiierally  means  animals  and  grain  offered  up  at  sacrifices. 

‘Upahara’  are  ordinary  offerings  to  the  deities. 

‘Homa’  is  the  pouring  of  clarified  butter  on  the  sacred  fire  in  honour  of 
the  deities. 

‘Gamana’  implies  going.  Here  it  means  pilgrimages  to  shrines  and  sacred 
waters. 

‘Ishti’  implies  all  kinds  of  subsidiary  sacrifices. — T. 


484 


CHA  R  A  KA  -  SA  MHI  TA 


So  also  drunken  men,  and  those  that  are  insane,  and  those 
whose  minds  have  been  deranged  (by  a  sudden  accession  of  any 
passion),  and  those  that  are  furious  and  restless,  and  those 
whose  understandings  have  been  vitiated  by  covetousness,  and 
enemies,  and  raging  fires,  and  diverse  species  of  reptiles  and 
Snakes  possessed  of  poison,  would  not  be  eschewable. 

Acts  of  rashness,  disregard  of  countries  and  seasons  that  have 
become  baneful,  the  wrath  of  kings,  these  and  other  similar  things- 
would  not  be  destructive  of  the  period  of  life,  if  all  life  were  fixed 
as  regards  measure  of  time. 

Then  also  the  fear  of  premature  death  would  not  enter  (the 
hearts  of)  living  creatures  engaged  in  warding  off  the  fear,  to 
which  they  are  unaccustomed,  of  premature  death.43 

The  instructions,  too,  of  the  great  Rishis,  about  the  adminis¬ 
tration  (of  Rasayanas ),  in  the  introductory  discourse,  in  the  division 
on  Rasayana,  would  be  needless.44* 

Nor  would  Indra  slay  with  his  thunder  a  foe  whose  period  of 
life  is  fixed. 

The  Afwins  also  would  not  then  treat  the  sick  with  medicine. 

The  Rishis  would  not  then  be  able  to  attain  to  periods  of  life 
according  to  their  own  wishes,  by  means  of  penances. 

The  great  Rishis  also,  possessing  a  knowledge  of  all  that 
deserves  to  be  known,  along  with  the  foremost  ones  among  the 
deites,  would  not  look  for  or  teach  or  administer  (medicines  for 
ailments  &c.45f 


*  The  first  portion  of  the  aphorism  has  been  worded  periphrastically.  The 
sense  is  this  :  all  men  have  the  fear  of  early  or  untimely  death  ;  and,  as  such, 
precautions  are  adopted  against  such  death.  If  the  period  of  life  were  fixed, 
such  fear  would  never  penetrate  any  human  being  ;  and,  hence,  unaccustomed 
to  such  fear,  no  man  would  take  precautions  for  avoiding  such  death. 

In  the  second  portion,  ‘prayoga’  has  reference  to  Rasayana  ;  ‘buddhayah’ 
implies  instructions.  ‘Rasayanas’  are  medicines  that  prevent  or  remove  the 
effects  of  age,  increase  the  vigour  of  the  healthy,  and  cure  the  ailments  of  the 
sick.— T. 

f  The  argument  here  goes  into  the  bosoms  and  businesses  of  men,  so  to 
say.  If  living  creatures  were  really  endued  with  determined  periods  of 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA- 


485 


Then,  again,  this  vision  of  Indra  (and  the  others)  is  the  fore¬ 
most  of  all  visual  powers. 

This,  however,  is  manifest  to  even  ourselves  that  amongst 
thousands  of  men,  between  those  that  engage  in  battle,  putting 
forth  their  prowess,  and  those  that  do  not  betake  themselves  to 
that  occupation,  a  difference  exists  in  the  period  of  life. 

Then  also,  among  infants  immediately  after  birth,  if  proper 
measures  be  taken  or  omitted,. 

as  also  among  those  that  do  or  do  not  swallow  poison, 

a  difference  exists  in  the  period  of  life. 

Nor  is  the  durability  the  same  of  those  earthen  pots  that  are 
used  for  fetching  water  and  those  that  are  kept  for  show,  in  the 
matter  of  breaking. 

Hence,  life  has  for  its  root  beneficial  practices. 

From  a  contrary  course  of  practices  results  death.46* 

life,  Indra’s  killing  a  foe  with  the  thunder  would  be  unnecessary  ;  the  celestial 
physicians,  viz.,  the  twin  A$wins,  would  be  guilty  of  folly  in  seeking  to  save  life 
by  administering  medicines  ;  the  Rishis  also  could  never  succeed  in  attaining 
to  desirable  spans  of  life  by  austere  penances  ;  the  great  Rishis  and  deities,  too, 
would  not  waste  their  time  and  energy  in  discovering,  and  teaching,  and 
administering  medicines.  It  should  be  remembered  that  the  science  of  life  was 
originally  obtained  from  the  Grandsire,  Brahman,  by  Prajapati  or  lord  of  the 
creation,  viz.,  Daksha  ;  from  Daksha  it  was  obtained  by  the  celestial  twins, 
the  Afwins  ;  from  the  A?wins,  it  was  received  by  Indra,  the  chief  of  the  deities. 
As  Indra,  having  obtained  it,  had  not  imparted  it  to  any  one,  the  Rishi  Bhara- 
dwaja  went  to  him  for  getting  it.  Having  got  it  from  him,  Bharadwaja 
communicated  it  to  Atri’s  son  Punarvasu  who,  in  his  turn,  imparted  it  to  six 
pupils,  viz.,  Agnive^a  and  the  rest. 

‘Pa?yeyuh’  means  look  for.  The  Rishis  obtained  knowledge  by  spiritual 
vision  ;  as  Manu  says  : — 

Rishayah  samyatatmanah  phalamulanilaijanah, 

Tapasaiva  prapacjyanti  trailokyam  sacharacharam. 
Aushadhanyagado  vidya  daivi  cha  vividhasthitih, 

Tapasaiva  prasiddhanti  tapastesham  hi  karanam. — T. 

*  What  is  said  in  aphorism  46  is  this  :  in  the  previous  aphorism  reference 
has  been  made  to  the  acts  of  the  deities  and  the  Rishis.  It  may  be  said  that 
they  are  beings  endued  with  superhuman  vision.  Hence  in  aphorism  46  the 
son  of  Atri  says, — Yes,  it  is  admitted  that  the  deities  and  the  great  Rishis  have 
62 


486 


CHAR  A  KA  SA  MBIT  A. 


Then,  also,  addiction  to  acts  contrary  to  place  and  time  and 
suitability,  as  also  to  vitiated  food,  (is  death).47* 

Complete  avoidance  of  all  kinds  of  excessive  correlation, 
never  suppressing  such  urgings  of  nature  as  have  become  pro¬ 
nounced,  and  abstention  from  all  acts  of  rashness,  are  concomitants 
©t  health,  as  we  think  we  lay  them  down  as  causes  of  health  ; 
for  we  see  them  as  such  in  all  respects.43+ 

After  this,  Agniveca  said, — If  this  be  so,  O  illustrious  one, 
then  why  does  death  take  place  timely  and  untimely  of  men  whose 
period  of  life  is  indeterminate  ?43J 


superior  vision.  But  then,  men,  by  the  aid  of  even  such  eyes  as  they  have, 
may  notice  the  several  facts  mentioned,  viz.,  that  there  is  a  difference  in  the 
period  of  life  between  those  who  engage  in  battle  and  those  who  do  not  engage 
in  such  murderous  acts  ;  between  those  infants  that  are  properly  attended  to 
after  birth  and  those  that  are  not  attended  to  f  and  between  those  persons 
that  swallow  poison  and  those  that  do  not  swallow  it.  The  same  difference  is 
observable  among  even  inanimate  objects,  such  as  earthen  pots  or  jugs.  Those 
that  are  used  for  fetching  water  soon  break  ;  while  those  that  are  painted  and 
kept  for  show,  do  not  break  so  soon. 

‘Utthaya  utthaya’  implies  ‘rising  up  and  rising  up,'  i.  e.,  putting  forth 
prowess.  The  measures  with  reference  to  infants  are,  of  course,  those  which 
relate  to  the  skilful  cutting  off  of  the  umbilical  cord,  rubbing  of  oil,  warming,  &c. 

‘Chitra-ghatas’  are  little  earthen  jugs  painted  and  kept  for  show,  or  for 
religious  purposes. — T. 

*  ‘Kriyopayoga’  is,  literally,  administration  of  operations,  or  practice  of 
acts.  It  is,  however,  frequently  used  for  ‘practice’  or  ‘addiction,’  or  ‘habit.’ 

By  ‘atmaguna’  is  meant  qualities  of  self  ;  i.  e.,  suitability  of  practices  and 
articles  to  oneself.  Like  ‘satmya/  which  is  a  technical  term,  the  word 
‘suitability’  ought  to  be  made  a  technical  term  for  avoiding  a  periphrasis. — T. 

j-  ‘Sandharanam’,  as  it  comes  first,  implies,  as  explained  by  Chakrapani, 
‘varjjana’  or  avoidance.  This  meaning  of  the  word  is  peculiar.  ‘Atiyoga’, 
as  explained  in  Sutrasthanam,  means  excessive  correlation.  Vide  Lesson  I, 
p.  5  ;  also  Lesson  VIII,  p.  88. 

‘Gatimat’  here  is  a  technical  word,  meaning  urine  and  excreta.  Hence, 
‘udirnanam  gatimatam  sandharanam’  would  imply  ‘not  suppressing  the 
urgings  of  nature  that  have  become  pronounced’. — T. 

}  What  Agnive^a’s  question  really  implies  is  this  :  if  it  be  the  fact  that 
the  life  of  human  beings,  as  regards  its  period,  be  indeterminate,  i.  e.,  not  pre¬ 
ordained,  to  what  cause  then  is  it  owing  that  some  die  timely  and  some  die 


CMA  RA  KA  -SA  M  HI  TA. 


487 


The  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said  unto  him, — Listen,  0  Agnivefa  ! 
As  a  wheel  attached  to  a  car,  endued  by  nature  with  all 
the  qualities  of  a  wheel,  possessed  of  all  the  necessary  equip¬ 
ments,  and  turning  round  (as  the  car  is  drawn),  meets  with 
destruction  at  the  proper  time  in  consequence  of  the  wearing 
out  of  its  frame,  after  the  same  manner,  life,  entering  In  the  body 
of  a  strong  person  duly  served  (with  food,  exercise,  and  other 
beneficial  practices),  naturally  comes  to  an  end  in  consequence 
of  the  exhaustion  of  its  own  limit.50* 

Such  death  is  said  to  be  death  in  proper  time. 

As  also  the  same  wheel  meets  with  premature  destruction  in¬ 
consequence  of  an  excessively  heavy  burthen  being  placed  over  it,, 
or  of  (its  moving  over)  an  uneven  road  or  a  place  over  which- 
there  is  no  road,  or  of  the  breaking  of  its  circumference,  or  of 
the  faults  of  the  load  or  the  animals  drawing  it,  or  of  the  coming 
out  of  the  pin  that  attaches  it  to  the  axle,  or  of  the  overturning 
of  the  car  itself,  or  of  its  not  being  oiled,  so  life,  too,  comes  to 
a  premature  end  in  consequence  of  exertions  disproportioned 
to  strength,  or  of  taking  food  disproportioned  to  the  digestive 
fire,  or  of  disposing  the  body  in  improper  attitudes,  or  of  excessive 
sexual  congress,  or  of  association  with  the  unrighteous,  or  of 
suppressing  such  urgings  of  nature  as  have  become  pronounced, 
or  of  not  suppressing  such  urgings  as  deserve  to  be  suppressed, 
or  of  afflictions  caused  by  evil  spirits  and  poisons  and  fires,  or  of 
wounds  or  of  abstention  from  food. 

Such  death  is  said  to  be  untimely  death.51t 


untimely  ?  By  untimely  death,  of  course,  is  meant  premature  death,  as  by 
timely  death  is  meant  death  at  the  proper  age,  that  is,  at  the  expiration  of  the 
full  period  allowed  for  a  particular  Yuga. — T. 

*  ‘Akshagunairupetah’  refers  to  the  qualities  of  the  material  of  which  it  is- 
composed,  &c. 

‘Sarvogunopapannah’  refers  to  the  merits  of  its  construction  by  the  carpenter, 
the  facility  with  which  it  turns  round,  the  oiling  of  the  axle  to  which  is  at¬ 
tached,  &c. — T. 

t  Wheels  break  in  consequence  of  excessive  pressure.  By  'vishama  patha’ 
is  meant  an  uneven  road.  By  ‘apatha’  is  meant  the  absence  of  a  road  ;  i.e., 
a  place  where  there  is  no  road.  ‘Akshachakra’  is  the  circumference  or  circular 
piece  of  wood  to  which  the  spokes  are  attached. 


488 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  Mill  TA. 


So  also  vve  see  that  untimely  death  takes  place  from  diseases 
like  fever  and  the  rest  not  being  skilfully  treated.82 

Then  Agnivefa  said, — Why,  O  illustrious  one,  is  warm  water 
largely  given  by  physicians  to  persons  assailed  by  fever,  for  drink  ? 

Indeed,  cold  water  is  not  given. 

There  are  temperaments  affected  by  fever,  which  admit  of  treat¬ 
ment  with  the  help  of  cold  drink.53* 

Unto  him  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said, — Observing  the  symp¬ 
toms  of  the  body  of  the  person  afflicted  with  fever,  as  also  the 
place  and  time,  physicians  prescribe  warm  w’ater  for  aiding 
the  digestion  of  all  the  undigested  humours. 


‘Vahya-vahakadoshat’  implies  the  faults  of  both  ‘vahya’  and  ‘vahaka’.  .  The 
former  includes  both  animate  and  inanimate  freight  ;  while  the  latter  implies 
either  the  animals  that  are  drawing  the  car  or  the  driver  that  holds  the  reins. 
If  the  freight  be  not  properly  placed,  the  wheel  may  break.  So  also,  through 
fault  of  the  driver  or  of  the  animals  the  same  result  may  happen.  The  correct 
reading,  as  noticed  by  Chakrapani,  is  ‘Alimokshat’  and  not  ‘anirmokshat’. 

‘Paryasana’  is  an  act  of  overturning. 

‘Anupanga’,  as  explained  by  Chakrapani,  is  neglect  to  oil. 

‘Antara’  is  an  indeclinable,  meaning  ‘before  the  proper  time’. 

Exertions  disproportioned  to  one’s  strength  shorten  life,  such  as  excessive 
work,  or  work  more  than  what  the  body  can  bear. 

‘Vishama-9arira-nyashat’  refers  to  the  placing  of  the  body  in  improper 
attitudes.  It  includes  the  practices  of  Hatha  yoga  when  these  are  not  slowly 
or  gradually  undertaken.  There  are  certain  urgings  that  require  to  be  sup¬ 
pressed,  such  as  those  of  the  passions.  Indulgence  in  wrath  or  envy  shorten 
life.  It  dries  up  vigour.  Duryodhana,  in  consequence  of  envy  of  his  cousins, 
is  described  in  the  Mahabharata,  as  getting  weaker  and  weaker  day  by  day. 

‘Ahara-vivarjjana’  refers  to  either  complete  fast  or  abstention  from  nutritive 
food.— T. 

*  The  question  asked  by  Agnive9a  arises  incidentally  from  the  last  answer 
of  the  Rishi.  The  matter,  though  not  directly  connected  with  the  subject 
treated,  viz.,  the  destruction  of  cities  and  towns,  is  disposed  of  here  incidentally 
by  way  of  parenthesis,  as  it  were  ;  or,  it  may  even  be  taken  as  remotely  connected 
with  the  subject.  Fevers  do  sometimes  depopulate  cities  and  towns.  The 
question,  therefore,  of  the  treatment  of  fevers  may  be  taken  as  having  some¬ 
thing  to  do  with  the  principal  subject. — T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHITA. 


489 


Verily,  fever  has  its  origin  in  (the  faults  of)  the  ama£aya. 
Generally,  the  medicines  for  all  diseases  of  the  ama^aya  are 
Pachanas,  or  emetics,  or  Apatarpanas,  or  £ atnanas . 

Warm  drink  is  (administered)  for  promoting  the  digestion  (of 
undigested  humours) 

Hence,  physicians  administer  this  in  large  quantities  to  men 
in  fever.54* 

The  warm  water  thus  administered,  when  drunk,  causes  the 
wind  to  move  in  its  natural  directions,  and  excites  the  fire  in 
the  stomach. 

It  is,  again,  quickly  digested.  It  dries  up  the  phlegm. 

Even  a  small  quantity  of  it,  when  drunk,  is  calculated  to  quench 
the  patient’s  thirst. 

Even  if  endued  with  such  virtues,  it  should  not  be  prescribed 
in  a  fever  in  which  the  bile  has  been  greatly  excited,  or  in  a 
fever  existing  with  burning  (of  the  skin),  delusion,  delirium,  and 
diarrhoea.  Through  administration  of  warm  water,  burning  (of  the 
skin),  delusions,  delirium,  and  diarrhoea  increase. 

By  cold  water  these  are  allayed.55 

Here  occurs  a  verse. 

Those  that  are  ceversant  with  medicines  allay  all  diseases  born 
of  heat  by  (applying)  cooling  (drinks  and  treatment). 

As  regards,  however,  those  diseases  that  are  born  of  cold, 
warm  water  is  their  effective  remedy.56! 

*  ‘Kayasamuthanam’  implies  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  as  manifested 
in  the  body.  These  symptoms  help  the  physician  in  judging  as  to  whether  the 
fever  is  due  to  cold  or  heat.  'Pachanas’  are  medicines  which  digest  all 
undigested  food,  without  increasing  the  appetite.  ‘Amacjaya’  is  that  part  of 
the  stomach  where  the  food  passes  immediately  after  deglutition.  Etymologically, 
it  means  the  region  of  raw  (undigested)  food.  ‘Apatarpanas’  are  medicines 
which  dry  up  humours.  Sometimes,  fasts  go  under  this  name.  They  are  the 
reverse  of  Santarpanas.  ‘Camanas’  are  sedatives  or  soothing  medicines. — T. 

t  ‘Vishagjitam’  implies  a  medicine.  Etymologically,  it  means  something 
that  has  been  subdued  by  the  physician  to  his  own  purposes.  Hence,  any 
efficacious  drug.  Products  of  nature  are  subjected  to  different  processes  and 
reduced  by  physicians  into  agents  for  serving  the  objects  they  have  in  view. — T. 


490 


CHAR  AKA  -  SA  MHITA. 


After  the  same  manner,  of  diseases  of  other  kinds,  the  medicines 
to  be  prescribed  should  be  of  virtues  contrary  to  their  causes.57 

So,  of  all  diseases  generated  by  Apatarpana,  there  is  no 
alleviation  without  Purana  ;  as  of  diseases  generated  by  Purana , 
there  is  no  alleviation  without  ApatarpanaP.* 

Apatarpana  is  of  three  kinds  ;  (i)  Langhana,  (2)  Langhana- 
Pachana ,  and  (3)  DoshdvasechanaP  t 

Of  these,  Langhana  is  prescribable  for  faults  slightly  provoked. 
A  fault  slightly  provoked  and  of  little  strength  becomes  dried  up 
through  the  increase  of  the  (digestive)  fire  and  of  the  wind 
brought  about  by  Langhana,  even  as  a  piece  of  shallow  water  is 
dried  up  by  heat  and  wind.60 4 

A  fault  that  is  provoked  a  little  more  than  what  would  be 
called  slight  and  that  possesses  middling  strength,  is  dried  up  by 
(the  administration  of)  both  Langhana  and  Pachana,  even  as  a 
quantity  of  water  that  is  not  large  is  dried  up  by  the  wind 
and  the  hot  rays  of  the  sun  as  also  by  (clouds  of)  dust  and  ashes 
falling  upon  it.61§ 

*  ‘Apatarpana’  as  explained  above,  is  a  course  of  treatment  that  dries  up 
humours.  It  is  fully  expanded  in  the  following  aphorisms.  ‘Purana’  is  another 
name  for  ‘Santarpana’  or  indulgence  in  food  and  practices  that  are  of  a  soothing 
and  nutritive  effect  on  the  system. — T. 

f  For  the  meaning  of  the  word  Langhana  vide  Lesson  XXII.  of  Sutra- 
sthanam.  "The  four  kinds  of  corrective  processes  {viz,  administration  of 
emetics,  of  purgatives,  of  errhines  or  cerebral  purgatives,  and  dry  enemata,  as 
also  bearing  thirst  and  wind  and  the  heat  of  the  sun,  drinking  the  medicines 
called  Pachana,  fasts  and  physical  exercise, — these  are  all  included  under 
Langhana.” — P.  245,  Sutrasthanum — T. 

{  ‘Alpavaladosthanam’  is  the  correct  reading. 

Langhana  leads  to  increase  of  the  digestive  fire  and  of  the  wind.  It  is 
this  increase  of  fire  and  wind  that  dries  up  a  fault  when  it  has  been  excited 
slightly  and  when,  therefore,  it  is  possessed  of  little  strength. — T. 

§  The  remedy  in  the  case  of  the  faults  excited  to  a  measure  that 
is  more  than  slight  and  less  than  much,  (that  is,  when  the  degree  of  excitement 
is  of  middling  proportions)  is  the  administration  of  both  Langhana  and 
Pachana.  Such  faults  are  then  dried  up,  as  a  piece  of  water  that  is  not 
large  is  dried  up  by  the  hot  rays  of  the  sun  and  by  the  wind,  assisted  by 
clouds  of  dust  and  ashes.  Langhana  operates  like  the  former  ;  Pachana 
like  the  latter. — T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  M  HIT A. 


491 


Of  persons  whose  faults  have  been  excited  to  a  great  degree, 
it  is  necessary  to  drain  out  the  faults. 

Verily  if  the  bounding  dams  of  a  water-basin  are  not  breached, 
the  water  (within  it)  cannot  be  drained  out. 

The  operation  of  draining  out  the  faults  is  (to  be  effected  by) 
similar  (means).'2* 

Of  diseased  persons  of  the  following  kinds,  even  when  the 
fit  time  for  it  comes,  a  draining  out  of  faults,  or  administration 
of  any  other  medicine,  should  not  be  attempted. 

They  are — 

(1)  one  that  is  not  disposed  to  remove  the  cause  of  censures 
directed  to  oneself, 

(2)  one  that  is  very  poor, 

(3)  one  that  has  no  attendants  (nurses)  to  look  after  him, 

(4)  one  that  is  full  of  pretensions  regarding  his  own  skill  as 
a  physician, 

(5)  one  that  is  of  a  fierce  temper, 

(6)  one  that  is  envious  of  other  people, 

(7)  one  that  is  exceedingly  addicted  to  unrighteous  acts, 

(8)  one  that  is  exceedingly  weak  in  strength,  flesh,  and  blood, 

(9)  one  that  is  suffering  under  an  incurable  disease,  and 

(10)  one  in  whom  the  symptoms  of  the  near  approach  of  death 
have  discovered  themselves. 

By  treating  a  patient  of  any  of  these  kinds,  the  physician 
incurs  both  sin  and  infamy. 63t 


*  The  ‘Avasechana’  of  excited  'doshas’  or  faults  implies  their  draining  out. 
The  means  adopted  is  the  administration  of  correctives  such  as  emetics  and 
purgatives,  and  application  of  oils,  &c.  (vide  Lesson  XXII,  Sutrasthanam). 

'Kedara1,  as  used  here,  does  not  mean  a  field  or  meadow,  but  a  water-basin. 

‘Setu’  is  a  dam  or  embankment. — T. 

t  The  reasons,  from  a  Hindu  point  of  view,  for  not  treating  these  kinds  of 
men,  are  all  cogent.  As  regards  those  men  that  are  undisposed  to  provide 
against  the  evil  opinions  entertained  of  them  by  others,  it  should  be  said  that 
they  are  wedded  to  their  vices  ;  for  it  is  by  leaving  off  their  vices  that  they  can 
silence  the  calumnies  of  friends  and  foes.  A  confirmed  sinner  like  such  a 


492 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


Here  occur  some  verses. 

That  region  where  water  and  trees  do  not  occur  plentifully, 
where  the  wind  blows  strongly,  and  which  is  much  exposed  to  the 
heat  of  the  sun,  is  called  a  jdngala  region. 


person  should  not  I  be  treated.  A  wholesome  dread  of  public  opinion  charac* 
terises  every  good  man. 

The  objection  to  treat  one  that  is  very  poor  is  based  on  his  inability  to  con¬ 
form  to  the  instructions  of  the  physician.  Such  a  man  cannot  have  a  room  like 
to  what  the  physician  would  advise  him  ;  he  cannot  have  beds  and  clothes  and 
diet,  &c.,  of  the  kind  prescribed. 

Hence,  treatment  in  his  case  can  never  be  effectual.  Then,  again,  the  Hindu 
Scriptures  regard  a  poor  man  as  suffering  misery  only  in  consequence  of  the  sins 
of  a  past  life.  Such  a  man  is  a  great  sinner.  Poverty  is  the  result  of  sin.  Even 
Manu  says  that  poor  men  should  be  driven  off  the  place  where  sacrifices  are 
performed  or  offerings  made  to  the  deities  and  the  Pitris.  In  another  place 
Manu  says  : — the  poor,  the  blind,  the  deaf,  should  not  be  given  any  portion 
of  the  offerings  made  at  Qraddhas.  Their  death  would  be  a  relief  to  them. 
The  world  does  not  lose  anything  by  the  disappearance  of  poor  men  from  it. 

It  should,  however,  be  remembered  that  these  injunctions  with  regard  to 
the  poor  do  not  apply  to  Brahmanas.  With  the  latter,  poverty  is  a  merit,  for 
it  is  adopted  from  choice.  To  the  credit  of  the  Hindu  Scriptures  it  should  be 
said  that  there  are  other  places  where  injunctions  occur  about  giving  to  the  poor. 

In  the  Mahabharata  there  are  many  passages  laying  down  this  obliga¬ 
tion.  The  objection  to  treat  a  person  who  has  none  to  attend  upon  or  nurse 
him,  is  founded  upon  a  similar  reason. 

With  regard  to  one  that  is  full  of  pretensions  about  his  own  skill  as  a  physi¬ 
cian,  the  objection  io  treat  him  arises  from  his  absence  of  faith  in  the  efficacy 
of  the  measures  proposed  or  prescribed.  Then,  again,  such  a  patient  is  sure 
to  interfere  with  the  physician  attending  upon  him.  Also,  if  cured,  he  will 
ascribe  the  cure  to  the  adoption  of  his  own  suggestions  by  the  attending 
physician,  thereby  denying  just  fame  to  the  latter. 

A  wrathful  man  should  not  be  treated.  Such  a  man,  impatient  of  re¬ 
covery,  may  call  in  a  new  physician.  He  may  even  injure  the^attending 
physician  by  wrongly  imputing  absence  of  knowledge  and  skill  to  him. 

Passing  over  the  others,  it  is,  of  course,  clear  why  a  patient  on  the  point 
of  death  should  not  be  treated.  Such  treatment  may  raise  false  hopes  among 
the  relatives  and  induce  them  to  spend  largely.  Besides,  as  death  is  certain, 
the  physician  loses  his  reputation  by  undertaking  to  ward  it  off. 

Then,  again,  the  physician,  by  treating  many  of  these  men,  has  to  come  in 
contact  with  sinful  men  and  thereby  incur  sin.  Probably,  the  idea  involved  in 
this  is  that  the  physician  loses  his  own  pure  magnetism, — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


493 


Jn  such  a  region  disease  occurs  rarely.”* * * § 

That  region  where  water  and  trees  are  plentiful,  where  wind 
•and  heat  are  rare,  which  has  no  beauty,  which  has  not  many  faults, 
and  which  is  level  land,  is  regarded  as  ordinary.7®! 

-Even  this  is  the  opinion  of  those  possessed  of  intelligence,  viz., 
that  those  acts  of  treatment  should  not  be  followed  which  are 
productive  of  baneful  effects  at  the  time  the  acts_  are  done  or 
afterwards. 7SJ 

(Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary  of  the 
contents  of  this  Lesson.) 

The  premonitory  symptoms,  the  general  causes,  with  the  respec¬ 
tive  characteristics  of  each,  of  the  destruction  of  cities  and  towns, 
&c.,  the  medicines  ( that  can  avert  it  ),  the  root  of  the  causes,  the 
origin  of  the  appearance  of  diseases,  the  progression  of  decay  of 
the  period  of  life,  the  ascertainment  of  the  timeliness  and  un¬ 
timeliness  of  death  in  respect  of  creatures,  of  timely  and 
untimely  death,  how  medicines  should  be  applied  for  becoming 
efficacious,  the  persons  for  whom  medicines  are  not  to  be  prescribed 
and  the  reason  for  it, — all  these,  that  best  of  ascetics,  the  son  of 
Atri,  declared  unto  Agnivepa  in  the  Vimanam  relating  to  the  causes 
of  the  destruction  of  cities  and  towns,  &c.1_4§ 


*  'Jangala'  does  not  mean  bushy  or  woody.  It  is  a  technical  word.  The 
field  of  Kuru,  or  Kurukshetra,  is  known  by  the  name  of  Kuru-jangala.  Its 
features  satisfy  the  definition  here  given  of  a  Jangala  land. — T. 

f  Such  a  region  is  ordinary,  that  is,  possessed  of  neither  great  merits,  nor 
great  faults.  Most  level  countries  fall  within  this  class.  Generally  speaking, 
uneven  or  hilly  countries  are  better.  Verses  71  and  72  do  not  occur  in  all 
texts. — T. 

t  As  verse  73  comes  immediately  after  70,  (for  verses  71  and  72  do  not 
occur  in  all  texts),  it  seems  that  73  should  be  understood  as  having  a  reference 
to  70.  In  aphorism  70,  the  men  that  should  not  be  treated  are  mentioned. 
In  73,  the  reason,  generally,  of  this  is  given.  That  reason  is  this  :  the  opera¬ 
tions  the  physician  may  direct  (in  the  case  of  the  proscribed  persons)  are  not 
likely  to  be  beneficial.  The  nature  and  temperament  of  the  persons  are  such 
that  medical  treatment  can  do  them  no  good.  Hence,  those  operations  should 
not  be  adopted. — T. 

§  The  premonitory  symptoms  are  spoken  of  in  aphorisms  1  to  3  ;  the 
general  causes  with  their  respective  characteristics  occur  in  aphorisms  4  to  10  ; 

63 


494 


CIIA  RA  KA  -SAM HIT  A  , 


1  hus  ends  the  Vimanam  relating  to  the  destruction  of  cities 
and  towns  in  the  treatise  of  Agnive5a  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  IV, 

After  this  we  shall  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  three  especial 
means  of  ascertainment  of  disease. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.-1* 

There  are  three  especial  means  of  ascertaining  disease.  They 
are  :  — 

i.  The  Instructions  of  the  inspired  or  wise,  2.  Observation, 
and  3.  Inference.2 

Amongst  these,  the  Instructions  of  the  Inspired  consist  of 
Ihe  words  spoken  by  them. 

Verily,  they  are  called  inspired  who  are  conversant  with  all 
distinctions,  without  the  help  of  reasoning  and  memory,  and  who* 
behold  all'  things  without  joy  and  sorrow. 

In  consequence  of  their  being,  endued  with  such  merits,  the 
words  they  utter  are  authoritative. 

The  words  of  persons  that  are  addicted  to  intoxicating  drinks, 
or  that  are  insane,-  or  that  are  ignorant,  or  that  are  attached  to 
worldly  things,  or  that  are  good  and  bad,  are  not  authoritative. 3f 

the  medicines  (that  can  avert  destruction)  are  spoken  of  in- aphorisms  n  to  21  ; 
the  root  of  the  causes  is  indicated  in  aphorisms  22  to  27  ;  the  origin  of  the 
appearance  of  diseases  occurs  in  aphorisms  28  to  33  ;•  the  progression  of  decay 
in  the  period  of  life  is  explained  in  aphorisms  34  to  35  ;  the  ascertainment  o£ 
timeliness  and  untimeliness  of  death  occurs  in  aphorisms  36- to  53  ;  (the  causes 
of)  timely  and  untimely  death  occur  in  aphorisms  56  to  59  ;  how  medicines- 
should  be  applied  for  becoming  efficacious  is  shown  hr  aphorisms  60  to  69  ;  the- 
persons  for  whom  medicines  are  not  to  be  prescribed,  as  also  its  reason,  are 
spoken  of  in  aphorisms  70  and  73.  As  aphorisms  71  and  72  are  not  referred  to¬ 
rn  this  summary,  they  are  evidently  interpolations. — T. 

*  ‘Vkeshavijnana’  is  especial  method  of  ascertainment  or  knowledge  ;  that 
is,  the  means  of  diagnosing  disease.  The  three  methods  by  which  disease  may 
be  ascertained  or  diagnosed  are  set  forth  in  this  Lesson. — L. 

|  ‘Apta’  is  rendered  ‘inspired’.  As  explained  by  the  Rishi,  that  persorn 


CHA  RA  RASA  MHITA. 


495 


That,  verily,  is  (the  result  of)  observation  which  one  acquires 
by  one’s  own  senses  and  mind.4* 

Inference,  verily,  is  argument  depending  upon  reasons. 

Verily,  with  the  aid  of  all  these  three  means  of  knowledge,  one 
should  in  the  first  instance  fully  examine  a  disease.  The  diagnosis 
that  is  then  arrived  at  becomes  faultless.5 

Truly,  by  only  one  of  these  means  of  knowledge,,  knowledge 
does  not  arise  of  everything  that  should  be  known. 

Among  all  these  three  means  of  knowledge,  the  knowledge 
derived  from  the  instructions  of  the  inspired  comes  first.  After 
this,  comes  examination,  with  the  aid  of  Observation  and  Inference. 

What  would  one,,  that  has  not  been  instructed  (by  the  inspired) 
in  the  first  instance,  succeed  in  knowing  by  examining  with 
the  aid  of  Observation  and  Inference  2 

Hence,  with  persons  possessed  of  knowledge,  there  are  two. 
methods  of  examination  :  Observation,  and  Inference- 
Counting  Instruction,  the  methods  are  there. 

These  are  the  points  regarding  which  those  that  are  possessed- 
of  intelligence  lay  down  instructions,  ms., — 


is  called  an  ‘Apta’  whose  knowledge  of  things- is  not  derived  by  a  posteriori 
methods.  They  do  not  depend  upon  reasoning,  nor  upon  memory,  that  is, 
observation,  for  the  business  of  memory  is  the  conservation  of  all  that  has  been 
observed.  They  behold  all'  things  without  ‘priti’,  {,  e.,  pleasure  or  satisfaction, 
and  without  ‘upatapa’,  i.  e.,  pain.  This  means  that  such  men  are  free  from, 
emotions,  or  passions  of  every  kind.  They  view  everything  with  an  equal 
eye, — without,  that  is,  being  moved.  They  are  unimpassioned  judges  of  truth. 
Generally,  by  ‘aptas’  are  meant  men  who  by  the  success  of  their  penances,  see 
the  truth  of  everything.  Hence,  ‘inspired’  would  give  the  sense  better  than 

‘Dushtadushta’  means  ‘good  and  bad’,  i.e.,  sometimes  behaving  well,  at 
other  times  behaving  ill.  Hence,  ordinary  men. — T. 

*'  As  ordinarily  understood,  ‘pratyaksha’  implies  all  that  is  acquired  by 
the  senses.  As  the  mind,  however,  is  regarded  in  Hindu  philosophy  as  the 
sixth  sense,  that  which  is  acquired  by  the  mind  is  included  within  the  word.. 
‘■Mind1,  in  Hindu  philosophy,  means  the  acquisitive,  the  conservative,  and  the- 
reproductive  faculties.  It  is  the  servitor  of  ‘Buddhi’  or  the  understanding^ 
which,  of  course,  is  the  faculty  of  comparison  or  Reason. — T. 


496 


CffA  RAKA-SA  MH I T A 


Diseases  individually  are  such  and  such  ;  the  strength  of  the 
disease  is  so  and  so  ; 

the  origin  of  the  disease  is  so  and  so  j  this  is  the  soul  (or 
character)  of  this  disease  ;  . 

this  is  the  seat  of  the  disease  ; 

this  is  the  manner  in  which  the  disease  makes  itself  known  ; 

these  are  the  sound,  touch,  colour,  taste,  and  smell  pertaining 
to  the  disease  ; 

these  are  the  supervening  afflictions  of  these  diseases  ; 

this  is  the  aggravation,  this  is  the  evenness,  (or  usual  state), 
and  this  is  the  attenuation  (or  mitigation)  of  this  disease  ; 

this  is  the  development  of  this  disease  j  this  is  the  name  by 
which  this  diease  should  be  known  ; 

in  this  disease,  for  its  treatment,  this  should  be  done,  or  this 
should  be  abstained  from. 

All  these  are  known  from  the  instructions  (of  the  Inspired).6* 

*  ‘Avayava’  means  a  part  or  fractional  portion.  When  three  methods  of 
knowledge  are  indicated,  any  one  of  them  would  be  called  an  ‘avayava’. 

In  treating  of  disease,  the  first  requisite  is  the  instructions  of  the  inspired 
or  wise.  Then  come  Observation  and  Inference.  In  examining  a  disease,  the 
foremost  requisite  is  instructions  ;  the  other  requisites  are  Observation  and 
Inference. 

■Jnanavatam'  implies  'with  men  of  knowledge’,  that  is,  those  that  have 
obtained  instructions  of  the  wise.  With  such  there  are  two  methods  of  exami¬ 
nation,  viz.,  Observation  and  Inference.  Counting  instructions,  the  methods 
or  means  are  three. 

‘Men  possessed  of  intelligence’  refers  to  persons  who  have  received  instruc¬ 
tions  of  the  wise. 

‘Prakopanam’  or  strength  of  the  disease  means  the  degree  of  excitement  of 
the  particular  fault  that  has  caused  the  disease. 

By  ‘Yoni’  is  meant  the  ‘nidiinam’  of  a  disease,  that  is,  the  original  cause. 

By  the  ‘soul’  (atman)  of  a  disease  is  meant  its  predominant  feature,  as  ex¬ 
plained  by  Gangadhara.  Thus,  certain  diseases  have  cold  for  their  soul  ; 
others,  heat  for  their  soul.  Chakrapani  takes  it  in  a  different  sense.  He 
explains  ‘soul’  as  ‘swabhava’  or  nature.  Thus  the  nature  of  ‘apoplexy’  is  its 
rapid  aggravation  and  death. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  Mill  TA. 


497 


One  desirous  of  ascertaining  the  truths  about  disease  with  the 
aid  of  Observation,  should  examine,  with  all  one's  senses,  all  the 
objects  of  the  senses  occurring  in  the  body  of  the  patient,  except 
taste  which  should  be  ascertained  otherwise.  They  are  as  fol¬ 
lows  : — 

Noise  of  the  bowels,  cracking  of  joints,  as  also  of  the  finger- 
joints,  the  peculiarities  of  voice,  all  other  sounds  pertaining  to  the 
body,  should  all  be  examined  by  the  ear. 

Colour,  form,  measure  (of  the  body),  lustre,  the  normal  or 
abnormal  state  of  the  body,  and  all  other  things  whatever  that  are 
objects  of  vision,  should  be  examined  by  the  eye.7 

Verily,  the  taste  occurring  in  the  body  of  the  patient,  though  an 
object  of  sense,  should  be  ascertained  by  Inference  ;  since,  the 
ascertainment  of  this  by  the  employment  of  the  physician’s  own 
tongue  cannot  very  well  take  place.  Therefore,  it  is  by  question¬ 
ing  the  patient  that  the  taste  of  his  mouth  should  be  known.  By 
observing  the  movements  of  lice,  the  fetidness  of  the  body  should  be 
known,  as  by  observing  the  movements  of  bees,  its  sweetness  should 
be  known.  When  doubt  arises  in  cases  of  hemorrhage,  that  doubt 
concerns  itself  with  this,  vi2 ,  whether  the  blood  discharged  is 
life-blood  or  bilious  blood.  If  eaten  by  dogs  and  crows,  it  should 
be  settled  as  life-blood  ;  if  not  eaten  by  these  creatures,  it  should 
be  inferred  to  be  bilious  blood. 

After  the  same  manner,  the  other  tastes  occurring  in  the  body 
of  the  patient  should  be  inferred.9* 


‘Udakam’  implies  the  after  consequences  of  a  disease.  Thus  venereal  diseases 
may  lead  to  leprosy. 

The  correct  reading  is  ‘pratikararthapravitti’.  The  vernacular  translators 
have  misunderstood  the  expression.  As  explained  by  Chakrapani,  ‘pravritti, 
and  ‘nivirtti’,  with  reference  to  ‘pratikiira’  or  treatment  of  a  disease,  imply  those 
acts  that  should  be  done  or  abstained  from,  in  treating  or  curing  a  disease. 
Thus,  in  fevers,  Langhana,  Pachana,  &c.,  are  to  be  resorted  to,  and  baths, 
champooing  of  the  body,  sexual  congress,  &c.,  are  to  be  abstained  from. — T. 

*  What  is  stated  by  the  Rishi  in  aphorisms  7  and  8  is  this  :  the  physi¬ 
cian  should  employ  all  his  senses  for  ascertaining  the  objects  of  those  senses  as 
these  occur  in  the  patient’s  body.  He  should  employ  his  ear  for  ascertaining 
the  sounds  that  occur  in  the  patient’s  body  ;  he  should  employ  his  eye  for 


498 


CIIA  RAKA-SA  MHI TA. 


The  scents,  verily,  which  occur  in  all  parts  of  the  patient’s 
body,  whether  normal  or  abnormal,  should  be  examined  by  the 
nose.* 

The  touch,  normal  or  abnormal  (of  the  patient’s  body),  should 
be  examined  by  the  (physician’s)  hand. 

Thus  is  explained  the  examination  (of  patients)  by  Observa¬ 
tion,  and  by  Inference  as  partially  treated.10 

These  {viz.,  the  following)  and  other  conditions,  again,  are 
ascertainable  by  Inference.  They  are  as  follow  : — 

The  (digestive)  fire  by  the  (patient’s)  power  of  digesting  ; 
Strength  by  the  power  for  exertion  (or  movements)  ; 
the  Senses,  such  as  ears  and  the  rest,  by  the  power  of  appre¬ 
hending  sound  and  the  rest ;  the  mind  by  freedom  from  error  as 
regards  objects  (of  the  senses)  ; 

Knowledge  (understanding),  by  concentration  ,* 

Rajas  (passion',  by  attachment ; 

Stupefaction  (coma),  by  absence  of  perceptions  j 
Wrath  by  acts  of  violence  ; 

Grief  by  cheerlessness  (such  as  weeping  &c.) ; 

Joy,  by  exhilaration  (such  as  singing,  &c.)  ; 

Satisfaction  by  brightness  of  facial  expression  ; 

Fear  by  gloominess  of  expression  ; 


examining  all  that  may  be  seen.  He  should  examine  by  touch  all  that  the 
sense  of  touch  may  enable  him  to  know.  As  regards  taste,  he  should  not 
employ  his  own  tongue.  Thus  as  to  what  the  taste  is  of  the  blood  that  is  dis¬ 
charged  by  a  patient,  other  animate  creatures,  such  as  the  dog  and  the  crow, 
should  be  used  for  ascertaining.  Then,  as  regards  the  taste  of  the  patient’s 
mouth,  the  physician  should  question  the  patient  and  ascertain  it.  Some 
patients,  in  fever,  feel  the  mouth  to  be  always  bitter.  Some  similarly  feel 
their  mouth  to  be  sweet.  These  particulars  must  be  ascertained  by  ques¬ 
tioning  the  patient  himself. 

The  fact  is,  the  word  ‘Rasa’  (taste),  as  used  in  this  aphorism,  implies  both 
the  taste  which  the  patient  feels  in  his  mouth,  and  the  taste  which  another  may 
feel,  by  applying  his  tongue,  as  regards  this  or  that  part  or  constituent  of  the 
patient’s  body. — T. 


CHA  RA  RA-SA  M  HI  TA 


499 


Fortitude  by  composure  of  countenance  ; 

Energy  by  excitement  ; 

Resoluteness  by  absence  of  restlessness  (of  mind)  ; 

Liking  by  purposes  ; 

Intelligence  by  capacity  of  apprehension  ; 

Consciousness  by  recognition  of  names  ; 

Memory  by  remembrance  ; 

Modesty  by  bashfulness  ; 

Habits  by  practices  ; 

Aversion  by  prohibitions  ; 

Hypocrisy  by  future  acts  ; 

Principle  by  absence  of  cupidity  ; 

Submission  by  obedience  ; 

Age,  food,  assimilation,  aggravation  of  disease,  by  years, 
Country  of  residence,  agreeableness,  and  new  pains  (respectively)  ; 

A  disease  of  invisible  features  by  noting  what  things  are  agree¬ 
able  ;  especial  degrees  of  the  faults  (i.  e.,  excited  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm)  by  the  baneful  act  especially  indulged  ; 

Diminution  of  the  period  of  life  by  pronounced  symptoms  of 
death  ; 

Imminent  prosperity  by  attention  to  good  deeds  ;  and 

Pure  mind  by  the  absence  of  abnormal  sentiments. 

The  softness  or  roughness  of  the  Grahani,  dreams,  purposes, 
which  things  are  disagreeable,  which  are  agreeable,  what  is  pleas¬ 
ing,  and  what  is  painful,  should  be  ascertained  by  questioning  the 
patient.11* 


*  The  strength  of  the  patient  should  be  ascertained  from  his  power  of 
exertion  or  motion,  ‘Vyayama’  here  means  exertion  or  motion,  and  not  physical 
exercise.  The  state  of  his  mind  should  be  ascertained  from  freedom  from 
error  as  regards  the  different  objects  of  the  senses.  Thus,  if  upon  seeing  a 
cow  the  patient  recognises  it  as  a  cow,  his  mind  may  be  said  to  be  in  a  good 
order.  Absence  of  mistakes  as  regards  objects  of  the  senses  is  the  best  criterion 
of  a  healthy  mind.  ‘Vijnana’  or  knowledge  is  to  be  judged  by  'vyavasaya' 
which,  in  this  connection,  implies  concentration  of  attention.  The  kind  of 


500 


CHA  RA  KA  -SA  M  HI  TA. 


Here  are  some  verses. 

By  Instruction  (obtained)  from  the  wise,  by  acts  of  Observing, 
as  also  by  Inference,  a  physician  of  wisdom  should  ascertain 
(diagnose)  disease.1® 


knowledge  here  referred  to  is  that  which  depends  upon  comparison  or  the 
process  of  reasoning.  Whether  the  patient  has  this  faculty  or  not  is  to  be  judged 
from  his  ability  to  concentrate  attention.  Images  may  arise  in  his  mind,  but 
these  may  fly  off  as  soon  as  they  arise.  That  which  is  called  the  Representative 
faculty  in  the  Hamiltonian  school,  is  'vyavasaya'  as  used  here  by  the  Rishi. 
‘Abhidroha’,  as  explained  by  Chakrapani,  means  ‘para-pidartha-privittih’,  i.  e., 
the  desire  to  give  pain  to  others.  Probably,  ‘violence’  is  the  sense  in  which 
it  is  used  here.  Grief  is  expressed  by  ‘dainya’,  i.  e.,  cheerlessness.  Chakrapani 
takes  ‘dainya’  to  imply  weeping,  &c. 

Joy  is  expressed  by  exhilaration.  ‘Amoda’  is  taken  by  Chakrapani  as 
meaning  dancing,  singing  and  laughter,  &c. 

‘Priti’,  which  I  have  rendered  ‘satisfaction’,  is  expressed  by  ‘Tosha’  which 
Chakrapani  takes  as  implying  brightness  of  facial  expression. 

The  correct  reading  is  ‘Avasthanam’  and  not  ‘Asthanam’.  It  implies  reso¬ 
luteness  of  mind,  or  fixity  of  determination.  ‘Avibhrama’  is  absence  of  roving 
from  one  purpose  to  another. 

‘Qraddha’,  as  explained  by  Chakrapani,  means  here  desire  or  liking.  This, 
of  course,  is  to  be  known  by  the  purposes  entertained  by  the  patient. 

‘Medha’  is  Intelligence.  It  is  to  be  judged  by  the  power  of  apprehending  or 
seizing  ideas. 

Consciousness  is  to  be  judged  by  the  power  of  recognizing.  It  is  said  that 
when  Sir  Walter  Scott  returned  home  from  his  last  tour  in  Italy,  he  could  not 
at  first  recognise  his  relatives  and  friends.  At  last,  when  his  beloved  friend 
and  steward,  William  Laidlaw,  stood  beside  his  bed,  Sir  Walter’s  face 
brightened  up  and  he  said, — “Is  that  you,  Willie  ?  I  feel  that  I  have  noo 
come  hame.”  The  test  of  recognition  is,  perhaps,  the  best  test  of  an  unclouded 
consciousness.  The  habits  of  a  patient  are  to  be  judged  from  his  practices. 

Aversion  to  particular  men  or  things  is  to  be  judged  by  the  prohibitions 
uttered  by  the  patient  respecting  the  entrance  of  those  men  or  the  appearance  of 
those  things  before  him. 

The  hypocrisy  of  a  patient  is  to  be  judged  from  a  comparison  of  his  future 
acts  with  present  conduct.  Onei  may  preserve  a  courteous  exterior  towards 
another  and  sometimes  after  even  take  his  life. 

‘Bhakti’  is  food.  It  is  to  be  ascertained  from  the  country  of  the  patient’s 
residence.  Thus,  in  Bengal,  the  staple  food  is  rice  ;  in  the  North-Western 
Provinces,  wheat,  &c. 

‘Vyadhisamutthana’  implies  aggravation  of  a  disease. 


'CHA  RAKA-SA  M  HI  TA 


50i 


The  physician  conversant  with  his  science,  reflecting,  in  all 
manner  of  ways,  upon  everything*  as  far  as  possible,  should  then 
come  to  a  conclusion  about  the  diagnosis  (  of  the  disease  before 
him  )  and  the  treatment '(  that  should  be  followed  ),18 

The  physician  that  is  conversant  with  both  diagnosis  and  treat¬ 
ment,  is  never  at  a  loss  to  achieve  success.  The  man  that  is  not 
ignorant  attains  to  the  fruits  that  are  born  of  non-ignorance.14* 

The  physician  of  knowlegde  who  fails  to  enter  the  inner  body 
of  the  patient  with  the  (  aid  of  the  )  lamp  of  knowledge  and 
understanding,  can  never  treat  diseases.18 

( Here  are  two  verses  containing  a  summary. ) 

The  three  means  of  acquiring  knowledge  of  the  features  of  all 
diseases,  the  matters  about  which  the  Inspired  lay  down  instruc¬ 
tions,  those  matters  which  are  apprehended  by  Observation,  as  also 
those  which  are  to  be  known  by  Inference  and  the  manner  in 
which  they  are  to  be  known, — all  these  things  the  ascetic  of  high 
intelligence,  (zw.,  Punarvasu  )  has  declared  in  this  Vimanam  about 
the  three  means  of  ascertaining  diseases.1"^ 

Thus  ends  the  Vimanam  about  the  three  means  of  ascertaining 
diseases,  in  the  treatise  of  Aginveja  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


•Gudhalingam  vyadhim’  implies  such  diseases  as  those  of  the  chest  or  of  the 
abdomen,  &c.  It  is  by  marking  what  things  are  agreeable  and  what  not,  as 
regards  food,  &c.,  that  such  ailments  can  be  known. 

In  ascertaining  which  of  the  faults  has  been  excited  in  what  measure,  atten¬ 
tion  should  be  paid  to  the  kind  of  baneful  practices  in  which  the  patient  had 
indulged. 

Whether  the  period  of  life  has  run  out  is  to  be  ascertained  from  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  these  indications  which  go  by  the  name  of  Arishta. 

*  ‘Amudha’  is  the  opposite  of  ‘mudha.’  It  implies  one  that  is  freed  from 
ignorance.  Hence,  a  physician  endued  with  wisdom. 

‘Amoha-nimittajam’  means  ‘born  of  non-ignorance’  ;  that  is,  ‘resulting 
from  wisdom’. 

The  simple  sense  is  that  the  physician  of  wisdom  attains  to  those  results 
which  spring  from  wisdom. — T. 

t  The  first  of  these  is  explained  in  aphorisms  I  to  the  middle  of  6  ;  the 
next  topic  occurs  in  the  remainder  of  aphorism  6  ;  the  matters  ascertainable 
from  Observation  occur  in  aphorisms  7  to  10  ;  and  the  matters  known  by  In¬ 
ference,  &c.,  occur  in  aphorisms  1 1  to  15. — T. 

64 


502 


CHARA  KA-SAMHITA. 


LESSON  V, 

After  this  we  shall  expound  the  Vimanam  about  the  ducts 
(  of  the  body  ). 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.1 

Whatever  embodied  phenomena  occur  in  a  person,  are  all  only 
especial  forms  ( or  conditions  )  of  the  ducts. 

All  phenomena  (  visible  )  in  a  person  never  make  their  ap¬ 
pearance,  or  never  disappear  (subside)  without  the  (  action  off 
the  )  ducts. 

Verily,  the  ducts  are  the  conduits  of  the  ingredients  of  the 
body,  for  bearing  them  (from  one  place  to  another),,  during  the 
process  of  their  development  (  or  transformation  ), 

Then,  again,  some  sages  say  that  a  person  is  only  the  sum  total- 
of  the  ducts,  because  of  the  ducts  being  present  in  every  part  of 
the  body,,  and  because  also  of  the  duets  being  the  conduits  of  both 
the  excitements  and  the  alleviations-  of  the  faults. 

This,  however,  is  not  so. 

Since  he  whose  ducts  they  are,  that  which  they  develop  (  or 
nourish  ),  and  that  in  which  they  are  located, — all  these  are  differ¬ 
ent  from  them.2* 

*  By  ‘Srotas’  is  meant  the  ducts  or  channels,  that  is,  the  arterial  and 
V'errous  system  of  the  body.  It  probably  includes  also  the  nervous  system. 
‘Srotas’  has  forits  synonymes  ‘Dhamani’  and  ‘Ciras’. 

There  is  a  stop  after  ‘ayanarthe’.  ‘Napi’  is  incorrect.  It  should  be  ‘Api', 
‘Yacchavahanti’  or  ‘yathavahanti’  is  superfluous  according  to  Chakrapani, 
Either  should,  therefore,  be  omitted. 

What  is  stated  here  is  a  scientific  truth  of  the  highest  importance.  Some 
Rishis  maintain  that  a  human  being  is  nothing  more  than  a  conglomeration 
of  nerves  and  arteries  gross  and  subtle..  There  is  no  part  of  the  body  that  would 
not  disclose  a  conglomeration  of  the  finest  nerves,  invisible  to  the  naked 
eye.  This  is  a  truth  that  has  dawned  upon  Western  scientists  only  recently. 
One  cannot  but  hold  that  the  Rishis  who  discovered  this  did  so  from  the 
inspiration  of  Yoga. 

Punarvasu’s  assertion  that  a  person  is  not  a  conglomeration  of  nerves  and 
arteries  is  correct  only  if  ‘person’  be  taken  to  signify  that  which  is  the  result  of 
a  union  of  the  soul  and  the  body.  As  regards  the  body,  or  the  material  ease 
of  the  soul,  the  proposition  is  incontrovertible. — T. 


CHA  BA  KA -SA  MHITA. 


503 


Indeed,  some,  in  consequence  of  their  exceedingly  large 
number,  say  that  the  ducts  are  uncountable. 

Others,  again,  say  that  they  are  countable. 

Of  those  ducts,  roughly,  some  varieties  we  shall  expound,  with 
reference  to  their  roots  as  also  to  the  knowledge  we  have  of  their 
excitement. 

Those  varieties  ( that  we  shall  explain )  will  suffice  for  a 
comprehension  of  the  unmentioned  ones  by  men  of  knowledge  as 
also  by  those  that  are  dull  or  reft  of  intelligence. 

They  are  as  follow. 

There  are  ducts  for  bearing  life-breaths,  water,  food- juice, 
blood,  flesh,  adeps,  bones,  marrow,  vital  seed,  urine,  stools,  and 
sweat. 

Of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  again,  which  move  through  every 
part  of  the  body,  all  the  ducts  are  conduits.3* 

Again,  after  the  same  manner,  of  the  mind  and  others,  which 
are  beyond  the  ken  of  the  senses,  the  body  endued  with  animation 
is  the  conduit  (  for  their  movements  )  and  the  substratum  (  upon 
which  they  rest ), 

If  the  ducts  are  all  in  their  normal  state,  the  body  cannot  be- 
affected  by  any  disease.4-! 


*  The  Bengali  texts  of  this  aphorism  are  vicious.  The  correct  reading  is 
‘anuktajnanaya  jnanavatam’,  and  ‘vijnanaya  chajnanavatam’. 

What  is  meant  by  there  being  ducts  for  bearing  flesh,  &c.  is  that  these 
ducts  are  the  conduits  of  those  substances  which  develop  into  flesh,  &c.  As 
regards  wind,  bile,  and'  phlegm,  these  have  no  especial  ducts  of  their  own, 
but  move  through  all  the  ducts  in  the  body,  for  they  are  present  in  every  part  of 
the  body.— T. 

f  ‘Sattwa’  is  the  mind  as  understood  in  Hindu  philosophy.  The  word 
‘adi’  includes  ‘buddhi’  or  understanding,  ‘ahankara’  or  self-consciousness  ;  and 
the  ‘Atman’  or  soul.  These  are  ‘atindriya’,  that  is,  beyond  the  ken  of  the  five 
organs  of  sense.  The  whole  body,  as  long  as  it  is  ‘chetanavat’,  i.  e.,  animate, 
is  the  ‘ayana’  or  conduit  for  their  movements,  and'  is  also  the  ‘substratum’ 
an  which  they  rest. 

As  long  as  the  ducts,  i.  e.,  the  arterial  (with  the  venous)  and  nervous- 
system,  are  in  a  good  order,  so  long  the  body  remains  free  from  disease.- — T. 


5°4 


CNARAKA  SAM  HIT  A , 


Amongst  these,  of  the  duets  that  bear  the  life-breaths,  the 
root  is  the  Chest  and  the  Great  duct. 

Of  those  ducts,  when  vitiated,  the  following  are  the  especial' 
indications, 

Beholding  a  person  inhaling  and  exhaling  long  breaths,  or 
breathing  obstructedly  or  breathing  furiously,  or  drawing  short, 
or  incessant  breaths,  or  breathing  with  noise  or  pain,  the  physician 
should  understand  that  those  ducts  of  the  man  that  bear  the  life-- 
breaths  have  become  disordered,® 

Of  the  ducts  that  bear  water,  the  root  is  the  palate  as  also  the 
bladder. 

When  vitiated,  the  especial  indications  are  these  ;; — > 

Beholding  the  dryness  of  the  tongue,  the  palate,  the  lips,  the 
throat,  and  the  bladder,  as  also  an  excess  of  thirst,  the  physician 
should  understand  that  those  ducts  which  bear  water  have  become 
disordered.6 

Of  the  ducts  that  bear  food,  the  root  is  the  amcigaya  as  alsq 
the  left  side  (  of  the  stomach.) 

When  vitiated,  these  are  the  especial  indications  : 

Beholding  a  disgust  for  food,  nausea, (absence  of  digestion,  as 
also  vomiting,  the  physician  should  understand  that  those  ducts 
which  bear  food  have  become  disordered.7 

Of  the  ducts  that  bear  the  food-juice,  the  root  is  the  chest  and 
the  ten  principal  dhamanis  ( arteries ). 

Of  the  ducts  that  bear  the  blood,  the  root  is  the  liver  as  also 
the  spleen, 

Of  the  ducts  that  bear  the  flesh  (i.  e.  the  substance  which 
develops  into  flesh  ),  the  roots  are  the  muscles  or  tendons,  as  also 
the  skin. 

Of  the  ducts  that  bear  the  marrow,  the  roots  are  the  bones  and 
and  cartilages. 

Of  the  ducts  that  bear  the  vital  seed,  the  roots  are  the  testicles 
and  the  male  organ  of  generation.8 


CH  A  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


505 


When  the  ducts  that  bear  food-juice,  &c.,  the  following  have 
been  said  to  be  the  indications  in  the  Lesson  in  “  Vividhagitiya  ” 
(  XXXVIII  of  Sutrasthanam  ). 

Verily,  those  symptoms  which  indicate  the  vitiation  of  the 
Dhatus  (  or  constituent  ingredients  of  the  body  )  are  indications  of 
the  (  vitiation  of  the  )  ducts  themselves  that  bear  those  Dhatus.9* 

Of  the  ducts  that  bear  urine,  the  root  is  the  bladder  as  also  the 
pubic  and  iliac  regions. 

Verily,  even  these  are  the  indications  of  those  ducts  when  they 
become  vitiated. 

Belolding  a  person  having  copious  discharges  of  urine  or  obs¬ 
tructed  discharge,  or  with  irritation  of  the  urethra,  or  with  scanty 
or  frequent  discharge,  attended  with  pain,  the  physician  should 
understand  that  the  urineThearing  ducts  of  the  individual  have 
become  vitiated.10 

Of  the  ducts  that  bear  stools,  the  root  is  the  Pakkafaya  as  also 
the  gross  ( ?.  <?.,  visible  )  gnus. 

Verily,  these  are  the  indications  of  those  ducts  when  vitiated  : 

Beholding  a  man  passing  stools  with  dfficulty,  or  a  little  at  a 
time,  or  with  pains,  or  having  very  liquid  motions,  or  with  the  anal 
canal  irritated,  or  with  bowels  constipated,  the  physician  should 
understand  that  the  stool-bearing  ducts  of  the  individual  have  be¬ 
come  vitiated.” 

Of  the  ducts  that  bear  sweat,  the  roots  are  the  adeps  or  the 
pores  of  the  body, 

Verily,  the  following  are  the  indications  of  those  ducts  when 
vitiated. 

Beholding  the  stoppage  of  sweat,  pr  copiousness  of  sweat,  or 
roughness  (  of  the  skin  ),  or  excessive  oiliness  (  of  the  skin  ),  or 


*  The  sense  is  this  :  in  the  Lesson  named,  indications  occur  of  the  vitiation 
of  blood.  Those  very  indications  prove  the  vitiation  of  the  ducts  that  bear 
blood.  Similarly,  the  symptoms  that  indicate  the  vitiation  of  flesh  also  indicate 
the  vitiation  of  the  ducts  that  bear  the  flesh,  &c.  &c.  The  Rishi,  content  with 
this  general  observation,  declines  to  refer  to  the  indications  of  yitiation  of  each 
class  of  ducts. — T. 


5°6 


CH A  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


burning  sensation  (  all  over  the  body  ),  or  a  general  horripilation 
( of  the  skin  ),  the  physician  should  understand  that  the  sweat¬ 
bearing  ducts  of  the  individual  have  become  vitiated.1* 

Srolas,  Siras,  Dhamani,  Rasavahini,  Nadi,  Pantha  Marga, 
Cariracchidra,  covered  and  uncovered  Sthana,  Ayaya,  Kshaya,  and 
Niketa, — these  are  the  names  by  which  are  known  the  passages  or 
conduits,  visible  and  invisible,  of  the  dliatus  (  or  constituent 
elements  )  of  the  body.18* 

In  consequence  of  the  excitement  of  those  ducts,  the  constitu¬ 
ent  elements  of  the  body,  which  dwell  and  pass  through  them,  be¬ 
come  themselves  excited. 14t 

In  consequence  of  the  excitement  of  the  other  ducts,  the  other 
elements  (  passing  through  them  )  become  excited. 

After  the  same  manner,  the  ducts  that  become  vitiated,  vitiate 
other  ducts. 


*  The  etymologies  of  these  names  are  interesting  as  these  offer  the  best 
indications  of  the  extent  of  the  knowledge  which  the  Rishis  had  about  the 
different  ducts  of  the  body. 

‘Srotas’  from  ‘sru’  to  flow.  Hence,  that  through  which  something  flows. 
‘(Jiras’  from  ‘yri’  to  slide.  Hence,  that  through  which  something  slides. 
‘Dhamani’  from  ‘dhma’,  to  sound.  Hence,  that  which  causes  a  sound,  that 
is,  beats. 

( Vide  Lesson  XXIX  of  Sutrasthanam).  ‘Rasavahini’  means,  literally,  that 
which  bears  ‘Rasa’  or  food-juice.  ‘Nadi’  means  that  through  which  something; 
moves. 

‘Pantha’  means  a  path  or  way.  ‘Marga’  from  ‘mrig’  to  seek  or  enquire.. 
Hence,  that  through  which  something  passes,  seeking  its  proper  destination. 

‘Qarira-cchidra’  implies  hollows  or  holes  of  the  body.  ‘Sthana’  implies  that 
which  holds  or  supports  another.  The  ducts  hold  the  several  constituent  elements 
of  the  body  which  pass  through  them.  ‘Ayaya’  is  that  upon  which  something- 
rests.  It  comes  from  ‘yi’  to  rest  or  lie  down. 

‘Kshaya’  from  ‘kshi’  to  undergo  destruction.  It  is  applied  to  a  house  or 
abode,  owing  to  its  destructibility. 

‘Niketa’  from  ‘kit’  to  dwell.  Hence,  an  abode  or  dwelling. — T. 

f  The  theory  is  that  if  the  ducts  be  excited,  the  elements  passing  through 
them,  such  as  blood  or  food-juice,  &c.,  become  excited.  The  excitement  of  the 
latter  is  sympathetic. — T. 


CHAR  AKA -SAM  HIT  A. 


507 


Similarly,  those  constituent  elements  that  become  vitiated, 
vitiate  other  constituents  (  of  the  body  )15* 

Of  all  those  ducts  and  constituent  elements  vitiated  wind,  bile, 
and  phlegm  become  vitiators  in  consequence  of  their  very  nature 
as  faults.16t 

(  Here  are  some  verses  ), 

Through  waste  (  of  the  elements  ),  through  suppression  of  the 
urgings  of  nature,  through  dryness,  through  (  excessive  )  physical 
excercise,  and  through  hunger  also,  the  ducts  that  bear  the  life- 
breaths  become  vitiated,  as  also  through  other  causes  of  a  powerful 
nature  (  which  aggravate  wind,  bile  and  phlegm  ).17J 

Through  heat,  through  undigested  food-juice,  through  fear1, 
through  (  excessive  )  drinking  (  of  intoxicating  stimulants),  through 
taking  dry  food  in  large  measure  or  frequently,  as  also  through 


*  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  There  are  ducts  other  than  those  men¬ 
tioned  especially.  If  these  other  ducts  become  excited,  the  elements  that  pass 
through  them  become  excited.  Certain  ducts,  again,  by  becoming  excited, 
excite  other  ducts,  as  certain  elements,  by  becoming  excited  or  vitiated,  excite 
or  vitiate  other  elements.  The  sympathy  exsisting  between  the  ducts  and  the 
elements  passing  through  them,  between  ducts  and  ducts,  and  elements  and 
elements,  is  a  close  one.  One  of  these  cannot  be  affected  without  affecting 
the  others.— T. 

f  In  the  vicious  Bengal  texts,  ‘pradushtah’,  which  is  really  the  last  word  of 
the  previous  aphorism,  occurs  as  the  first  word  of  aphorism  16.  ‘Tesham 
sarvesham’  refers  to  both  ‘Srotasam’  and  ‘dhatunam’. 

What  is  said  in  aphorism  16  is  this  :  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  are  called 
'doshas’  or  faults,  because  of  their  liability  to  vitiation.  Such  being  their 
nature,  when  they  actually  become  vitiated,  they  vitiate  both  the  ducts  and 
the  constituent  elements  of  the  body.  Wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  move  through 
every  part  of  the  body.  They  have  no  especial  ducts  of  their  own,  but  have  all 
the  ducts  for  their  conduits  or  passages.  Hence,  their  power  extends  not  only 
over  all  ducts  but  also  over  all  the  elements  passing  through  those  ducts. — T. 

%  What  is  meant  by  the  ducts  that  bear  the  life-breaths  becoming  vitiated 
is  that  these  lose  their  normal  condition  in  consequence  of  excited  wind,  bile, 
and  phlegm  affecting  them. 

‘Darunaih’  refers  to  such  causes  as  aggravate  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm. 
Literally,  the  word  means  ‘fierce’. — T. 


5°8 


CHA  R  A  KA  -  SA  M  HIT  A. 


excessive  affliction  of  thirst,  those  ducts  that  bear  water  beconiS 
vitiated.18 

Through  food  taken  in  excessive  measure  or  at  improper  time; 
or  food  that  is  baneful,  and  through  the  weakness  of  the  digestive 
fire,  those  ducts  that  bear  food  become  vitiated.13 

Through  eating  food  that  is  heavy  or  cold  or  exceedingly  oily, 
or  beyond  the  proper  measure,  or  through  thinking  hard  on  sub¬ 
jects  of  thought;  those  ducts  that  bear  food-juice  become  vitiated.20 

Such  food  and  drink  as  cause  a  burning  sensation,  as  also  such 
food  and  drink  as  are  oily  and  warm;  and  such  food  as  is  of  a  liquid 
kind;  vitiate  those  ducts  which  bear  blood.  The  blood-bearing 
ducts  of  also  those  men  who  expose  themselves  to  the  heat  of  the 
sun  and  the  fire  become  vitiated;21 

Food  that  stops  the  secretions,  or  is  gross,  or  heavy,  vitiates 
the  flesh-bearing  ducts.  The  flesh-bearing  ducts  also  of  the  man 
that  sleeps  at  day-time  after  a  meal  become  vitiated.22 

Through  absence  of  physical  exercise,  through  sleep  by  day, 
through  excessive  eating  of  such  food  as  produces  fat,  and  through 
excessive  indulgence  in  the  wine  called  Varum,  the  ducts  that 
bear  the  adeps  become  vitiated.28 

Through  (  excessive  )  physical  exercise,  through  violent  mo¬ 
tions  of  the  body,  and  through  violent  wounds  inflicted  on  the 
bones,  as  also  through  excessive  indulgence  in  food  that  produces 
wind,  the  bone-bearing  ducts  become  vitiated.24* 

Through  pressure,  through  excessive  indulgence  in  food  that 
stops  the  secretions,  through  violent  wounds,  through  indulgence  in 
food  made  up  of  hostile  ingredients,  those  ducts  that  bear  the 
marrow  become  vitiated.25t 


*  The  vicious  Bengal  texts  read  ‘asthnam  ati  cha  bhakshanat’.  This  is 
ridiculous.  Gangadhara’s  reading,  ‘vighattanat’  is  unquestionably  correct. 

‘Samkshobha’  implies  violent  agitation  or  motion. 

'Vighattana'  implies' the  samething  nearly. 

Bone-bearingi  ducts  mean,  as  has  been  explained  before,  those  ducts  which 
bear  the  substance  that  develops  into  bones. — T. 

t  ‘  U  tpeshana’,  'Abhighata’,and  'Prapidana'  imply  different  kinds  of  pressure 
or  violence.  Food  made  up  of  hostile  ingredients,  such  as  milk  and  fish. — T. 


^PT^mfn^Tfn^cT^T^f%?rt  ^cwpsrifqfa- 
qi^q»qf%m  qq^fagHTC^cr:  qrfcrfqcr  wr: 
OT^hn:,  *f  ^ 

^m:  srarercri  *m:?  cf^wTcTOTS*FfHr- 

cT^TT  1%Wq#tT^T  TRT 

^Tf^cT^^,ff?:5fT^f^^mi7^Tf3[[clTgT^T^;ef¥rTr?rT: 
^rjfHffa^^  wrefter  ^qf%c^qml%crr- 
n^TsjTRfTt^c^r  ^f^g^^«*^scr«3Rr:,  qq  ^ 
fn?ipi  *rewTCTq  steuwcr^q- 

*rfa  qftsrtssr  ^w^rts^  sre^ar  fqsj^- 
^r^fT  fsr^T^cT^^^T^TT: 
Wif^m  cp^aTsftqT^raT  **qfx 

^T^rT  ^11*?  cTR^cTH  ^TWqiTfsjcRT«J?  qrTO3*j 
R  3TT%q  cp^T39pRfq  Wmfqqq^TP^R- 
^rrats^^rf^er:,  Mirror  ^  iifT  ^cq4f»rwf rr?j^R 
wsi  f^nffcRTii,  q^  *r^q  w4vRm,v%- 
^fr  f^^tm  x^qwfNTOsfq  ww. ;  ^fq  q 

?lcg^TflIc{^^^f%cTT^T:  q^T#^  ^TfT^R  Wn^TT- 
fsjcn^m^^f^cTPIT:  q^TW^twT^Tf^rf:  ViH^3 
STqctWfH  ^Tfjqfq  #1kR  ;  ?N  * 

qi^TRq  qnqnqf%:  ^feqf  wre^toT  ; 
iwjfjT  tocwt^t:  *ftaraf*mqT:  ^  fqtq- 
f^igiTT  qfTOTf^iir  qrf^r^TmTT^WT^t  qfiS^T- 
fisrafterarci  ^qsra  **  trerafs^i%  *re*t 
qqfacRjfq  I 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


Translated  into  English. 

PUBLISHED  BY 

A  YIN  ASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita  (in  original) 
Commentaries  ;  Bengali  and  Hindi  Translator  of  Charak 
Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita;  Editor  of  Chikitsa- 
Sammilani  (Medical  Journal  in  Bengali) ;  Prac¬ 
titioner  of  the  Hindu  System  of 
Medicine,  &c.,  &c.,  &c. 

CALCUTTA: 

Printed  by  YV.  C.  Samanta. 

“Deva  Press”,  27,  College  Street, 
and 

Published  at 

200,  Cornwallis’  Street. 


(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved. ) 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS. 


PART  XVII. 


The  contents  of  Lesson  V.  are, — 

The  human  body  is  a  conglomeration  of.  ducts  (aphorisms 
1(04): 

The  roots  -of  (he  three  and  ten  kinds  of  ducts  (aphorisms 

The  indications  of  their  vitiation  (the  concluding  portions  of  the 
same  aphorisms);  ' 

1  he  different  names  of  the  ducts  (aphorisms  13)  ;  / 

The  circumstances  attendant  on  their  provocation  (aphorisms 


The  causes  of  the. vitiation  of  each  class  of  ducts  (aphorisms 
16  to  32)  ; 

.  The  medicines  that  should  be  prescribed  for  each  class  of 
ducts  when  vitiated  (aphorisms  33  to  35). 

Then  comes  Lesson  VI.  Its  contents  are, — 

The  conception ^of  groups  of  diseases  according  to  difference  of 

The  absence  of  difference  between  diseases  and  faults,  and  the 
synonymous. character  of  the  two  terms  (aphorisms  4  and  5)  ; 

Enumeration  of  faults  and  of  diseases  (aphorisms  6  to  o'); 

.  Excitement  of  each  one  of  the  faults  (aphorisms  10  to  13); 

Considerations  about  digestion,  kc.  (aphorisms  14  to  18); 

TIiq  courses  of  treatment  (aphorisms  iq  to  29). 

Then  comes  Lesson  VII.  Its  contents  arc, — 

The  aspects  presented  by  a  diseased  person  ;  grave  diseases 
may  not  seem  grave;  so  light  diseases  mav  not  seem  light. 
Only  skilled  physicians  are  competent  to  judge  of  the  gravity 
or  lightness  of  diseases  from  merely  the  aspects  presented  by 
patients. 

Then  comes  an  enumeration  of  the  worms  that  are  generated  in 
the  human  body.  They  are  of  4  kinds;  1.  Those  born  of 
faeces,  2.  those  born  of  phlegm,  3.  those  born  of  blood, and  4. 
those  born  of  impurities. 

The  several  habitats  of  these  respective  classes  of  worms,  their 
names,  colour,  form,  the  causes  of  their  generation,  and  the 
methods  of  treatment,  &c  ,  are  then. laid  down. 


CM  A  RA  KA  SA  MU  IT  A. 


509 


Through  sexual  congress  at  improper  seasons,  through 
excessive  abstention,  through  excessive  indulgence  in  such  con¬ 
gress,  as  also  through  cuts  inflicted  with  weapons,  through  use  of 
alkaline  ashes,  and  through  burns  caused  by  fires,  those  ducts  that 
bpar  the  vital  seed  become  vitiated.26 

From  (excessive)  discharges  of  urine,  from  excessive  drafts 
of  water,  from  excessive  indulgence  in  sexual  congress,  from 
suppression  of  urine,  the  urine-bearing  ducts  become  vitiated. 
Those  very  ducts  of  persons  also  that  are  weak,  or  that  are  ex¬ 
ceedingly  lean,  become  vitiated.27* 

From  suppression  (of  stools),  from  excessive  eating,  from 
eating  before  the  food  last  taken  has  been  digested,  those  ducts 
that  bear  stools  become  vitiated;  Those  very  ducts  of  persons 
also  that  are  of  weak  digestive  fire,  or  that  are  exceedingly  lean, 
become  vitiated.28 

From  (undue)  physical  exercise,  from  excessive  agitation  of 
mind,  from  irregular  exposure  to  cold  and  heat,  the  ducts  that 
bear  sweat  become  vitiated.  Through  wrath,  grief,  and  fear  also 
the  same  result  occurs.2St 

Such  food,  and  such  practices,  as  correspond  with  the  qualities 
of  the  faults,  and  as  are  hostile  to  the  ingredients  ( dhdtus )  of 
the  body,  are  vitiators  of  the  ducts.30f 


*  ‘  From  suppression  of  urine’,  i.  e.,  delay  in  answering  calls  of  nature. — T. 

t  For  ‘  Sankshobhat  ’  some  texts  read  ‘Santapat’.  Both  imply  the  same 
thing,  viz excessive  mental  agitation. — T. 

J  ‘  Faults'  here  should  be  taken  as  implying  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm.  Such 
food  and  such  practices  as  correspond  with  the  qualities  of  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm,  must,  of  course,  increase  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  ;  vide  aphorism  43,  in 
page  4,  of  Lesson  I  of  Sutrasthanam.  It  is  said  there  that  “of  all  things,  at  all 
times,  similarity  is  the  cause  of  increase  ;  and  dissimilarity  is  the  cause  of 
decrease.”  Food  and  practices,  therefore,  whose  effects  are  similar  to  those 
of  wind,  bile  and  phlegm,  must  necessarily  aggravate  wind,  bile,  and  .  phlegm. 
Such  aggravation  cannot  but  lead  to  a  vitiation  of  the  ducts.  After  the  same 
manner,  food  and  practices  whose  effects  are  hostile  to  the  ingredients 
(dhatus)  of  the  body,  such  as  blood,  flesh,  &c.,  must  lead  to  a  vitiation  of  the 
ducts  or  the  physical  organisation.  For  ‘  dhatuvigunah,’  some  texts  read  1  Ritu- 
vigunah,’  meaning  food  and  practices  not  corresponding  with  '  the  seasons  ’. — T. 


5io 


CH  A  RA  KA-SAMHJTA. 


Excessive  generation  (or  flow,  of  food-juice,  blood,  and  other 
ingredients  of  the  body),  or  stoppage  or  attenuation  (of  these), 
or  cystic  tumours,  or  diviations  (of  the  elements  from  their  own 
into  other  channels),  are  regarded  as  indications  of  the  vitiation  of 
the  ducts.81 

The  ducts  should  be  of  the  colour  of  the  elements  they  respec¬ 
tively  bear,  round,  gross  or  subtle,  long,  and  of  the  form  of  the 
stem  of  a  creeping  plant.52* 

Of  ducts  that  bear  the  life-breaths,  and  water,  and  food,  when 
they  have  become  vitiated,  the  treatment  that  should  be  followed 
should  consist  (respectively)  of  these,  viz,  the  adoption  of  oper¬ 
ations  that  improve  the  breath,  of  operations  that  allay  thirst, 
and  of  operations  that  cure  the  disorders  of  indigestion.!8t 

The  medicines  that  have  been  indicated  in  the  Lesson  on 
diverse  kinds  of  food  and  drink  for  the  vitiation  of  the  several 
elements  of  the  body  beginning  with  Rasa,  should  be  used  for 
allaying  the  vitiation  of  the  ducts  that  respectively  bear  these 
elements  beginning  with  Rasa.M% 

Of  the  ducts  that  bear  urine  and  stools  and  sweat,  (when  these 
become  vitiated,)  the  treatment  should  (respectively)  be  as  follows  ; 
viz,  that  which  is  prescribed  for  diarrhoea  and  that  which  is 
prescribed  for  fevers.35 

( Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary. } 

The  roots  of  the  three  and  four  (kinds  of)  ducts,  the  general 
indications  of  their  vitiation,  the  different  names  by  which  the 


*  Blood-bearing  ducts  should  be  of  the  colour  of  blood  ;  See.  They  should 
all  be  round.  Some  of  them  may  be  gross  or  thick,  while  others  subtle  or  thin. 
Every  one  of  them  should  be  long.  Their  form  should,  therefore,  be  like  that 
of  the  stem  of  a  creeper. — T. 

t  1  Amaprodoshini,’  as  explained  in  a  previous  lesson  of  this  Division, 
implies  the  treatment  that  is  prescribed  in  the  case  of  the  ‘  amaijaya  ’  being 
disordered,  i.e.,  in  all  irregularities  brought  about  by  indigestion. — T. 

$  The  Lesson  on  diverse  kinds  of  food  and  drink  is  numbered  XXVIII  of 
the  Sutrasthanam  ;  vide  page  391  ante.  The  correct  reading  is  'RasadigrotasanV 
in  the  second  line. 


CH  A  R  A  KA -SA  MH I TA . 


5 


ducts  are  known,  the  circumstances  attendant  on  their  mutual’ 
provocation,  the  causes  of  the  vitiation  ot  each  class  of  ducts 
one  after  another,  the  medicines  that  should  be  prescribed  for 
each  class  (when  vitiated)  have  been  laid  down  in  this  Lesson  on 
the  Vimanam  of  the  ducts,  as  also  the  important  truth  at  the 
outset  {viz.,  that  the  body  is  only  a  conglomeration  of  ducts.1-3 

He  to  whom  the  body  is  known  in  all  its  aspects,  as  also  all 
the  diseases  that  pertain, to  it,  is  never  stupefied  in  the  applica¬ 
tion  of  remedies.** 

Thus  ends  the  Fifth  Lesson,  called'  the  Vimanam.  of  ducts,  in. 
the  treatise  of  Agnivefa  as  revised  by  Charaka.. 


LESSON  VI. 

We  shall,  after  this,  expound  the  Vimanam  about  groups  of 
diseases. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri-.’t 

There  are  two  groups  of  diseases,  judged  by  difference  of 

origin  or  nature,  viz.,  Curable  and  Incurable. 

There  are  two  groups  of  diseases,  judged  by  difference  of 

strength,  viz.,  Mild  and  Violent. 

There  are  two  groups  of  diseases,  judged  by  difference  of 

substratum  viz.,  those  that  have  the  mind  for  their  substratum,, 
and  those  that  have  the  body  for  their  substratum- 

*  The  roots  of  the  three  and  ten  kinds  of  ducts  occur  in  aphorisms  5  to  12- 
The  indications  of  their  vitiation  occur  in  the  concluding  portions  of  the  same 
aphorisms.  The  different  names  of  the  ducts  occur  in  aphorism.  13,  The  cir¬ 
cumstances  attendant  on  their  provocation  occur  in  aphorisms  14  and  15. 
The  causes  of  the  vitiation  of  each  class  of  ducts  occur  in  aphorisms  16  to  31.. 
The  medicines  that  should  be  prescribed  for  each  class  of  ducts  when  vitiated, 
occur  in  aphorisms  33  to  35.  The  truth  at  the  outset,  about  a  person  being  a 
conglomeration  of  ducts,  occurs  in  aphorisms  1  to  4. — T. 

1"  ‘  Anika’  literally  means  many  or  multitudinous.  Hence,  ‘  Roganika’ 

implies  multitudes  of  diseases.  In  this  lesson  something  like  a  classification 
is  attempted  of  diseases- — T. 


512 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  II  IT  A. 


There  are  two  groups  of  diseases,  judged  by  difference  of  their 
causes,  viz.,  those  due  to  disorders  of  the  constituent  elements, 
and  those  due  to  accidental  causes. 

There  are  two  groups  of  diseases,  judged  by  difference  of  their 
seats,  viz.,  those  that  arise  from  the  5.ma9aya,  and  those  that 
arise  from  the  Pakkagaya.®* 

Thus,  although  disease  in  consequence  of  difference  of  origin 
or  nature,  of  strength,  of  substratum,  of  cause,  and  of  seat,  is  of 
two  kinds  still,  if  distributed  according  to  other  causes  of  differ¬ 
ence  or  unified,  it  becomes  either  manifold  or  only  one. 

As  regards  unification,  all  the  groups  of  diseases  may  be 
included  under  one  head  in  consequence  of  all  having  the  com¬ 
mon  charcteristic  of  being  diseases. 

As  regards  disease  being  manifold,  there  are  ten  groups  of 
diseases,  according  to  difference  of  origin  and  the  rest. 

This  multiplicity  of  diseases  is  either  countable  or  countless. 
They  are  countable,  as  laid  down  in  the  Lesson  called  Ashtodariya 
(  XIX  of  Sutrasthanam,  ante  p.  21 1.) 

They  are  countless,  as  laid  down  in  the  Lesson  called  Maha- 
roga  (  XX  of  Sutrasthanam,  p.  220.)  in  consequence  of  the  count¬ 
lessness  of  the  degrees  (  or  kinds  )  of  pain,  complexion,  cause, 
&c.8f 


*  Compare  these  classifications  with  what  occurs  at  the  outset  of  Lesson 
XX  of  Sutrasthanam,  called  Moharoga.  ‘  Dhatuvaishamya  ’  is  inequality 
of  dhatus  or  constituent  elements  of  the  body,  i.  e„  their  disorders,  such  as 
excess  of  blood  over  the  others.  The  stomach  is  divided  into  two  parts,  the 
Ama^aya,  and  the  Pakkacjaya.  The  first  consists  of  those  organs  where  the 
food  taken  remains  in  an  undigested  state.  The  second  consists  of  those  organs 
where  food  is  developed  into  the  constituent  elements  of  the  body,  such  as  blood 
flesh,  adeps,  marrow,  &c. — T. 

t  The  correct  reading  is  ‘  Prabhava . bhedat  dwaidham  sat  &e.’ 

In  aphorism  2,  certain  considerations  are  refered  to  in  consequence  of  which 
diseases  may  be  distributed  under  two  heads.  What  is  stated  in  aphorism  3 
is  that  if  other  causes  of  difference  be  considered,  diseases  may  be  divided 
into  more  classes  than  two.  They  may  even  be  unified  and  shown  under  one 
class.  Their  oneness  may  be  supported  by  the  consideration  of  their  common 


CHA RA  KA-SA M H / TA. 


5r3 

In  distributing  diseases  under  a  few  principal  heads,  and 
distributing  them,  again,  according  to  other  differences,  no  contra¬ 
diction  is  involved. 

Hence,  neither  of  the  several  couples  of  alternate  propositions 
(  stated  above  )  is  faulty. 

Then  also,  although  there  is  no  absence  of  contradiction,  yet 
either  of  every  couple  of  propositions  is  faultless. 

The  person  who  distributes  (  or  differentiates  )  a  number  of 
individual  objects,  can  distribute  those  objects  in  a  way  different 
from  that  in  which  he  may  distribute  them  first. 

By  basing  his  distribution  upon  causes  of  difference  that  are 
different  from  the  one  adopted  at  first,  the  distributor  succeeds  in 
multiplying  the  manner  of  distribution. 

He  does  not  thereby  contradict  the  distributions  made  before.4* 


character  as  disease,  that  is,  their  capacity  of  producing  pain.  (  The  ety¬ 
mology  of  word  Roga — disease — is  something  that  produces  pain,  from  ruj  to 
pain).  If  treated  as  many,  their  multiplicity,  again,  may  be  countable  or 
countless,  for  the  reasons  shown. — T. 

*  The  language  of  the  original  has  here  been  rendered  as  nearly  as  possible. 
Dealing  as  this  aphorism  does  in  abstract  propositions,  it  may  be  slightly  unin¬ 
telligible  to  some  classes  of  readers.  What  the  Rishi  says  here  is  this  :  it  has 
been  observed  in  aphorism  3  that  diseases  are  either  one  or  many  ;  if  many, 
they  may  be  countable  or  countless. 

These  propositions  involve  apparent  contradictions,  for  if  one,  how  can 
they  be  many  ?  Then,  again,  if  countable,  how  can  they  be  countless  ? 

In  aphorism  4  the  Rishi  explains  that  these  contradictions  are  such  that  either 
of  the  propositions  is  correct.  In  classifying  a  number  of  individual  objects, 
various  principles  of  classification  may  be  adopted,  without  the  classification 
being  landed  on  any  real  contradiction.  Thus,  if  diseases  are  regarded  as  all 
presenting  the  common  aspect  of  causing  pain,  they  may  all  be  spoken  of  under 
one  head,  viz.,  disease  or  a  pain -producing  entity  or  condition.  If,  disregarding 
this  common  aspect  connected  with  the  production  of  pain,  diseases  be  con¬ 
sidered  from  other  standpoints  of  view,  they  may  be  classed  differently  without 
the  first  classification  being  at  all  regarded  as  erroneous.  Take  the  case  of  human 
beings  ;  classified  according  to  complexion,  there  are  two  classes  viz.,  white  and 
not  white  ;  classified  according  to  habitat,  they  are  Asiatics,  Europeans,  Ame¬ 
ricans,  &c.  Regarded  from  the  point  of  view  presented  by  religion,  they  are 
Hindus,  Mussulmans,  Christians,  Bauddhas,  &c.  None  of  these  classifications 
would  be  at  all  incorrect. — T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MU  IT  A. 


5*4 

There  are  things  that  differ  in  meaning  though  named  by  the 
same  words. 

There  are  also  things  that  do  not  differ  in  meaning  though 
named  by  different  words. 

The  same  word  Roga  (  disease  )  is  applied  to  faults  (  wind, 
bile,  and  phlegm  )  as  also  to  disorders  affecting  the  body. 

Again,  the  faults  receive  these  different  appellations,  viz.,  Roga, 
Atanka,  Yakshma,  Doshaprakriti,  and  Vikara.  Diseases  are  also 
called  by  those  very  designations,  viz.,  Roga,  Atanka,  Yakshma , 
Doshaprakriti,  and  Vikara . 

Thus,  the  wmrd  Roga  applies  equally  to  the  faults  and  diseases. 
To  the  last,  however,  it  applies  especially.5* 

It  should  be  stated  that  diseases  are  countless  in  consequence 
of  their  very  large  number. 

The  faults,  however,  are  countable,  in  consequence  of  their 
not  being  many. 

Therefore,  diseases,  for  example’s  sake,  and  the  faults,  without 
anything  touching  them  being  left  out,  are  being  expounded  (  as 
follows  )  agreeably  to  the  requirements  of  propriety .6t 


*  The  etymologies  of  the  words  expressive  of  disease  are  highly  interesing.. 

‘  Roga'  is  from  ‘Ruj’  meaning  ‘to  pain.’  Hence  it  means  anything  that  pains.. 

‘  Atanka  '  is  from  '  taki 1  implying  to  live  in  distress. 

‘Yakshma’  is  from  a  word  that  means  worship.  A  person  that  is  ill  worships, 
the  deities  devoutly.  In  health,  one  may  forget  the  deities,  but  not  so  when 
one  is  lying  on  a  sick-bed.  Various  vows,  &c.,  are  also  made  on  such, 
occasions. 

‘  Doshaprakriti  ’  implies  the  nature  of  ‘  Dosha,’  i.  e.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm. 
That  nature  is  to  be  disordered  or  diseased.  Hence,  disease  may  fitly  be  called 
as  ‘  of  the  nature  of  Dosha.’ 

‘  Vikara  ’  is  modification  or  change  for  the  worse.  Health  is  changed  into, 
disease. — T. 

f  The  correct  reading  is  '  Yathochitam  ’  and  not  ‘  Yathachitram  ’  as  some 
vicious  Bengal  texts  have.  What  the  Rishi  says  in  the  concluding  portion  of 
aphorism  6  is  this.  Diseases  are  innumerable,  the  faults  are  few.  Some  of  the 
diseases,  therefore,  can  be  explained,  for  the  sake  of  example.  Faults,  however,, 
may  be  treated  of  exhaustively.  ‘  Udaharanartham  ’  applies  to  '  Vikarah,’ 
while  '  Anavafeshena  ’  applies  to  '  doshah.’— T. 


C11ARAKA-SA  MHITA 


5i5 


Rajas  (  Passion  )  and  Tamas  (  Darkness  )  are  the  faults  of  the 
mind. 

Their  modifications  are  Lust,  Wrath,  Cupidity,  Heedlessness. 

Envy,  Pride,  Arrogance,  Grief,  Anxiety,  Fear,  Joy,  &c.7 

Wind,  Bile,  and  Phlegm  are,  verily,  the  faults  of  the  body. 

Their  modifications  are  Fever,  Diarrhoea,  Rheumatism,  Con¬ 
sumption,  Asthma,  Diabetes,  Leprosy,  &c.8* 

Thus,  the  Faults  are  enumerated  in  full,  while,  of  Diseases, 
only  a  portion  is  enumerated.9 

Amongst  them,  verily,  of  these  two  kinds  of  Faults  (  viz., 
mental  and  bodily  ),  there  are  three  kinds  of  exciting  causes,  viz,, 
union  with  disagreeing  objects  of  sense,  faults  of  understanding, 
and  Time. 

When  excited,  the  faults,  in  consequence  of  difference  of 
exciting  causes  as  also  of  difference  of  the  elements  vitiated, 
generate  innumerable  diseases. 

Verily,  those  diseases,  viz .,  Lust  and  the  others,  and  Fever  and 
the  rest,  following  one  another,  sometimes  exist  together. 

As  regards  Rajas  and  Tamas,  their  co-existence  is  perpetual, 
since  there  can  be  no  Ta?nas  without  Rajas.10 + 


*  ‘  Cosha  ’  is  any  disease  that  dries  up  the  body  or  bodily  elements.  It 

means  Consumption  and  similar  other  diseases  that  waste  or  emaciate  the 

‘  Meha  ’  has  many  varieties.  It  is  a  word  applied  to  all  urinary  affections 
as  also  affections  of  the  genital  organs.  Of  Leprosy,  again,  there  are  many 
varieties. — T. 

t  Faults  are  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  mental  and  bodily.  Their  excitement  leads 
to  disease.  The  exciting  caused  are  three ;  viz.,  union  of  the  mind  or  body 
with  such  objects  of  sense  as  do  not  agree  with  the  mind  or  the  body.  ( Vide 
Lesson  XI,  ante,  Sutrasthanam) 

By  '  Parinama’  is  meant  Time. 

The  correct  reading  is  ‘  Dushya^ifeshat'  and  not  ‘  drayavifeshat’. 

The  faults  being  excited  generate  innumerable  diseases  in  consequence  of 
differences  of  exciting  causes  and  differences  of  the  1  dushyas  ’  or  elements  of 
the  body,  such  as  juice,  blood,  flesh,  &c.,  that  are  excited.  Though  numbered 
three,  the  exciting  causes  are  really  infinite. 


5‘6 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


Generally,  of  the  faults  dwelling  in  the  body,  in  consequence 
of  their  belonging  to  the  same  place,  there  happens  a  commingling 
of  all  or  a  mingling  of  any  two. 

The  faults,  again,  are  like  those  that  vitiate  them,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  both  being  possessed  of  qualities  that  are  similar.11* 

In  this  connection  (shall  be  explained)  the  difference  between 
that  which  is  principal  and  that  which  is  accessory  (or  an  adjunct). 

That  is  called  the  principal  which  exists  independently,  whose 
indications  are  all  manifest,  and  whose  origin  and  alleviation 
conform  to  what  has  been  said. 


Lust,  &c,  representing  the  modifications  of  the  two  mental  faults,  and  Fever, 
&c.,  representing  the  modifications  of  the  bodily  faults,  follow  one  another  and 
sometimes  co-exist.  Modifications  of  mental  faults  may  co-exist  as  regards 
one  another,  or  they  may  co-exist  with  modifications  of  bodily  faults.  The 
same  is  the  case  with  regard  to  the  co-existence  of  the  modifications  of  bodily 
faults. 

Such  co-existence  may  be  either  accidental,  in  the  sense  of  being  temporary, 
or  perpetual,  in  the  sense  of  being  necessary.  The  two  mental  faults,  viz.,  Rajas 
and  Tamas  cannot  but  co-exist.  One  of  them  can  not  exist  independently 
of  the  other.  Vide  Mahabharata,  Qanti  Parva,  the  Sections  on  Rajas  and 
Tamas. — T. 

*  The  word  .  ‘  faults’,  as  explained  in  many  places  ante,  means  wind, 
bile,  and  phlegm.  These  dwell  in  the  body.  In  that  respect  they  are  similar. 
In  consequence  of  their  similarity  or  sameness  of  abode,  they  are  capable  of 
all  commingling  together,  or  any  two  of  them  of  coming  in  contact  with  each 
other.  ‘  Samsarga  1  is  the  contact  of  two  ;  ‘  Sannipata 1  is  a  commingling  of 
all  three.  What  the  Rishi  wishes  to  lay  down  is  that  things  that  are  entirely 
different  from  one  another  cannot  mingle.  In  order  te  be  able  to  mingle, 
there  must  be  similarity  or  sameness  of  nature  ;  or,  as  regards  some  particular 
phase.  However  different  they  are  in  other  respects,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm 
agree  or  are  similar  in  this  respect,  viz.,  that  they  have  the  same  abode.  In 
consequence  of  this  agreement  or  similarity,  they  are  seen  to  exist  in  a  state  of 
union  :  sometimes  wind  with  bile,  or  wind  with  phlegm,  or  bile  with  phlegm, 
or  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  all  together.  Wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  have  been 
called  ‘  doshas  ’  or  '  faults  ’  because  of  their  readiness  or  aptitude  for  being 
vitiated. 

‘  Dushans  ’  are  those  that  have  the  power  to  vitiate.  They  are  the  different 
tastes,  in  fact,  all  exterior  objects  having  anything  to  do  with  the  body. 


CHA  BA  KA-SAM  HIT  A. 


5i7 


That  which  is  endued  with  characteristics  of  an  opposite  kind, 
is  called  accessory  or  adjunct.12* 

Then,  if  the  faults  (wind,  bile,  and  phlegm)  exist  together 
with  the  characteristics  of  principal  and  accessory,  the  co-existence 
of  all  three  is  called  Sannipata,  while  that  of  any  two  is  called 
Samsarga. 

The  distinctions  are  manifold  that  are  due  to  the  kinds  of  co¬ 
existence  as  principal  and  accessory. 

In  consequence  of  these  distinctions  of  kind  in  faults  and 
diseases,  is  the  large  group  (of  diseases^differentiated  by  physicians 
by  means  of  names. 18f 


What  the  Rishi  says  in  the  second  part  of  the  aphorism  is  that  the  faults 
are  vitiated  in  consequence  of  their  possessing  qualities  similar  to  those  that 
vitiate  them.  In  other  words,  in  consequence  of  the  ‘  doshas  ’  and  the  '  dushans  ’ 
being  similarjn  respect  of  qualities,  the  former  are  vitiated  by  the  latter. 

By  vitiation  should  be  understood  the  increase  or  diminution  of  some  attri¬ 
bute  already  present  in  the  object  already  vitiated.  Compare  aphorism  43,  p.  4, 
Lesson  I,  Sutrasthanam,  ante. — T. 

*.  The  two  words  explained  in  this  aphorism  are  '  Anubandhya  ’  and 
1  Anubandha’.  The  first  I  render  as  '  principal’,  the  second,  as  ‘  accessory  ’ 
or  ‘  adjunct.’  In  most  ailments  what  is  seen  is  that  some  diseases  exist  in 
a  predominating  state  and  some  in  a  subsidiary  form.  Those  that  may  be 
called  principal  have  the  characteristics  noted  above ;  those,  on  the  other  hand, 
that  exist  only  as  accessories  or  adjuncts  have  characteristics  of  an  opposite 
kind. 

‘  Yathoktasamutthanaprafania  ’  means,  as  explained  by  the  commen¬ 
tators,  ‘  of  origin  and  alleviation  conforming  to  what  has  been  said  ;  ’  that  is, 
whose  origin  and  alleviation  correspond  with  what  has  been  said  in  this  treatise 
under  those  very  heads. — T. 

+  In  the  first  part  of  the  aphorism  the  Rishi  explains  the  meanings  of 
the  words  ‘  Sannipata  ’  and  ‘Samsarga’.  Co-existence  must  be  in  the  form 
of  principal  and  accessory.  All  the  three,  or  even  any  two,  cannot  exist 
together,  each  as  a  principal.  When  the  three  faults  exist  together,  such 
co-existence  is  ‘  Sannipata.’  When  any  two  of  them  exist  together,  that  co¬ 
existence  or  union,  of  course  as  principal  and  accesory,  is  ‘  Samsarga’. 

The  forms  in  which  they  may  exist  as  principal  and  accessory,  it  is  said  in 
the  second  part  of  the  aphorism,  are  many. 

66 


5i8 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA 


In  the  fires  dwelling  in  the  physical  system,  a  fourfold  dis¬ 
tinction  may  be  made  agreeably  to  difference  of  strength.  It  is 
as  follows : 

Keen,  mild,  even,  and  uneven. 

Amongst  these  that  fire  is  said  to  be  keen  which  can  bear  all 
kinds  of  dietary  riotousness. 

That  fire  which  is  endued  with  characteristic  of  an  opposite 
kind  is  called  mild. 

That  fire  is  said  to  be  even  which  becomes  vitiated  by  dietary 
riotousness,  but  which  exists  without  being  deranged  when  no 
dietary  riotousness  is  indulged  in. 

That  fire  which  possesses  characteristics  that  are  the  reverse 
of  the  above,  is  called  uneven. 

These  are  the  four  different  kinds  of  fire  of  four  different 
kinds  of  persons.14* 

Amongst  these,  of  those  persons  that  are  of  equable  wind, 
bile,  and  phlegm,  and  that  are  in  their  normal  state,  the  (digestive) 
fires  are  even.15t 

The  conclusion,  therefore,  is  inevitable  that  individual  diseases  must  be 
many.  Physicians,  in  naming  many  diseases,  have  been  guided  by  the 
consideration  explained!  in  the  second!  part  of  the  aphorism. — T. 

*  The  digestive  fire  is  shown  in  this  aphorism  to  be  of  four  kinds  :  Keen 
is  that  which  can  digest  every  food,  good  and  bad,  or  food  however  improper 
in  itself  or  improperly  taken.  Mild  is  that  which  cannot  digest  all  kinds  of 
food  ;  indeed,  the  fire  that  digests  only  light  food  is  called  mild, 

I  have  rendered  ‘  Sama  ’  even,  and  ‘  Visama’  uneven.  The  sense  is  that 
of  equable  and  unequable.  The  words  may  also  mean  normal  and  abnormal. 

That  fire  is  ‘  Sama  ’  which  becomes  deranged  in  consequence  of  riotous 
food  and  acquires  its  normal  condition  in  consequence  of  good  food  taken  regu¬ 
larly. 

That  fire  is  ‘  Visama  ’  which  sometimes  is  not  deranged  by  riotous  living 
and  at  other  times  is  deranged  thereby.  Even  proper  food  taken  properly  may 
at  times  derange  it.  Indeed,  a  digestive  fire  that  is  irregular  is  so  called.— T. 

■f  Cbakrapani  notes  that  the  use  of  ‘  prakritisthanam  ’  after  ‘  samavata- 
pitta^eshmanam  ’  is  not  an  instance  of  tautology.  What  the  Rishi  intends 
to  say  is  that  the  digestive  fire  of  men  in  whom  the  three  are  in  a  harmonious 
state  and  who  are  not  old,  is  said  to  be  even. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


5i9 


Of  persons  in  whose  constitutions  the  wind  predominates, 
when  the  wind  overwhelms  the  seat  of  fire,  the  fires  become 
uneven.  Some  say  that  there  are  no  creatures  that  are  of  equable 
wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  because  of  human  beings  taking  food  of 
unequal  virtues.  Hence,  (they  say),  some  have  constitutions 
characterised  by  predominance  of  wind  :  some  have  constitutions 
with  the  bile  predominating  in  it ;  and  some  have  constitutions 
with  the  phlegm  predominating  in  it. 

This,  however,  is  not  reasonable,  for  why  would  physicians 
regard  a  person  of  equable  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  as  healthy  ? 
The  normal  condition  (of  the  body)  is  called  Health, 

The  application  of  medicine  has.  health  for  its  purpose. 

That  application  has  exertion  for  its  form. 

Through  such  exertion  one  becomes  of  equable  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm. 

Without  doubt,  there  cannot  be  persons  with  constitutions  in 
which  the  wind  predominates,  or  in  which  the  bile  predominates, 
or  in  which  the  phlegm  predominates. 

What  really  happens  is  that  in  consequence  of  the  increase 
of  any  of  these  (three  faults),,  individuals  come  to  be  called  as 
having  constitutions  with  that  particular  fault  predominating  in 
them.16* 


It  is  for  excluding:  the  old  that  ‘  prakritisthanam  ’  is  used.  This  explanation 
is  far-fetched.  The  passage  is  certainly  pleonastic. — T, 

*  This  aphorism  contains  an  important  explanation.  The  Rishi  notices 
that  what  is  called  Health  or  Ireedom  from  disease  is  really  the  normal  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  body.  When  that  condition  becomes  deranged,  the  state  is  called 
disease.  That  which  is  the  normal  condition  of  the  body  or  Health  consists 
in  a  harmony  or  equability  of  the  three  faults,  viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm.  If 
this  harmony  were  not  the  nature  or  the  normal  condition  of  the  body,  physicians 
when  called  to  treat  disease,  would  never  try  to  restore  the  body  to  that  con¬ 
dition.  It  is  when  that  harmony  is  destroyed  that  one  seeks  the  aid  of  medicine. 
The  application  of  medicine  involves  exertion.  It  has  to  be  sought  out ;  its 
virtues  are  to  be  examined ;  its  effects  on  the  human  constitution  are  to  be 
observed  ;  it  may  have  to  be  mixed  with  other  objects  possessing  other  virtues. 
All  this  labour  has  one  object  in  view,  viz.,  the  restoration  of  the  state  of  har¬ 
mony  (of  the  faults)  that  has  been  lost. 


52(3 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


If  the  faults  are  vitiated,  such  vitiation  cannot  in  reason  be 
regarded  as  one’s  normal  condition.  Hence,  faults,  when  they 
predominate,  can  never  be  said  to  constitute  one’s  nature  or  normal 
condition. 

There  are  men  that  have  the  wind,  or  the  bile,  or  the  phlegm 
predominating  in  them.  They  should  be  taken  as  out  of  their 
normal  condition.17* 

For  the  four  kinds  of  persons  already  indicated,  {vis.,  those  with 
wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  that  are  harmonious  or  equal,  and  those 
with  any  of  these  predominating  over  the  other  two)  four  different 
courses  of  living  are  prescribed  as  beneficial. 

Amongst  these,  for  them  that  have  constitutions  characterised 
by  harmony  or  equability  of  ingredients,  everything  that  conduces 
to  maintain  that  harmony  is  beneficial.t 


From  these  considerations  it  would  seem  that  there  cannot  really  be  a  person 
in  whose  constitution  wind,  or  bile,  or  phlegm  naturally  predominates.  What, 
therefore,  is  meant  by  a  person  having  a  constitution  with  this  or  that  fault 
predominating  in  it,  is  that  the  original  or  normal  harmony  is  lost,  by  any  one 
of  the  three  increasing  or  exeeeding  its  proper  proportion.  Such  increase  or 
predominance  of  one  of  the  faults  should,  therefore,  be  taken  not  as  nature  but 
as  a  derangement  or  disease. — T. 

*  That  which  is  said  in  the  previous  aphorism  is  further  developed  here. 
Any  one  of  the  three  faults  is  seen  to  increase  or  predominate  in  this  or  that 
person.  If  this  increase  be,  as  it  should  be,  regarded  as  vitiation  from  its 
normal  condition,  the  person  distinguished  by  it  cannot  be  said  to  be  in  his 
normal  condition.  It  is  true  there  are  men  in  whom  one  of  the  three  faults 
may  be  seen  to  predominate.  Such  men,  however,  should  be  taken  as  out  of 
their  normal  condition. — T. 

f  The  true  reading  is  ‘  Anupranidh&na  ’  which  I  render  ‘  course  of  living.’ 
It  includes  the  use  of  medicines,  particularly  Rasayanas. 

The  vicious  Bengal  texts  have  '  Annapranidhana’,  which  is  too  narrow. 

The  word  1  Dhatu  ’  in  '  Samasarvadhatunam  ’  implies  juice,  blood,  fat, 
marrow,  &c.,  Here  it  should  be  taken  as  including  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm. 
Etymologically,  that  which  sustains  the  body  is  ‘  dhatu.’ 

For  men  whose  '  dhatus  ’  are  in  a  state  of  harmony,  the  course  of  living 
should  be  such  as  not  to  destroy  that  harmony.  Their  food  and  practices  should 
be  regulated  by  this  one  consideration,  viz.,  preservation  of  harmony. — T. 


CH  A  RA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


52i 


As  regards  those  three  that  have  any  one  of  the  faults  in  an 
increased  or  predominating  state,  the  particular  fault  that  has  in¬ 
creased  should  be  observed,  and  such  food  and  practices  as  are 
hostile  to  (or  alleviative  of)  the  increased  fault  should  be  held 
beneficial  till  the  digrstive  fire  is  restored  to  a  state  of  evenness. 

When  the  digestive  fire  has  been  (thus)  restored  to  a  state  of 
evenness,  the  course  of  living  should  be  as  that  laid  down  (above) 
for  those  whose  constitutional  ingredients  are  harmonious. 

After  the  same  manner,  there  are  other  exertions  and  appli¬ 
cations  of  medicine. 

These  we  shall  expound  hereafter.18* 

Three  (of  the  four)  kinds  of  persons  are  diseased. 

They  are  not  so,  according  to  physicians  that  follow  the  treatises 
of  other  schools. 

The  three  (of  which  we  speak)  are  1.  he  that  has  the  wind  pre¬ 
dominating  in  his  constitution,  2.  he  that  has  the  bile  predominating 
in  his  constitution,  and  3.  he  that  has  the  phlegm  predominating 
in  his  constitution.19 

Of  them  these  are  the  especial  indications. 

Of  one  in  whom  the  wind  predominates,  diseases  born  of  the 
wind  acquire  great  strength. 

Of  one  in  whom  the  bile  predominates,  diseases  born  of  the 
bile  acquire  great  strength. 

Of  one  in  whom  the  phlegm  predominates,  diseases  born  of  the 
phlegm  acquire  great  strength.20 


*  When  the  evenness  of  the  digestive  fire  is  destroyed,  a  particular  fault 
may  become  predominant  over  the  other  two.  Such  a  course  of  living  should 
then  be  adopted  as  would  destroy  that  predominance  and  restore  the  digestive 
fire  to  its  state  of  evenness. 

As  soon  as  that  evenness  is  reached,  the  course  of  living  should  be  such  as 
has  been  laid  down  for  those  whose  '  dhatus  ’  are  even  or  harmonious. 

Not  content  with  such  general  instructions,  the  Rishi  says  that  there  are 
other  kinds  of  'cheshta  ’  (exertions  or  practices)  and  applications  of  medicine 
which  he  promises  to  expound  hereafter. — T. 


522 


CM  A  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


Among  these,  of  one  in  whose  constitution  the  wind  prdomf- 
nates,  if  he  indulges  in  any  such  food  or  practice  as  excites  the 
wind,  the  wind  is  quickly  excited,  while  the  other  two  are  not. 

The  wind,  being  excited,  afflicts  the  person’s  body  by  bringing 
about  those  diseases  which  have  already  been  indicated  as  due  to- 
excitement  of  the  wind. 

And  this  it  does  to  the  injury  of  the  person’s  strength,  com¬ 
plexion,  and  happiness  of  life.22 

Of  the  excited  wind  the  means  of  check  consist  of  Sneha  and 
Sweda  agreeably  to  the  ordinances  ( laid  down  ),  and  mild  correctives,, 
and  food  and  drink  characterised  by  oiliness,  warmth,  sweetness,, 
sourness  and  saltiness. 

After  the  same  manner  the  following  practices  should  be 
adopted  or  resorted  to  :  plasters  and  unguents,  bandages  (  for  twin¬ 
ing  the  limbs  or  the  body  round  with  cottons  or  wollens  or  fibrous 
substances  or  cords  ),  pressure  on  the  body,  sprinkling  of  medica¬ 
ted  waters,  immersions  in  water,  gentle  rubbing  of  the  body,  in¬ 
haling  particular  drugs,  intimidation,  excitement  of  wonder,, 
inducing  of  forgetfulness,  the  use,  according  to  the  ordinances,  of 
wines  and  other  stimulating  liquors,  oils  derived  from  diverse 
sources,  the  use  of  drugs  which  excite  the  digestive  fire  or 
digest  all  undigested  humours,  and  the  administration  of  all  such 
purgatives  as  are  destructive  of  the  wind,  and  oils  cooked  a 
hundred  times  or  a  thousand  times,  all  sorts  of  enemata  adminis¬ 
tered  according  to  the  rules  laid  down,  and  the  use  of  everything 
that  conduces  to  ease  or  comfort.23* 


*  By  ‘  Sneha  is  meant  the  administration  of  oils.  Vide  Lesson  XIII,  p. 
138,  of  Sutrasthanam,  ante. 

By  ‘  Sweda  ’  is  meant  not  simply  the  administration  of  diaphoretics.  It 
includes  warm  water  baths, vapour  haths,  and  hot  cataplasms  of  medicinal  plants. 
Vide  Lesson  XIV,  p.  153,  of  Sutrasthanam,  ante. 

By  '  Sam^odhana  ’  is  meant  the  application  of  correctives  for  restoring  a 
man  to  health  who,  though  not  suffering  under  any  particular  disease,  yet  feels 
weak  or  not  cheerful.  The  subject  is  treated  of  in  Lesson  XV,  p.  166  of 
of  Sutrasthanam,  ante  ;  vide  p  p,  177  and  178  in  particular. 


CH  A  RA  KA  -  S  A  M HI  TA 


523 


Of  the  person  in  whose  constitution  the  bile  predominates,  the 
bile  becomes  quickly  excited  in  consequence  of  indulgence  in  such 
articles  and  practices  as  have  been  declared  capable  of  exciting 
the  bile. 

The  two  others,  (  viz.,  wind  and  phlegm  )  will  not  be  excited 
through  such  indulgence.24 

The  bile  of  such  a  person,  (  thus  )  excited,  afflicts  his  body 
with  such  diseases  as  have  (  already  )  been  declared,  to  the  detri¬ 
ment  of  (  his  )  strength,  complexion,  and  happy  life.25 

Its  subjugation  is  brought  about  by  the  following  means. 

The  drinking  of  Ghee. 

The  use  of  Ghee  as  a  Snehana  (  i  e.,  rubbing  it  all  over  the 
body  ).* 

The  administration  of  correctives  that  would  operate  through 
the  lower  duct,  (  i.  e.,  the  administration  of  purgatives  ).+ 

The  use  of  medicines  and  dietary  substances  which  are  sweet, 
bitter,  astringent,  and  cooling. 

Indulgence  of  such  scents  ar  are  mild,  sweet,  fragrant,  cooling 
and  agreeable. 


For'  Upanahana  ’  or  plasters,  &c.,  vide  Lesson  III,  p.  19,  Sutrasthanam, 

'  Udveshtana  ’  implies  bandages  of  various  kinds  or  a  twining  round  the 
limbs  of  cords,  &c. 

‘  Parisheka  ’  and  ‘  Avagahana '  are  particular  methods  of  Swedana  ;  vide. 
pp.  160  and  161  of  Sutrasthanam,  ante. 

For  wines,  &c.,  vide  Lesson  XXVII,  p,  329,  Sutrasthanam  ;  particularly 
pp.  362-65. 

For  drugs  exciting  the  appetite,  &c.,  vide  Lesson  IV.  p.  27. 

“  Cooked  a  hundred  times,”  and  “  cooked  a  thousand  times  "  are  especial 
methods  of  preparing  oils  and  ghees.  These  have  been  mentioned  in  Chikitsa- 
sthana  or  the  Division  on  treatment  of  disease. 

*  Snehana  means  the  application  of  medicated  oils  over  the  surface  of  the 
body.  Here  the  Rishi  directs  that  no  oil  is  to  be  used,  but,  in  its  stead,  only 
ghee.— T. 

f  ‘  Doshaharanam  ’  is  the  cure  or  alleviation  of  the  excited  faults.  Here 
the  particular  fault  excited  is  bile.  The  use  of  purgatives  is  intended. — T. 


524 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  M  HI  TA. 


Frequently  placing  on  the  breast  garlands  of  pearls  and  gems 
cooled  by  delicious  breezes  and  the  night  dew. 

Plastering,  placing,  and  sprinkling  of  white  sandal,  Aglaia 
Roxbughiana,  Kaliya,  lotus-stalks,  and  cold  water,  with  fanning, 
and  sprinkling  of  water  from  drenched  Utpalas,  Kumudas,  Koka- 
nadas,  and  fragrant  lotuses.* 

Listening  to  such  vocal  songs  and  instrumental  music  as  are 
pleasing  to  the  ear,  mild,  sweet,  and  agreeable. 

Listening  to  scriptural  recitations  and  other  discourses  as  are 
auspicious. 

Re-unions  with  friends  and  well-wishers.  Reunions  with 
agreeable  women  whose  touch  is  cooling  and  who  are  clad  in  silk 
and  decked  with  floral  wreaths  and  garlands  (  of  gold  and  gems  ). 

Residence  in  palatial  mansions  cooled  by  the  rays  of  the  moon 
and  exposed  to  breezes  blowing  from  every  direction. 

Residence  in  regions  of  sandy  soil  in  the  midst  of  waters,  and 
in  regions  that  are  cool,  wearing  cool  clothes,  fanning  with  drench¬ 
ed  yak-tails  and  palm-leaves,  and  exposure  to  cool  breezes. 

Enjoyment  of  delightful  pleasure-gardens  and  groves  through 
which  blow  breezes  that  are  delicious,  cool  and  fragrant. 

The  use  of  Nalinas,  Utpalas,  Padmas,  Kumudas,  Saugandhikas, 
Pundarikas,  and  £atapatras,  in  large  numbers, 

and  also  of  everything  that  is  possessed  of  cooling  effects  on 
the  body.aft 


*  Utpala,  otherwise  called  Nilotpala,  is  the  Nymphcea  Stellata,  Linn. 
Kumuda  is  the  Nymphcea  Lotus,  Linn. 

Kokonada  is  the  Nelumbium  Speciosum,  Willd.  The  red  variety. 

The  word  ‘Padma'  is  general.  It  is  used  to  express  all  the  different  varieties 
of  the  flower  commonly  called  Lotus.  It  is,  of  course,  the  Nelumbium  speciosum 
of  all  varieties. — T. 

j-  Nalin  is  a  variety  of  the  Lotus. 

For  Utpala  vide  the  previous  note. 

For  Padma  vide  ditto. 

For  Kumuda  vide  ditto. 

Saugandhika  is  a  variety  of  the  Lotus. 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


525 


Of  one  in  whose  constitution  the  phlegm  premominates,  the 
phlegm  is  quickly  excited  in  consequence  of  indulgence  in  such 
articles  and  practices  as  have  been  declared  capable  of  exciting 
the  phlegm. 

The  two  others  (  vise.,  wind  and  bi'e  )  will  not  be  excited  by 
such  indulgence.27 

The  phlegm  of  such  a  person,  (  thus  )  excited,  afflicts  his  body 
with  such  diseases  as  have  already  been  declared,  to  the  detriment 
of  (  his  )  strength,  complexion,  and  happy  life.23 

Its  subjugation  may  be  brought  about  by  the  following 
means  : 

The  administration,  according  to  the  rules  laid  down,  of  correct¬ 
ives  that  are  keen  and  warm. 

The  use  of  food  and  drink  that  are  mostly  dry  and  possessed  of 
pungency,  bitterness,  and  astringency  of  taste. 

Also  (  indulgence  in  )  running,  jumping,  leaping,  walking  about, 
night-keeping,  fighting,  sexual  congress,  athletic  exercises,  sub¬ 
jecting  the  body  to  rubbing,  baths,  and  chaffing  the  body. 

Especially  the  drinking  of  such  liquors  as  are  keen  and  as  have 
been  kept  for  a  long  time. 

Fasts  of  every  kind. 

The  use  of  warm  clothes, 

With  smoking, 

And  abstinence  from  every  kind  of  comfort. 

The  above  are  calculated  to  give  ease  to  such  a  person.25* 


Pundarika  is  a  variety  of  ditto. 

(Jatapatra  is  literally  'with  a  hundred  petals’.  It  is  a  variety  of  the  Lotus. 

The  meaning  of  the  word  ‘hasta’  is  ‘kalapa’  or  ‘sam’hua’  as  explained  by 
Chakrapani.  Gangadhara  explains  the  word  wrongly. 

*  ‘Langhana’  and  ‘plavana’  both  imply  motion  by  jumps  and  leaps.  The 
former,  it  seems,  is  limited  to  sudden  leaps  by  which  one  passes  over  some 
impediments  or  from  one  side  of  a  ditch  to  another.  ‘Plavana’  is  motion  by 
continuous  leaps,  like  that  of  the  frog.  Gangadhara  wrongly  takes  it  as 
'swimming’. 

67 


526 


CHAR. \KA-SAMH1TA. 


(  Here  occurs  a  Verse.  ) 

One  that  is  conversant  with  the  distinctive  features  of  all 
diseases,  that  is  conversant  alscr  with  all  curative  operations,  and 
that  knows  the  virtues  of  all  drugs,  should  be  the  physician  of  the 
king.50 

(  Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary.  ) 

The  conception  of  groups  of  diseases  according  to  difference 
of  originating  causes, 

the  absence  of  difference  between  Diseases  and  Faults  and 
the  synonymous  character  of  the  two  terms, 

the  enumeration  of  the  Faults,  the  enumeration  of  Diseases, 
the  excitement  of  each  one  of  the  Faults,  considerations  about 
digestion,  and  the  preservation  (  or  stirring  up  )  of  the  digestive 
fire,  the  courses  of  treatment  and  conduct  for  restoring  to  its 
natural  order  the  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  of  persons  in  whom  each 
of  these  predominates, 

These  have  been  declared  by  the  great  Rishi  in  this  Lesson  on 
the  Vimanam  relating  to  grants  of  diseases.1-3* 

Thus  ends  the  Sixth  Lesson,  called  the  Vimanam  of  disease- 
groups,  in  the  treatise  of  Agnive$a  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


‘Utsadana’  is  a  doubtful  word.  Wilson  gives  the  following  meanings  : — 
going  up,  ascending,  rising,  raising,  elevating,  destroying,  overturning,  clean¬ 
ing  the  person  with  perfumes  ;  rubbing  or  chaffing  the  limbs  ;  &c.  Some  kind 
of  pressure  on  the  body  seems  to  be  the  sense  here. — T. 

*  ‘  The  conception  of  groups  of  diseases  according  to  difference  of  originating 

causes,  is  treated  of  in  aphorisms  2  and  3  ;  the  absence  of  difference  between 
diseases  and  faults  and  the  synonymous  character  of  the  two  faults,  are  treated 
of  in  aphorisms  4  and  5  ;  the  enumeration  of  the  faults  and  that  of  the  diseases 
occur  in  aphorisms  6  to  9  ;  excitement  of  each  one  of  the  faults  is  treated  of  in 
aphorisms  10  to  13/  considerations  about  digestion,  & c.,  occur  in  aphorisms  14 
to  18  ;  the  courses  of  treatment,  &c.,  occur  in  aphorisms  19  to  29. — T. 


CHARA  KA-SA  Mil  IT  A, 


527 


LESSON  VII 

We  shall  next  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  Vimanam  of  the 
aspects  of  the  diseased. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.1* 

Persons  of  diseased  aspects  are  of  two  kinds. 

Those  two  are  as  follows  : — 

The  first  is  the  case  of  persons  who,  though  afflicted  by  a  grave 
■disease,  seem  yet  to  have  caught  only  a  light  disease,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  healthy  appearance  of  their  mind,  strength,  and 
body. 

The  second  is  the  case  of  persons  who,  though  afflicted  by  a 
light  disease,  st-em  yet  to  have  caught  a  grave  disease,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  poor  state  of  their  mind  and  the  rest. 

Unskilful  persons,  who  endeavour  to  treat  or  cure  by  noticing 
aspects  of  diseased  persons  by  the  aid  of  their  eyes  alone,  fail  to 
understand  the  seriousness  or  lightness  of  the  diseases  that  con¬ 
front  them. 

Without  doubt,  by  knowing  only  a  part,  knowledge  is  never 
gained  of  the  entire  object  of  knowledge. 3f 

Physicians  erring  in  the  knowledge  of  the  disease  ( that  corn- 
fronts  them  ),  err  in  the  knowledge  of  the  treatment  to  be  followed. 

When  they  meet  with  a  patient  who,  though  afflicted  by  a 
serious  disease,  presents  the  apparent  symptoms  of  a  light 
disease,  they  take  him  as  one  in  whom  a  particular  fault  has  been, 
excited  to  only  a  slight  extent. 

When  the  time  comes  for  administering  correctives  unto  him, 
they  give  him  mild  correctives  with  the  result  that  the  particular 


*  The  name  of  the  Lesson  is  ‘  Vyadhitarupiyam,’  literally,  that  which 
relates  to  the  1  rupa  1  or  form,  i  e.,  aspects,  of  one  that  is  ‘  Vyadhita,’  meaning, 
afflicted  by  disease.  Hence  the  name  has  reference  to  the  aspects  of  the 
diseased. — T. 

f  This  aphorism  plainly  shows  that  Hindu  physicians,  in  diagnosing 
disease,  never  rely  upon  the  apparent  symptoms  alone.  Their  diagnosis  is 
endeavoured  to  be  made  as  thoroughly  as  possible. 


528 


CHA  RA  KA-SAM  HI  7' A . 


fault  excited,  (  after  being  partially  or  temporarily  allayed ),  re¬ 
appears  with  force. 

When  they  meet  with  one  who,  though  afflicted  by  a  light 
disease,  presents  the  apparent  symptoms  of  a  serious  disease, 
they  take  him  for  one  in  whom  a  particular  fault  has  been  greatly 
excited. 

When,  therefore,  the  time  comes  for  administering  correctives 
unto  him,  they  give  him  correctives  that  are  powerful,  with  the 
result  that  subduing  to  an  excessive  degree  the  particular  fault 
excited,  they  weaken  or  waste  his  very  constitution.4 

Thinking,  in  this  way,  that  they  have,  by  knowing  only  a  part, 
acquired  a  knowledge  of  the  entire  object  of  knowlevge,  they  trip 
repeatedly. 

Those  physicians,  however,  who  know  all  that  should  be  known, 
set  themselves  to  treat  disease  after  examining  everything  in 
every  possible  way.  (  Accordingly  )  they  never  fad,  but  succeed 
in  achieving  the  end  they  have  in  view,5 

(  Here  occur  some  verses.  ) 

The  aspects  of  disease  in  a  suffering  person  depend  on  the 
difference  of  ( the  condition  of )  mind  and  the  rest. 

Beholding  these,  ignorant  physicians  err  in  judging  of  the 
strength  or  weakness  of  a  disease,  Stupified  by  ignorance,  they 
administer  medicines  improperly,  for  the  destruction  or  excessive 
misery  of  the  afflicted,6"' 

Physicians  of  wisdom,  however,  ascertaining  everything  by 
examination  of  every  kind,  do  not  trip  in  the  administration  of 
medicines  at  any  time,8 

Having  heard,  in  course  of  this  prelection  on  the  aspects 
presented  by  a  diseased  person,  of  the  cause  that  limits  the  number 
of  those  aspects,  of  the  cause,  with  censures;  of  erroneous  con¬ 
clusions  with  respect  to  aspects,  of  the  diseased,  and  also  of  the 
cause,  with  praises,  of  correct  conclusions  with  respect  thereto, 
Agnivefa,  after  this,  touching  the  feet  of  the  illustrious  son  of 
Atri,  questioned  him  about  the  origin,  place  ( habitat ),  shape, 


CHA  RA  KA  -  SA  M  HIT A. 


529 


complexion,  name,  effects,  and  treatment  of  all  kinds  of  worms 
generated  in  the  body. 

Unto  him  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said 

In  this  matter,  without  doubt,  O  Agnivefa,  (  it  may  be  said 
that ).  there  are  twenty  varieties  of  worms.  In  a  former  place, 
except  those  that  have  their  birth  with  the  body,  they  have 
been  spoken  of  with  all  their  distinctions.9* 

Classified  according  to  (  the  differences  of )  their  nature  (  or 
origin  )  they  are  of  four  kinds. 

These  are  1.  those  born  of  faeces,  2.  those  born  of  phlegm,  3. 
those  born  of  blood,  and  4.  those  born  of  impurities. 

Of  Impurities,  there  are  two  kinds,  viz-,  1.  External,  and  2. 
Internal. 

We  shall  speak  of  only  those  worms  that  are  born  of  External 
Impurities. 

Their  rise  (  or  appearance  )  is  due  to  omission  or,  neglect  in 
cleansing  the  body. 


*  The  first  portion  of  this  aphorism  has  been  worded  in  a  very  intricate 
way.  It  seems  that  the  writers  of  such  texts  took  a  delight  in  expressing  their 
meanings  in  language  at  once  quaint  and  difficult  of  comprehension,  or, 
perhaps*  they  devised  that  the  services  of  living  teachers  should  never  be  dis¬ 
pensed  with.  ‘  Sankhyagrasambhavam  ’  of  '  Vyadhitarupa,’  implies  ‘  cause 
of  the  limit  of  the  number’  of  the  aspects  of  the  diseased’.  It  has  been  said 
that  the  number  of  those  aspects  is  two,  the  cause  being  difference  in  respect 
of  the  condition  of  mind,  strength,  complexion,  &c,.  Instead  of  saying  this, 
plainly,  it  is  referred  to  as  ‘  the  cause  that'  limits  the  number,’  Number  has, 
limits,  for  it  may  be  large  or  small ;  cause  of  the  number,  and  cause  limiting 
the  number,  are  the  same.  The  former  is  a  quaint  mode  of  expression.  Then, 
again,  in  ‘  Vyadhitarupahetu-Vipratipattau-karanam,’  both  ‘  hetu  ’  and 
‘karanam’  ordinarily  mean  the  samething.  ‘  Vipratipatti  ’ is. erroneous  conclu¬ 
sion.  ‘  Vipratipattau  karanam  ’  would,  therefore,  mean  the  causes,  in  the  matter 
of, or  of,  such  erroneous  conclusion.  ‘  Vyadhitarupahetuviprapatti'  implies  erro¬ 
neous  conclusions  with  reference  to  or  about  ‘  vyadhitarupa  ’  or  aspects  of 
diseased  persons.  I  take  this  opportunity  for  shewing  how  round  about  and 
needlessly  periphrastic  is  the  language  of  some  of  the  aphorisms. 

Some  medical  scholars  believe  that  these  portions  are  later  interpolations. 
This,  however,  is  a  crude  opinion.— T. 


530 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


Their  habitat  is  hair,  beard,  bristles,  eyelashes,  and  clothes. 

As  to  their  form  they  are  very  minute,  of  the  shape  of  a  seed, 
and  possessed  of  many  feet. 

Their  colour  is  black  or  white. 

Their  names  are  Yuka,  and  Pipilika. 

The  effect  they  produce  is  an  itching  sensation,  on  Urticaria 
evanida,  or  eruptions  of  diverse  kinds  (  i.  e .,  small  boils  and 
pimples  ). 

Their  treatment  consists  ef  separating  them  from  the  body  by 
scratching  •  or  combing  and  other  processes,  destruction  of  the 
impurities  ( that  generate  them  )  by  washing  and  other  processes, 
and  avoidance  of  such  food  and  practices  as  generate  them.10 

Of  worms  born  of  blood,  the  origin  is  the  same  as  those  of  the 
several  varieties  of  Kushtha  (  Leprosy  ). 

Their  habitat  is  the  blood-bearing  ducts. 

As  regards  their  form,  they  are  very  minute,  round,  feetless. 
Owing  to  their  minuteness,  some  of  them  are  invisible.  Their 
colour  is  coppery. 

Their  names  are  Kegada,  Lomada,  Lomadwipa,  Sanrosa, 
Audumvara,  and  Jantumatri. 

The  effect  they  produce  is  the  destruction  of  the  hair,  beard, 
nails,  and  bristles. 

As  regards  those  blood-worms  that  occur  in  boils  and  sores, 
the  effects  they  produce  are  to  make  the  hair  stand  on  end,  violent 
itching,  sharp  pains  and  gentle  itching. 

As  regards  those  that  become  very  powerful  amongst  them, 
they  eat  away  the  skin,  the  ducts,  tendons,  flesh  and  cartilage. 

Their  treatment  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  several  varieties  of 
Kushtha  (  Leprosy  )  which  we  shall  explain  in  future.11 

Those  worms  that  are  born  of  phlegm  have  their  origin  in  the 
use  (  as  food  and  drink  )  of  milk,  raw  sugar,  sesame  seeds,  fish, 
flesh  of  animals  living  in  marshy  regions,  cakes  of  diverse  varieties, 
frumenty,  the  herbs  called  Kusumbha  (  Carthamus  tinctorius, 
Linn.  ),  oily  substances, 


CM  A  RA  KA-SA  Mill  TA.  53 1 

as  also  of  food  taken  before  digestion  has  occurred,  of  food 
consisting  of  rotten  substances,  moist  food,  food  that  is  prepared, 
by  mixing  diverse  articles,  food  composed  of  hostile  ingredients, 
and  food  that  is  not  agreeable  to  the  constitution. 

Their  habitat  is  the  amagaya. 

When  they  become  powerful,  they  move  upwards  or  downwards 
or  in  both  directions. 

As  regards  their  form  and  colour,  there  are  diversities.  Some 
are  white  of  hue,  and  some  have  forms  resembling  fleshy  muscles, 
some  are  circular,  some  are  like  earth-worms,  some  are  partly 
white  and  partly  coppery,  some,  that  are  white,  are  very  minute, 
or  long  or  threadlike.  Of  these  three  kinds  of  phlegm-worms  the 
names  are  1.  Antrada,  2.  Udarada,  and  3.  Hridayada. 

Others  are  called  Churu,  Darbhapushpa,  Saugandhika,  Maha- 
guda. 

The  effects  they  produce  are  Hiccough,  discharges  from  the 
mouth,  disgust  for  food,  indigestion,  fever,  swoons,  yawns, 
sneezing,  epistasis,  heaviness  of  the  body,  vomiting,  leanness  of 
the  body,  and  roughness  of  the  skin.14 

Those  worms  that  are  born  of  faeces  have  the  same  origin  as 
those  born  of  phlegm. 

Their  habibat  is  the  Pakkagaya. 

When  they  become  powerful,  they  move  downwards.  When 
they  move  (upwards)  in  the  direction  of  the  Amagaya,  then  the 
eructations  and  breath  of  the  person,  as  a  consequence,  emit  the 
disagreeable  stench  of  faeces. 

Diversity  is  noticeable  in  their  forms  and  colour. 

Some  are  very  minute,  circular,  and  white,  and  resemble  sheep’s 
wool. 

Some,  again,  are  gross  (large)  and  circular,  and  dark  and  blue 
and  green  and  yellow  in  colour.  Their  names  are  Kakeruka, 
Makeruka,  Leliha,  Sagalaka,  and  Sansarfida. 

The  effects  they  produce  are  loose  motions,  leanness,  roughness 
of  the  skin,  and  horripilation. 


532 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


They  proceed  towards  the  anus,  paining  that  duct  or  pro¬ 
ducing  an  itching  sensation,  and  remain  there  (without  coming 
out  or  going  out.) 

Sometimes  coiling  and  moving  in  joy,  they  come  out  in  large 
numbers  from  the  anus.11 

Thus  are  explained  the  origin  and  the  rest  of  worms  born  of 
phlegm  and  faeces. 

Having  first  expounded  in  brief  the  treatment  of  these,  we 
shall  lay  down  instructions  hereafter  at  large. 

In  this  matter  as  regards  all  kinds  of  worms,  their  expulsion 
(from  the  system)  should  be  first  endeavoured  to  be  brought  out. 

The  next  step  (if  the  first  fails)  should  be  to  destroy  them  and 
stop  their  birth  (by  means  of  drugs). 

The  patient  should  also  avoid  the  indulgence  of  all  such 
articles  and  practices  as  beget  those  pests.14 

Amongst  these  (processes  of  treatment)  expulsion  consists  of 
driving  out  (the  worms)  by  seizing  them  with  the  hand  aided  or 
unaided  by  some  appliance. 

As  regards  worms  residing  in  their  respective  habitats,  they 
should  be  expelled  by  means  of  medicines.  Tins  may  be  duly 
accomplished  in  four  ways.  They  are, — administering  errhines, 
emetics,  purgatives,  and  enemata. 

These  are  the  ordinances  on  the  subject  of  Expulsion.15* 

The  destruction  of  their  origin  is  accomplished  by  the  use  of 
such  articles  (as  food  and  drink)  as  are  pungent,  bitter,  astringent, 
alkaline,  and  hot ;  as  also  the  use  of  such  articles  as  are  hostile 
to  phlegm  and  faeces. 

This  much  on  the  destruction  of  their  origin.  16+ 


*  Upakarana  '  here  implies  any  kind  of  mechanical  appliance,  such  as 
pin'cers,  &c. — T. 

t  Worms,  when  generated  and  when  they  approach  the  mouth  of  the 
anal  canal  may  be  expelled  by  the  hand.  If,  however,  they  remain  within  the 
body  and  are  unapproachable  by  the  hand  even  when  aided  by  instruments, 
they  should  be  treated  in  the  way  pointed  out  in  aphorism  16.  ‘  Prakritivighata  ’ 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MH I TA. 


533 


Then  comes  (the  topic  of)  avoiding  those  practices  which  are 
said  to  be  the  causes  of  their  generation. 

All  that  has  been  said  as  causes  of  their  generation  should  be 
abstained  from. 

Also  articles  of  a  like  nature  should  be  avoided. 

Thus  have  been  declared  the  treatment  of  worms  along  with 
their  symptoms. 

This  very  topic  is  hereafter  elaborately  laid  down.17. 

The  patient  in  whose  Koshtha  there  are  worms  should  be 
treated  for  six  or  seven  nights  with  Snehanas  and  Swedas.  On  the 
next  day  I  shall  cause  him  to  take  correctives. 

The  patient,  however,  should  be  treated  with  milk,  curds, 
raw-sugar,  sesame-seeds,  fish,  flesh  of  animals  living  in  marshy 
regions,  cakes,  frumenty,  Kusumbha  (  Carthamus  tinctorius  ),  and 
other  food  with  oily  ingredients,  for  stirring  up  the  worms  and 
severing  them  from  the  Koshtha.15 

The  physician,  having  ascertained  that  the  night  has  passed 
away  in  happy  sleep,  and  that  the  food  taken  has  been  well 
digested,  should  then  administer  unto  the  patient  that  very  day 
enemata,  emetics,  and  purgatives.19* 

If  these  are  to  be  administered,  they  should  be  administered 
after  an  examination  of  everything  and  after  a  careful  observation 
of  all  especial  conditions. 


is,  literally,  destruction  of  origin  ;  i.  e.,  after  their  birth  they  should  be  des¬ 
troyed  by  the  methods  indicated. 

In  aphorism  17,  the  means  are  pointed  out  by  which  their  very  generation 
may  be  stopped. — T. 

*  It  is  on  the  morning  of  the  seventh  or  the  eighth  day  that  these  should 
be  administered  after  having  ascertained  that  the  patient  has  passed  the  pre¬ 
vious  night  in  proper  sleep  and  that  the  food  he  took  has  been  properly  . digested. 
There  are  two  kinds  of  enemata,  viz.,  dry  and  oily;  the  former  is  called 
‘  asthapana  ’  and  the  latter  ‘  anuvasana.'  Here  the  dry  kind  is  indicated. — T. 

68 


534 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  MHI TA . 


The  physician  should  (when  he  thinks  that  these  should  be 
administered)  address  the  patient,  saying, — Do  thou  collect  these 
articles,  vis.,  garden  radish,  mustard  seeds,  Lasuna  (a),  Karanja  (6), 
£igru  ( c ),  Kharapushpa  ( d ),  Bhustrina  (e),  Sumukha  (f),  Surasa 
(g),  Kutheraka  (Ji),  Kandira  (/),  Kalamalaka  (/),  Parnasa  ( k ), 
Kshavaka  (/),  and  Phanijjhaka  ( m ). 

These  all,  or  as  many  of  them  as  are  obtainable,  should  be 
gathered. 

Having  gathered  these,  the  physician  should  examine  them  and 
then  cut  them  into  pieces  and  then  wash  them  in  water,  and  place 
them  in  a  well-washed  vessel,  and  then  cook  them  in  cow’s  urine 
mixed  with  water  half  and  half. 

It  should  be  frequently  stirred  with  a  wooden  ladle. 

When  the  water  is  reduced  to  the  quantity  that  is  proper,  and 
when  the  juice  (in  the  process  of  cooking)  has  fully  come  out  of 
the  herbs,  the  vessel  should  be  taken  down. 

The  decoction  should  then  be  properly  strained  and,  while 
yet  lukewarm,  should  be  mixed  with  the  Kalka  of  Madana- 


a.  Lasuna  is  Allium  Sativum ,  Linn. 

b.  Karanja  (Bengali,  Dahar- Karanja).  is  Pongamia  Glabra ;  syn.  Galedupa 
Indica,  Lamk. 

c.  Moringa  pterygosperma ;  syn.  Hyperanthera  moringa,  Willd.  Some 
texts  add,  after  ‘Qigru,’  ‘  Madhu-9igru’,  meaning  the  red  variety  of  the  above. 

d.  Kharapushpa  is  otherwise  called  Yamani  (as  explained  by  Gangadhara). 
It  is  the  Ptychotis  Ajowan  ;  syn.  Ligusticum  Ajoisian,  Flem. 

e.  Bhustrina  (Gandhabena  in  Bengali)  is  the  Andropogon  Schcenanthus, 

f.  Sumukha  is  a  variety  of  Tulasi  or  Ocimum  Sanctum,  Linn. 

g.  Surasa  is  a  variety  of  ditto. 

h.  Kutheraka  is  a  variety  of  ditto. 

i.  Kandira  is  a  variety  of  ditto. 

j.  Kalamalaka  is  a  variety  of  ditto. 

k.  Parnasa  is  a  variety  of  ditto. 

l.  Kshavaka  is  a  variety  of  ditto. 

m.  Phanijjhaka  is  a  variety  of  ditto. 


CHA  RA  /CA-S  A  MHITA 


535 


pliala  (a),  Pippali  (3),  and  Vidanga  (c),  and  then  should  a  quantity 
of  oil  be  poured  upon  it. 

Then  throwing  some  Sarjjika  (d),  and  salt  over  it,  the  prepar¬ 
ation  should  be  applied  to  the  anal  canal  as  enemata.20* 

Then  also,  with  the  infusion  of  Arka  ( e ),  Alarka  (f),  Kutaja 
(g),  Adhaki  (k),  Kustha  (?’),  Kaitarya  (/ ),  as  also  the  infusion  of 
Sigru  ( k ),  Pilu  (/),  Kustumvura  (m),  Katuka  (  n ),  and  mustard 
seeds,  and  also  the  infusion  of  Amalaka  (<?),  £ringavera  (/), 


a.  Madanaphala  means  fruits  of  the  Randia  dumetorum. 

b.  Pippali  is  Piper  longurn,  Linn  ;  syn .\Chavica  Roxburghii. 

c.  Vidanga  is  Embelia  Ribes. 

d.  Sarjjika  or  Sarjjikshara  is  carbonate  of  soda. 

*.  ‘  Paniya  ’  is  a  technical  term,  meaning  a  weak  form  of  decoction  prepared 

by  boiling  one  part  of  medicinal  substances  in  thirty-two  parts  of  water  till  the 
latter  is  reduced  to  one-half.  Here,  the  word  stands  for  common  water. 

‘  Gomutrenarddhodakena’  implies  that  the  liquid  in  which  the  substances 
are  to  be  boiled  should  be  cow’s  urine  and  water  in  equal  proportions.  ‘  When 
the  water  is  reduced  to  the  quantity  that  is  proper  this  means  that  when  a 
fourth  of  the  water  still  remains,  or  sometimes  an  eighth.  The  usual  rule  is 
to  allow  three  quarters  to  evaporate. — T. 

“  Kalka  or  paste  is  prepared  by  grinding  dry  or  fresh  vegetable  substances 
on  a  stone  with  a  muller,  and  then  making  a  thin  paste,  with  the  addition  of 
water  when  necessary.” — U.  C.  Dutt’s  Hindu  Medicine. 

e.  Calatropis  gigantea  or  procera  ;  syn.  Asclepias  gigantea. 

f.  A  white  variety  of  the  above.  Chakrapani,  however,  takes  it  as  standing 
for  Mandara  or  Erythrina  Indica. 

g.  Holarrliena  antidysenierica,  Wall  ;  syn.  Echites  antidysenterica,  Roxb. 

h.  Cajanus  Indicus,  Spreng ;  syn.  Cytisus  Cajan,  Linn. 

i.  Sanssurea  auriculata  ;  syn.  Applotaxis  auriculata. 

j.  Otherwise  called  Katphala.  Myrica  Sapida,  Wall. 

k.  Moringa  pterygosperma ;  syn.  Hyper  anther  a  Moringa,  Willd. 

l.  Salvadora  Persica,  Linn  ;  syn.  Salvadora  Indica ,  Wight. 

m.  Zanthoxylum  Alatum,  Roxb  ;  syn.  Zanthoxylum  hostile,  Wall. 

n.  Picorrhiza  Kurroa,  Royle. 

o.  Phyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn  ;  syn.  Emblica  Officinalis. 

p.  Zingiber  Officinale,  Rose.  Common  Ginger. 


536 


CHAR  A  KA-SAM  HI  TA 


Daru-haridra  (a),  and  Pichumarddana  (6),  mixed  with  the  Kalka 
of  Madanaphala  and  the  others,  enemata  should  be  applied  by 
the  physician  for  three  nights  or  seven  nights.21* 

When  the  enemata  last  applied  has  come  out  of  the  anal  canal, 
the  physician  should,  after  having  assured  the  patient,  administer, 
with  due  consideration,  that  very  day,  such  correctives  as  operate 
both  upwards  and  downwards. 

The  method  of  such  administration  is  explained  as  follows  :aa 

Mixing  an  Anjali  of  the  infusion  of  Madanaphala  and  Pippali, 
with  an  Aksha  of  the  paste  of  Trivrit,  the  physician  should  give 
it  to  the  patient  to  drink. 

This  drink  will  properly  purge  him  in  both  directions.aef 

The  physician  should,  observing  all  distinctions  very  carefully 
with  his  intelligence,  cause  the  patient  to  drink,  in  this  way,  after 
having  prepared  them  by  combination,  the  various  emetics  and 
purgatives  spoken  of  in  the  division  called  Kalpa.21 

After  having  ascertained  that  the  patient  has  been  sufficiently 
purged,  the  physician  should,  the  next  day,  cause  the  patient  to  be 
drenched  (  washed  )  with  “  £aikhari-kashaya  ”  that  is  tolerably 
hot.J 

a.  Berberis  Asiatica ;  syn.  Berberis  Aristata. 

b.  Pichumarddana  is  a  name  applied  to  the  bark  of  the  Nim,  that  is, 
Melia  Azadirachta,  Linn,  or  Azadirachta  Indica,  J-uss. 

*  In  the  text  occurs  ‘  Madanaphaladi,  &c.,’  Gangadhara  explains  that 
this  means  Madanaphala,  Pippali,  and  Vidanga.  The  Kalka  of  these  is  to 
be  taken.  By  Kalka,  as  already  explained,  is  meant  a  paste  prepared  by 
grinding  dry  or  fresh  vegetable  substances  on  a  stone  with  a  muller,  and  then 
making  a  thin  paste,  with  the  addition  of  water  when  necessary. — T. 

The  reading  ‘  triratram  saptaratramva  ’  does  not  occur  in  all  texts. — T. 

f  An  Anjali  is,  literally,  a  handful,  or  rather  what  is  contained  in  the  two 
palms  when  they  are  joined  together  and  disposed  in  the  form  of  a  vessel. 
In  Medicine,  it  is  equal  to  32  tolas,  or  a  little  less  than  half  a  seer.  '  Aksha  ’ 
is,  in  Medicine,  equal  to  2  tolas,  i.  e.,  about  the  weight  of  2  Rupees. 

The  mixture  is  to  be  made  in  a  particular  way.  First,  an  Anjali  of  the 
Infusion  is  to  be  taken.  Into  it  should  be  thrown  an  Aksha  of  the  paste.  The 
latter  should  then  be  stirred  repeatedly  with  a  ladle,  till  it  is  dissolved. — T. 

f  ‘  Purged,’  here  includes  the  administration  of  emetics. 

1  Qaikhari-kashaya  ’  is  explained  by  Chakrapani  as  infusion  of  Vidanga  or 
Embelia  Ribes,  syn.  Embelia  glandurifera.  Gangadhara  takes  it  as  the 
infusion  of  Apamarga  or  Achyranthes  aspera,  Linn. — T. 


charaka-samhitA. 


537 


With  the  same  infusim  the  physician  should  cause  the  patient 
to  invariably  perform  all  those  external  and  internal  acts  which 
are  (  usually  )  performed  with  the  help  of  w'ater. 

If  such  infusion  be  not  available,  the  patient  should  be  drench¬ 
ed  (  washed  )  with  the  decoctiou  of  such  drugs  as  are  pungent, 
bitter,  and  astringent,  or  with  alkaline  ashes  mixed  with  urine.* 

After  having  ( thus  )  drenched  the  patient,  he  should  be  caused 
to  enter  into  a  chamber  not  exposed  to  the  wind,  and  the  physi¬ 
cian  should  then  treat  him  with  such  drinks  as  the  gruel  of  barley 
boiled  with  Pippali(a),  Pippalimala(3),  Chavya(t),  Chitraka(aT), 
and  £ringavera  (e).26t 

When  the  process  of  the  administration  of  gruels  like  that  of 
barley  is  over,  the  patient  should  have  the  oil  of  Vidanga  adminis¬ 
tered  to  him  as  enemata  twice  or  thrice  every  alternate  day. 

If,  again,  the  physician  thinks  that  the  patient  has  got 
*  £irshada  ’  worms,  which  sometimes  move  through  the  head, 
then  treating  his  head  (  first),  with  Sneha  and  Sweda,  he  should 
(  next )  be  purged  with  errhines  such  as  those  made  of  seeds 
of  Apamarga  and  others.a'J 


*  <-  Kkatha  ’  or  decoctions  are  generally  prepared  by  boiling  one  part  of 
vegetable  substances  with  sixteen  parts  of  water,  till  the  latter  is  reduced  to 
one-fourth.  In  some  cases,  eight  parts  of  water  have  been  recommended. 
The  boiling  must  be  on  a  slow  fire,  and  the  liquid  should  be  strained. 

‘  Mutrakshara,’  as  explained  by  Gangadhara,  is  ‘  mutra  ’  or  urine  mixed 
with  ‘  khsara  ’  or  alkaline  ashes.  Generally,  1  Yavakshara  ’  and  cow’s  urine 
are  taken. — T. 

f  The  chamber  should  be  a  closed  one,  so  that  the  inmate  may  not  be 
exposed  to  the  wind. 

a.  Piper  longum,  Linn. 

b.  The  roots  of  ditto. 

c.  Piper  Chaba,  Hunter  ;  syn.  Chavica  officinarum. 

d.  Plumbago  eeylanica,  Linn. 

e.  Zingiber  officinale.  (  Common  ginger  powder.) 

X  Gangadhara  wrongly  reads  ‘  Vilepya  ’  with  the  previous  aphorism. 
Chakrapani  correctly  explains  ‘  Vilepya  kramagatam  ’  as  equivalent  ‘to  krita- 


538 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  At  HI  TA. 


That  course  of  diet  which  has  been  declared  to  be  destructive 
of  the  birth  of  worms  is  hereafter  explained. 

Taking  the  plant  Mushikaparni(a)  with  its  roots,  top,  and  stem, 
it  should  be  cut  up  into  pieces,  then  pounded  in  a  mortar,  and 
then  the  juice  (  of  the  paste  )  should  be  pressed  out  by  the  hands. 

Pounded  £ali  rice  of  the  red  variety  should  be  thrown  into 
that  juice  and  then  stirred  (  with  a  ladle  ). 

It  should  then  be  made  into  cakes  which  should  be  baked  upon 
smokeless  charcoal.  Those  cakes  should  next  be  dressed  in 
Vidanga-oil  and  salt,  and  given  to  the  person  who  has  worms  in 
his  stomach,  for  eating. 

After  this  the  patient  should  be  made  to  drink  sour  Kanjika 
(  b  )  and  Uda^wit  (  c  ),  and  the  decoction  of  the  five  aggregates 
numbering  Pippali  (  d  )  as  the  first,  seasoned  with  salt.27 

According  to  the  same  process  cakes  should  be  made  of  pound¬ 
ed  £ali  rice  of  the  red  variety  stirred  in  the  juice  of  any  one  of 
these  plants,  viz.,  Markara  ( e ),  Arka  (_/),  Sahachara  ( g  ),  Nipa  (Ji), 


yavagvadi  kramam,’  i.  e.,  when  the  previous  process  of  administering  '  yavagu,’ 
&c.,’  is  over. 

‘  Qirshada’  worms  are  those  that  eat  the  substance  of  the  brain.  They  are 
not  mentioned  in  the  place  where  the  other  worms  and  parasites  are  named  in 
this  Lesson. — T. 

a.  Called  also  Indurkani.  Salvinia  Cucullata,  Roxb. 

b.  Sour  gruel  of  rice. 

c.  Butter-milk  mixed  with  an  equal  proportion  of  water. 

d.  Piper  longum,  Linn,  syn  Chavica  Roxburghii.  The  article  referred 
to  is  the  decoction  of  Piper  longum,  its  root,  Piper  chava,  Plumbago  Xeylanica, 
and  dry  ginger. — T. 

e.  Otherwise  called  Bhringaraja  /  Wedelia  Calendulacea ;  syn.  Verbesina 
CaLenauvaoeu,  Willd. 

f.  Calatropis gigantea  or  procera ;  syn.  Asclepias  gigantea,  Willd. 

g.  Otherwise  called  Jhinti ;  Barleria  cristata,  Linn. 

h.  Nauclea  Cadamba.,  Roxb.  syn.  Anthocephalus  Cadamba,  Benth  and 
Hook. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  M  HIT A. 


539 


Nirgundi  (  a  ),  Sumukha  (  b  ),  Surasa  (  c  ),  Kutheraka  ( d ),  Gandira 
(  e  ),  Kalamalaka  ( f ),  Parnasa  (g),  Kshavaka  (  h  ),  Phanijjhaka 
(  t),  Vakula  (/  ),  Kutaja  (  k  ),  and  Suvarnakshiri  (  /). 

Similarly  cakes  should  be  made  with  the  help  of  the  juice  of 
these,  viz.,  Kinihi  (  m  ),  Kiratatiktaka  (»),  Suvaha  (  o  ),  Amalaka 
(/>  ),  Haritaki  (  q  ),  and  Vibhitaka  (  r  ) as* 

The  juice  of  any  one,  or  any  two,  or  all  these,  mixed  with 
honey,  should  be  given  to  the  patient  in  the  morning  to  drink 
while  his  stomach  is  empty .Z8f 

Then,  bringing  a  quantity  of  horse-dung,  and  spreading  it  over 
a  large  mat,  and  drying  it  in  the  sun,  and  pounding  it  in  a  mortar, 
and  causing  it,  again,  to  be  reduced  to  finer  powder  on  a  flat 


a.  Vitex  Nigundo,  Linn. 

b.  Gangadhara  says  it  is. a  kind  of  potherb.  So  also  Wilson. 

c.  A  variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum. 

d.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

e.  A  kind  of  potherb,  described  as  growing  in  aquatic  regions.  Wilson. 

f.  Otherwise  called  Kasamardda,  Cassia  Sophora,  Linn ;  syn.  Senna 
Sophora,  Roxb. 

g.  A  variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum. 

h.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

i.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

j.  Mimusops  Elengi,  Linn. 

k.  Holarrhena  antidysenterica,  Wall ;  syn.  Echites  antidysenterica,  Roxb. 

l.  Mimusops  Indica,  D.  C.,  syn.  Mimusops  hexandra,  Roxb. 

m.  Gangadhara  takes  it  as  Apamarga ;  Achyranthes  aspera,  Linn,  also 
Achyranthes  bidcntata. 

n.  Agathotes  cherayta. 

o.  Otherwise  called  Sephalika.  Nyctanthes  arbor-tristes,  Linn. 

p.  Phyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn  ;  Emblica  officinalis,  Gaert. 

q.  Chebulic  myrobalan. 

r.  Terminalia  Bellerica,  Roxb. 

*  The  cakes,  thus  made,  should  be  given  to  the  person  having  worms  in 
his  stomach.  The  juice  referred  to  is  called  '  Swarasa.’  This  is  prepared  by 
pounding  fresh  vegetables  in  a  mortar,  and  then  pressing  out  the  juice  and 
straining  it  through  a  piece  of  cloth. — T. 

t  The  correct  reading  is  ‘  madhu-vilikhitan,’  as  noticed  by  Chakrapani, 
and  not  ‘  madhu-vilulitan  '  as  given  by  Gangadhara.  '  Vilikhitan  ’  is  ‘  aloritan  ’ 
as  explained  by  Chakrapani.— T. 


54° 


CH A  RA  KA  -  SA  M  HI  T A . 


stone  (  with  a  muller  ),  and  then  macerting  it  for  eight  or  ten  times, 
in  either  the  juice  of  Embelia  Ribes  or  of  the  triple  fruit 
(  Chebulic  myrobalan,  Terminalia  Bellerica)  and  Phyllantlius 
Emblica  ),  it  should  be  dried  in  the  sun. 

It  should,  again,  be  reduced  to  finer  powder  on  a  flat  stone 
(  with  a  muller ),  and  then  put  into  a  new  earthen  jar  with  its 
mouth  hermetically  sealed. 

Taking,  then,  a  quantity  of  such  powder  measured  by  a 
Panitala  (  a  ),  or  as  much  as  may  be  deemed  proper,  and  mixing 
it  with  honey,  it  should  be  given  to  the  patient  who  has  worms  in 
his  stomach,  for  licking.80* 

Also  causing  a  quantity  of  Bhallataka  seedsf  to  be  collected  of 
the  measure  of  a  kalasa,  it  should  be  pounded,  and  put  into 
a  well-baked  earthen  jar  that  has  sucked  a  good  quantity  of  oil, 
and  that  has  got  many  minute  holes  at  the  bottom.  This  jar 
should  then  be  plastered  over  with  soft  earth.  Its  mouth  should  be 
covered  by  means  of  an  earthen  platter. 

Taking  another  well-baked  earthen  jar  that  has  sucked  a  good 
quantity  of  oil,  it  should  be  embedded  in  the  earth  up  to  its  neck. 

The  jar  (  containing  the  Bhallataka  seeds)  should  be  placed 
upon  the  embedded  jar.  It  should  then  be  covered  with  (  dry  ) 
cow-dung  cakes  and  burnt. 


*  A  *  kilinja  ’  is  a  mat  prepared  by  weaving  blades  or  stems  of  certain 
kinds  of  grass  or  reeds. 

*  Drishad  ’  is  a  flat  stone  or  a  curry-stone. 

The  process  of  maceration,  called  Bhabana,  is  a  very  important  one  in 
Hindu  pharmacy.  “  Powders,  and  especially  mineral  substances,  are  often 
soaked  in  various  fluids,  such  as  expressed  juice  of  herbs,  decoctions,  &c., 
and  then  dried  (by  exposure  to  the  sun).  For  this  process,  the  quantity  of 
of  fluid  added  to  the  powder  should  be  sufficient  to  cover  it.  The  mixture  is 
then  allowed  to  dry  in  the  sun.  A  single  operation  of  this  sort  is  completed  in 
twentyfour  hours,  but  the  process  is  generally  repeated  from  three  to  seven 
times  (  or  more ),  and  often  with  a  variety  of  fluids,  so  that  the  resulting  mass 
combines  in  it  the  active  principles  of  various  drugs.” — U.  C.  Butt’s  Mat. 
Med.  of  the  Hindus. 

f  The  seeds,  that  is,  of  the  fruits  of  Semecarpus  Anacardium,  Linn.—T. 


OPINIONS, 


( From  Raja  Peary  Mohan  Maker ji,  M.A.,  B.L.,  C.S.I.,  &c.) 

Uttarpara  : 

25th  August,  i8g6. 

My  dear  Sir. — Thanks  for  the  15th  part  of  the  translation  of  Charaka  Samhits, 
which  I  have  just  received.  This  part  is  exceedingly  valuable  by  reason  of  its  dealing 
with  a  subject  which  is  of  vital  importance  to  the  public.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the 
work  is  not  more  widely  patronised.  I  have  no  doubt  that  everybody  who  reads  it  is 
much  benefited  by  it. 

Yours  very  truly, 

(Sd.)  Peary  Mohan  Mukerji. 

(  From  G.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C.  S.  ) 

Bankipore. 

My  dear  Sir, — I  have  to  thank  you  for  Part  XV  of  your  very  useful  translation 
of  Charaka. 

I  quite  agree  with  you  that  Charaka' s  work  can  be  read  by  laymen  with  great 
interest.  It  is  by  no  means  a  book  which  is  to  be  read  only  by  professional  medical 

Yours  truly, 

(Sd.)  G.  A.  Grierson. 

(  From  the  Medical  Age.,  U.  S.  A.) 

The  Charaka-Samhits.  By  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna.  Part  XIV,  Octavo  ; 

pp.  38.  The  Deva  Press,  Calcutta. 

The  contents  of  this  fasciculus  are  varied  and  interesting.  The  functions  of  the 
heart  are  described,  and  the  “ten  great  duets  arising  therefrom”  explained.  Next 
are  elaborated  and  discussed  the  “five  things  essential  to  prolong  life,”  viz  : — 
Universal  compassion  ;  increase  of  energy  ;  subjugation  of  the  senses  ;  knowledge  of 
Brahma:  and  the  practice  of  Brahmacharyya.  Also  are  carefully  pointed  out  the 
.  characteristics  that  accrue  to  those  that  are  truly  conversant  with  medical  scriptures. 
The  seven  principal  questions  relating  to  life,  and  errors  concerning  them,  follow, 
finally  is  a  dissertation  on  the  conduct  of  good  physicians  towards  charlatans. 

No  medical  man  interested  in  the  archaeology  of  his  profession  should  lose  the 
opportunity  of  subscribing  for  this  work,  which  is  both  unique  and  remarkable,  giving 
evidence  that  all  of  civilization  and  of  medicine  does’not  pertain  to  the  Christian  or 
any  other  era. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


AYINASII  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA. 


-Samhii 


Editor  of  Ci 


Editor  of  Chi 


System 


TITIONER 


Medicine,  &c.,  &c.,  &c. 


‘Deva  Press”,  27,  College  Sti 


Published 


(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved. ) 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS. 

PART  XVIII. 

The  contents  are  varied  and  interesting-.  The  observations  on 
the  book  to  be  selected  for  study,  the  qualifications  of  the  preceptor, 
and  the  bearing  of  the  pupil,  will  amply  repay  perusal. 

Lesson  VII  terminates  in  this  Part.  In  the  concluding  portion 
of  that  Lesson  occurs  an  account  of  the  manner  in  which  a  few 
medicines  destructive. of  worms  may  be  prepared. 

Lesson  VIII  commences  in  this  part.  It  treats  of  how  disease 
is  to  be  conquered  by  the  physician. 

First  comes  the  selection  of  the  proper  book  which  one  is  to 
take  up  for  study.  The  characteristics  of  such  a  work  are  laid 

The  next  thing  is  the  selection  of  a  Preceptor.  The  character¬ 
istics  of  a  good  Preceptor  are  set  forth. 

How  the  Pupil  should  approach  the  Preceptor  and  what  he 
should  do.  The  manner  of  study.  The  method  of  teaching.  The 
examination  of  the  intending  pupil  by  the  Preceptor.  The  quali- 
’fications  of  the  Pupil. 

The  time  when  both  Preceptor  and  Pupil  should  begin.  The 
preliminary  rites  to  be  performed. 

The  directions  the  preceptor  should  give  the  pupil  regarding 
his  carriage  or  deportment  during  the 'state  of  pupilage.  (The 
discipline  laid  down,  it  may  be  said,  deserves  to  be  imitated  in 
modern  colleges  and  universities.) 

The  classes  of  persons  to  whom  medicines  should  not  be  ad- 

How  the  physician  should  enter  the  houses  of  his  patients. 
What  he  should  do,  having  entered  the  house. 

The  methods  of  discussion  which  physicians  should  adopt  for 
keeping  up  their  knowledge  or  for  gaining  knowledge.  There  are 
two,  kinds  of  discussion,  viz'.,  Peaceful  discussion  and  Hostile 
discussion.  The  manner  in-  which  peaceful  discussion  should  be 
conducted. 

|  The  manner  of  conducting  hostile  discussion.  What  qualities 
are  good,  and  what  bad,  in  controversy. 

Elaborate  instructions,  for  'the  most  connected -with  dialectical 
philosophy,  are  laid  down  for  observance  by  a  physician  wishing 
to  enter  into  a  hostile  discussion  with  another. 

Technical  terms  explained. 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITAl 


54i 


When  the  physician  ascertains  that  the  cow-dung  cakes  have 
all  burnt  off,  and  that  the  oily  substance  in  the  Bhallataka  seeds 
has  dropped  from  the  upper  into  the  lower  vessel,  he  should  then 
take  up  the  embedded  jar. 

Taking  out  of  that  second  jar  the  oily  substance,  it  should  be 
mixed  with  the  powdered  grain  of  Vidanga  (  Embelici  Ribes ).  The 
mixture  should  contain  two  parts  of  Bhallalaka  oil  and  one  part  of 
Vidanga  grain. 

This  mixture  should  next  be  exposed  to  the  sun  for  one  whole  x  ,ry 
day. 

Having  prepared  it  in  this  way,  the  physician  should  give  unt 
the  patient  a  proper  dose  for  drink. 

It  will  purge  the  patient  properly. 

Having  purged  him,  the  subsequeut  drinks  (  as  noted  before 
should  be  given  to  him.81* 

Using  the  oil  of  Bhadradaru  (  a  )  and  Saralakashtha  (  b  )  in 
this  way,  the  physician  should  give  it  to  the  patient  for  drink. 

The  same  oil  should  be  used  as  enemata  when  the  time  comes 
for  administering  it.sa+ 


*  Kalasa  is  a  measure  representing  16  seers.  Wilson  gives  it  as  the  equi¬ 
valent  of  an  Adhaka  or  Drona.  In  Medicine,  wherever,  kalasa  occurs  as  a 
word  significant  of  measure,  it  is  taken  as  equivalent  to  16  seers.  Ordinarily, 
the  word  means  an  earthen  jar  of  a  well-known  size.  That  size  is  such  as  to 
contain  about  16  seers. 

The  earthen  jars  recommended  for  use  should  be  strongly  made,  that  is, 
well-baked.  They  should,  besides,  be  such  as  have  sucked  a  goodly  quantity 
of  oil.  Such  jars  prove  more  durable. — T. 

a.  Otherwise  called  Devadaru  ;  Cedrus  deodara  ;  syn.  Pinus  deodara,  Roxb. 

b.  Pinus  longifolia,  Roxb. 

f  The  oil  of  the  fruits  of  Cedrus  deodara  and  Pinus  longifolia,. should 
first  be  obtained  according  to  the  process  described  in  the  previous  aphorism. 
It  should  then  be  mixed  with  Vidanga  grains,  and  a  sufficient  dose  thereof 
should  be  given  to  the  patient.  After  this,  if  the  physician  likes,  enemata  may 
be  administered  with  the  same  oil  only,  not  using  Vidanga  grains  in  it— .T 
69 


542 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


Then  the  physician  should  address  the  patient  (  or  his  friends  ), 
saying, — Collect  these  articles,  viz.y  new  autumnal  sesame  seeds 
of  a  rich  kind.* 

Having  brought  such  seeds,  they  should  be  husked  till  every 
grain  becomes  huskless. 

They  should  next  be  washed  till  they  become  very  clean. 

Casting  them  next  into  the  decoction  of  Vidanga .  (  Embelia 
Ribes  )  while  tolerably  hot,  they  should  be  allowed  to  cool  till  they 
become  very  cool. 

This  process  should  be  repeated  till  the  sesame  seeds  become 
perfectly  faultless.f 

Ascertaining  that  they  have  become  faultless,  those  amongst 
them  that  are  broken  or  that  have  burst,  should  then  be  thrown 
away. 

They  should  once  again  be  husked  till  every  grain  has  become 
huskless,  and  washed  till  every  grain  has  been  thoroughly  washed 
and  become  purified. 

The  purified  grains  should  next  be  macerated  for  thrice  seven 
times  and  exposed  to  the  sun  ( as  often  )  till  the  process  of 
maceration  has  been  thorough. 

They  should  then  be  pounded  on  a  mortar,  and  next  reduced  to 
finer  powder  on  a  flat  stone  (  with  the  aid  of  a  muller). 

They  should  next  be  thrown  into  a  flat-mouthed  earthen  vessel 
and  repeatedly  sprinkled  over  with  the  decoction  of  Vidanga 
(  Embelia  Ribes  ). 

Taking  them  up  they  should  then  be  pressed  with  the  hands 
(  for  squeezing  out  their  oil  ). 


*  I.  e.,  well  developed. — T. 

4  What  the  indications  are  of  the  seeds  becoming  perfectly  faultless,  are 
not  given  here.  Perhaps,  what  is  intended  is  that  the  seeds  should  all  be 
thoroughly  soaked  in  the  decoction  and  assume  a  certain  softness  and  clear 
appearance.  Chakrapani  thinks  that  nothing  particular  is  meant  beyond  a 
thorough  cleansing,  & c. — T. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


543 


The  oil  that  would  come  out  in  course  of  such  squeezing  with, 
the  hands,  should  be  taken  up  and  kept  in  a  clean  and  strong 
earthen  jar  unexposed  to  the  wind. 

Then,  again,  the  physician  should  ask  the  patient  (and  his 
friends)  to  collect  the  following  articles,  viz.,  two  balls,  each  of 
the  measure  of  a  Vilwa ,*  of  Tilwaka  (a),  and  Uddalaka  (b)  pounded 
into  a  fine  paste  with  the  aid  of  the  decoction  of  Vidanga  ( Embelia 
Ribes),  and  two  balls,  each  of  half  the  measure  (of  a  Vilwa),  of 
£yama  (c)  and  Trivit  (d),  and  two  balls,  each  of  half  the  measure 
(of  half  a  Vilwa )  of  Danti  ( e )  and  Dravanti  (f),  and  two  balls, 
each  of  half  the  measure  of  the  previous  ones,  of  Chavya  ( g )  and 
Chitraka  ( h ). 

These  articles  should  be  mixed  with  the  decoction  of  Vidanga, 
of  the  measure  of  half  an  Adhaka. 

Then  a  prastha\  of  the  oil  should  be  taken  and  throwing  it  in 
a  large  pan,  the  paste  (spoken  of )  should  be  stirred  in  it  with  the 
aid  of  a  fire,  the  physician  sitting  at  his  ease  on  a  goodly  seat.  He 
should  cast  his  eyes  on  every  part  of  the  surface,  and  continue  to 
boil  the  oil  on  a  gentle  fire,  and  stir  it  with  a  wooden  ladle. 

When  the  physician  ascertains  that  all  sound  has  ceased,  that 
the  froth  has  disappeared,  that  the  oil  has  become  perfectly  still, 
that  the  proper  scent,  colour,  and  taste  have  appeared,  and  that 
the  medicine,  when  taken  up  with  two  fingers,  seems  to  have  be- 


*  Vilwa  is  of  the  measure  of  a  Pala  as  explained  by  Chakrapani.  A  pal  a 
is  equivalent  to  3  tolahs,  2  mashas,  and  8  ratis. 

Gangadhara  says  that  each  ball  should  be  of  the  measure  of  a  Pala  ;  hence, 
the  two  balls  should  together  be  of  the  weight  of  2  palas. 

a.  Otherwise  called  Lodhra.  Symplocos  racemosa  ;  Roxb. 

b.  Called  also  Selu  and  Bahubara.  Cordia  Myxa,  Linn , 

c.  This  is  Trivrit  having  dark  roots.  (See  d  below), 

d.  Ipomcea  Turpethum.  That  variety  which  has  red  roots  is  implied  by  it. 

e.  Baliospermum  montanum  ;  syn.  Cretan  polyandrum,  Roxb. 

/.  Anthericum  tuberosum. 

g.  Piper  chaba  ;  syn.  Chavica  officinarum. 

h.  Plumbago  zeylanica,  Linn. 

t  A  prastha  is  4  kudavas  or  48  double  handfuls. 


544 


charaka-samhitA. 


come  neither  very  soft  nor  very  hard,  and,  further,  that  it  does  not 
adhere  to  the  fingers,  he  should  then  understand  that  the  time  has 
come  for  taking  down  the  pan. 

After  taking  it  down  and  allowing  it  to  cool,  and  straining  it 
with  the  aid  of  an  untorn  cloth,  and  placing  it  in  a  clean  and  strong 
earthen  jar,  and  covering  the  mouth  of  that  jar  by  a  dish,  and 
wrapping  the  whole  with  a  piece  of  white  cloth,  and  binding  it  up 
with  cords,  the  physician  should  place  it  in  a  place  unexposed  to 
the  wind. 

Then  a  proper  dose  should  be  given  to  the  patient  for  drink¬ 
ing.83 

By  means  of  this  oil,  the  patient  may  be  very  well  purged. 

After  his  faults  have  been  extracted  (relieved),  he  should  next 
have  administered  unto  him  that  course  of  treatment  which  has 
been  already  laid  down. 

After  this,  when  the  time  comes  for  administering  enemata, 
enemata  should  be  applied.84 

Preparing,  according  to  the  same  process  of  cooking,  the  oil 
of  mustard  seeds,  linseed,  Karanja  (a),  a’nd  Koshataki  ( b ),  the 
physician,  carefully  observing  all  indications,  should  cause  the 
patient  to  drink  it.  Through  it  the  patient  becomes  free  from 
poison.35 

Thus  have  been  expounded,  in  a  general  way,  the  cause,  the 
place  or  seat,  the  shape  and  size,  the  colour,  names,  influence,  and 
the  different  modes  of  treatment,  of  the  two  kinds  of  worms  viz., 
those  born  of  phlegm  and  faeces. 38 

As  regards  especial  treatment. 

Among  the  medicines  (spoken  of  above),  a  little  measure  of 
those  particular  ones  that  are  exceedingly  well-fitted  for  use  as 


a.  Pangamia  glabra  /  syn,  Galedupa  Indica,  Lamh. 

b.  Luffa  amara,  Roxb, 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


545 


enemata  of  both  kinds,  {viz.,  oily  and  dry),  and  that  are  well- 
adapted  for  making  the  wind  move  in  its  natural  directions,  should 
be  taken  for  the  treatment  of  worms  born  of  faeces.* 

Among  these  medicines,  a  large  measure  of  those  particular 
ones  that  are  exceedingly  well-fitted  as  cerebral  purgatives,  as 
emetics;  and  as  palliatives,  should  be  taken  for  the  treatment  of 
worms  born  of  phlegm. 

Thus  has  been  expounded  the  method  of  treatment  for  killing 
worms.87 

The  patient,  while  under  this  course  of  treatment,  should  en¬ 
deavour  to  avoid  those  causes  that  generate  the  kind  of  worms 
from  which  he  is  suffering. 

The  treatment  of  persons  suffering  from  worms  in  their  bodily 
vessels  is  duly  expounded  agreeably  to  what  was  premised.38 

Here  are  some  verses. 

Extraction  has  been  indicated  as  the  first  process  in  the  treat¬ 
ment  of  worms. 

After  this,  the  prevention  of  their  birth,  and  then  the  avoidance 
of  their  cause.89 

Even  this  is  the  method,  consisting  of  three  ways,  that  has 
been  declared,  for  the  alleviation  of  all  diseases  ;  referring  to  (the 
subject  of)  worms.40 

They  are  the  processes  of  correction,  administration  of  allevia- 
tives,  and  avoidance  of  the  originating  causes. 

Even  this,  agreeably  to  the  ordinances  laid  down,  is  what  the 
physician  should  do  in  individual  cases  (of  worms.)41 

(The  following  verses  contain  a  summary  of  the  contents ). 

The  two  sorts  of  diseased  persons,  learned  and  unlearned 
physicians,  the  effects  of  their  respective  treatments,  the  twenty 
varieties  of  worms,  and  the  seven  incidents  beginning  with  their 

*  ‘Anulomaharana-bhuishtam’  seems  to  be  an  incorrect  reading  for 
‘anulomakarana  &c.’  Almost  all  the  printed  texts  have  ‘harana.’  Chakra- 
pani,  adhering  to ‘harana,’ is  obliged  to  suggest  an  interpretation  that  is  very 
far-fetched  and  that  is  scarcely  supported  by  the  words  of  the  text.  The 
correction,  ‘karana’  for  'harana'  would  at  once  make  the  sense  clear. — T. 


546 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  M II  IT  A 


origin,  have  all  been  declared,  in  the  Vimanam  called  Vyadhita- 
rupiyam,  by  the  great  Rishi,  for  the  instruction  of  his  pupils  as 
also  for  the  alleviation  of  disease.1-2 

Thus  ends  the  Lesson  called  Vyadhitarupiyam  in  the  Division 
called  Vimanam,  in  the  treatise  of  Agnive?a  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  VIII. 

We  shall  next  expound  the  Vimanam  called  “  how  disease  is  to 
be  conquered  by  the  physician.” 

Thus,  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.* 

If  an  intelligent  man,  who  knows  the  difficulty  and  lightness 
of  all  acts,  the  results,  immediate  and.  remote,  of  acts,  and  place 
and  time,  desires,  impelled  by  proper  reasons,  to  become  a  physi¬ 
cian,  he  should  then,  at  the  outset,  select  the  particular  treatise  he 
should  take  up  for  study. 

Diverse  treatises  appertaining  to  the  profession  of  physicisan 
are  in  circulation. 

Amongst  these  one  should  have  recourse  to  that  particular 
work  which  has  been  honoured  by  men  of  renown  and  wisdom, 
which  is  full  of  substance,  which  is  worshipped  by  the  inspired, 
which  is  well-suited  to  the  understandings  of  the  three  kinds  of 
pupils,  which  is  free  from  the  fault  of  tautology,  which  is  ascrib- 
able  to  a  Rishi,  which  has  been  well-compiled  in  respect  of 
aphorisms,  commentaries,  and  abstracts  in  due  order,  which  treats 
of  nothing  but  the  professed  subject,  which  is  devoid  of  slang  and 
provincial  words,  which  contains  no  obsolete  or  unfamilar  words, 
which  is  couched  in  words  of  wide  import,  which  is  duly  arranged 
according  to  sense,  which  has  been  principally  designed  to  lead  to 
certainty  of  inferences,  which  is  consistent,  which  has  well-distri- 


*  This  Lesson  is  called  ‘Roga  Bhishakjitiyam.’  This  is  explained  differ¬ 
ently  by  different  men.  I  follow  Chakrapani  in  rendering  it  as  equivalent  to 
the  conquest  of  disease  by  the  physician. 

The  meaning  of  the  expression  will  be  best  understood  as  the  reader  goes 
on  with  the  Lesson. — T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHI TA. 


547 


buted  sections,  which  is  capable  of  being  quickly  understood, 
which  has  all  the  indications  of  a  scientific  treatise,  and  which  con¬ 
tains  proper  illustrations. 

A  treatise  of  this  kind  dispels  ignorance  like  the  bright  sun  dis¬ 
pelling  darkness  and  discovering  all  things.® 

After  this,  he  that  should  be  selected  as  preceptor  should  be 
examined. 

The  following  should  be  the  qualifications. 

He  should  be  one  whose  doubts  have  all  been  cleared  in  res¬ 
pect  of  medical  scriptures. 

He  should  be  possessed  of  experience  (gained  from  treatment 
of  disease). 

He  should  be  clever  (in  the  practice  of  his  profession.) 

He  should  be  compassionate  towards  those  who  approach  him. 

He  should  be  of  pure  conduct.* 

He  should  have  a  practised  hand  (in  Surgery). 

He  should  have  all  the  implements  of  his  profession  (such  as 
pestle  and  mortar,  syringes,  surgical  instruments,  &c). 

He  should  have  all  the  organs  of  sense.  + 

He  should  be  conversant  with  (the)  nature  (of  health,  of  disease, 
of  medicaments,  of  time,  of  place,  of  men,  &c.) 

He  should  be  conversant  with  the  tendencies  and  acts  of  the 
healthy  and  of  the  diseased  (as  regards  food  and  sports,  &c.) 

He  should  be  one  whose  knowledge  of  the  medical  science 
has  been  supplemented  by  knowledge  of  other  branches  of  study. 

He  should  be  without  malice. J 

He  should  be  without  a  wrathful  disposition. 

He  should  be  capable  of  bearing  privations  and  pain. 


*  Purity  may  be  internal  or  external.  Here  external  purity  is  implied, 
such  as  cleanliness  in  dress  or  food,  &c. — T. 

t  i.e.,  he  should  not  be  defective  in  any  of  the  senses  : — T. 

}  i.e.,  Not  given  to  ill-speaking. — T. 


548 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHITA. 


He  should  be  one  well-affected  towards  disciples  and  disposed 
to  teach  them. 

He  should  be  capable  of  communicating  his  ideas  ( to  pupils 
that  seek  his  instructions.) 

A  preceptor  possessed  of  these  qualifications  very  soon  succeeds 
in  equipping  an  intelligent  disciple  with  the  requisite  characteristics 
of  a  physician  like  a  cloud  belonging  to  the  proper  season  equipping 
a  fertile  field  with  an  abundant  harvest. 

Approaching  such  a  preceptor,  the  pupil  desirous  of  courting 
him  should  attend  on  him  with  heedfulness  like  one  revering  one’s 
sacrificial  fire,  or  one’s  deity,  or  one’s  king,  or  one’s  father,  or 
one’s  patron. 

Then,  studying  the  entire  treatise  through  his  grace,  the  pupil 
should  duly  strive  to  comprehend  the  relations  of  the  different  parts 
towards  one  another  and  of  each  part  towards  the  whole,  to 
understand  the  consistency  and  correlation  of  the  words  employed, 
t©  apprehend  the  sense  of  the  author,  and  to  acquire  the  facility 
of  exposition.8 

The  means  for  achieving  these  ends  are  as  follow  : — 

Study,  teaching,  and  conversations  with  fellow-students. 

These  are  the  means.4 

Amongst  these,  the  following  is  the  method  (to  be  observed)  in 
study. 

In  health  (*.*.,  when  there  is  no  disease),  and  observant  of  the 
rule  regarding  time,  the  pupil  should  rise  at  day-break  or  a  little 
before,  and  going  through  the  necessary  morning  rites,  performing 
his  ablutions,  and  bowing  into  the  deities,  the  Rishis,  the  cow,  the 
Brahmanas,  preceptors,  those  venerable  for  age,  those  ascetics 
that  have  been  crowned  with  success,  and  professors,  and  seating 
himself  down  at  his  ease  on  a  level  and  clean  spot  of  ground,  he 
should  repeatedly  recite  the  aphorisms  in  due  order,  with  his 
mind  set  on  the  recitation.* 


i.e.,  he  should 


the  words  with  mind  set  on  other  objects. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  549 

He  should  do  this,  duly  entering  into  the  sense  with  the  aid  of 
his  understanding.  , 

And  he  should  do  this  for  getting  rid  of  his  own  faults  and 
demonstrating  the  faults  of  others. 

He  should  do  this  at  mid-day,  in  the  afternoon,  and  in  night¬ 
time,  steadily. 

Without  allowing  his  time  to  run  to  waste-,  he  should  thus 
practise  himself  in  recitation. 

Even  this  is  the  method  of  study.5 
After  this  comes  the  method  of  teaching. 

The  preceptor  who  has  set  his  mind  on  teaching  should  at  first 
examine  the  person  that  presents  himself  for  becoming  a  pupil. 

The  disciple  should  be  as  follows: — ■ 

He  should  be  of  a  mild  disposition. 

He  should  be  noble  by  nature. 

He  should  not  be  mean  in  acts. 

His  eyes,  mouth,  and  nasal  line  should  be  straight. 

His  tongue  should  be  thin,  red,  and  unslimy. 

His  teeth  and  lips  should  have  no  deformity. 

He  should  not  have  a  nasal  voice. 

He  should  be  possessed  of  intelligence. 

He  should  be  free  from  pride. 

He  should  be  endued  with  a  large  understanding. 

He  should  have  power  of  judgment  and  memory. 

He  should  have  a  liberal  mind. 

He  should  belong  to  a  family  the  members  of  which  have 
studied  the  medical  scriptures  or  followed  medicine  as  a  profession. 
He  should  have  a  devotion  for  truth. 

He  should  not  be  defective  in  respect  of  any  limb. 

He  should  have  all  his  senses  perfect. 

He  should  be  disposed  for  solitude. 

He  should  be  free  from  haughtiness. 

He  should  be  of  a  thoughtful  disposition. 


70 


550 


CHARAKA-SA  M II  IT A 


He  should  be  free  from  those  faults  which  go  by  the  name  of 

Vyasana.* 

He  should  be  free  from  wrath. 

He  should  be  endued  with  excellent  character,  purity .  of 
behaviour,  devotion,  cleverness,  and  compassion  for  all. 

He  should  be  fond  of  study. 

He  should  be  devotedly  attached  to  both  the  theory  and 
practice  (of  medicine).! 

He  should  be  free  from  cupidity. 

He  should  be  without  sloth. 

He  should  seek  the  good  of  all  creatures. 

He  should  be  prepared  to  obey  all  the  commands  of  his 
preceptor. 

He  should  be  attached  (to  his  preceptor). 

One  adorned  with  such  qualifications  has  been  declared  to  be 
worthy  of  acceptance  as  a  pupil. 

Unto  one  that  is  adorned  with  such  qualifications,  when  he 
has  presented  himself  for  acceptance  as  a  pupil,  and  when  he  is 
prepared  to  serve  his  preceptor  steadily  and  for  a  long  time,,  the 
preceptor  should  say  as  follows.6 

When  the  sun  is  in  his  northern  course,  during  the  lighted 
fortnight,  on  an  auspicious  day,  when  the  holy  Chandramas  is  in 
conjunction  with  any  of  these  asterisms,  viz.,  Tishya,  Hasta, 
^ravana,  and  the  twin  A?winis 

*  Certain  habits  and  acts  go  by  the  name  of  1  Vyasana.’  They  are  hunt¬ 
ing,  gambling  with  dice,  sleep  during  day  time,  speaking  ill  of  others,  infatua¬ 
tion  for  women,  excessive  addiction  to-  singing,  dancing,  and  instrumental  music, 
purposeless  sauntering,  and  others  of  a  similar  nature.  The  Hindu  Scriptures 
abound  with  exhortations  to  avoid  them.  In  the  case,  especially,  of  a  Brahma- 
charin  (pupil. living  in  the  house  of  his  preceptor),  their  avoidance  is  doubly  in¬ 
cumbent. — T. 

•j-  I.  e.,  he  should  not  only  be  fond  of  studying  Medical  Science,  but  should 
also  like  to  follow  his  master  for  observing  his  practice. — T. 

|  Tishya  (or  Tishya)  is  otherwise  called  Pushya.  It  is  the  eighth  asterism. 
Hasta  (or  Hasta)  is  the  thirteenth  asterism.  Cravana  (or  Cravana)  is  the 
twenty-second  asterism  ;  and  the  Ascwins  are  the  fir  asterism.  These  are 
regarded  as  auspicious  asterisms. — T. 


ChlAR A KA  SA M HI 7' A. 


55' 


when  the  holy  Chandramas  is  in  an  auspicious  Karana, 
and  when  the  Muhurta  is  friendly  (favourable),  having  fasted, 
having  shaved  off  the  hair  of  his  head,  attired  in  robes  steeped  in 
red-chalk,  equipt  with  (sacred)  fuel,  fire,  ghee,  unguents  (such  as 
sandal-paste),  water-pots,  and  perfumes  of  various  kinds,  as  also 
garlands  of  flowers,  a  lamp,  gold,  ornaments  of  gold,  silver,  gems, 
pearls,  corals,  and  silken  cloths,  also  with  blades  of  sacred  grass, 
fried  paddy,  mustard  seeds,  rice-grains  prepared  with  the  aid  of 
solar  heat  (instead  of  boiling),  also  a  quantity  of  white  flowers, 
both  loose  and  strung  together  in  wreaths,  also  some  clean  articles 
of  diet,  and  perfumes  pasted  and  otherwise,  do  tliou  come  !  The 
disciple  should  do  as  he  is  commanded.7  Ascertaining  that  he 
has  come,  the  preceptor  should  select  a  level  and  pure  plot  of 
ground  that  is  slightly  inclined  towards  the  east  or  towards  the 
north.  It  should  be  a  square,  every  side  of  which  should  measure 
one  cubit.  This  plot  is  to  be  used  for  igniting  the  homo,  fire.  It 
should  be  rubbed  over  with  cowdung  and  water.  Blades  of  sacred 
grass  should  then  be  laid  over  it,  and  on  four  sides  four  well-marked 
boundaries  should  be  drawn.  The  sides  should  be  adorned  with 
sandal-paste,  water-pots,  silken  cloths,  ornaments  of  gold,  (unmade) 
gold,  silver,,  gems,  pearls,  and  corals,  and  also  with  clean  articles  of 
diet,  perfumes,  white  flowers,  fried  paddy,  mustard  seeds,  and  sun- 
dried  rice.  Upon  that  piece  of  ground  a  fire  should  be  ignited  with 
fuel  of  Palana  ( a )  or  Ingudi  ( b ),  or  Udumvara  c),  or  Madhuki  d). 

He  should  sit  with  face  turned  eastwards,  having  purified  him¬ 
self  by  a  bath  or  other  rites).  He  should  then  pour  thrice  three 
libations  of  honey  and  ghee  on  the  fire  according  to  the  ordinances 
prescribed  for  pupils  entering  on  a  course  of  study.* 


(a.)  Butea frondosa,  Roub. 

(b.)  Balanites  Roxburghii.,  syn.  Ximenia  JEgyptiaca,  Roxb. 

(e.)  Ficus  glomerata.,  Willd,  syn.  Covellia  glomerata,  Miq. 

(d.)  Bassia  latifolia,  Roxb. 

*  The  libations  to  be  poured  have  reference  to  Bhu,  Bhuva,  and  Swah,  the 
three  great  vyShritis.  Three  to  each  of  these  would  make  nine  in  all. — T. 


Cc  'UtlTtpS,  5,  boulevard  des  Italiens 

_ _ Du  1H  Octo.  (iu  15  Avril  1-901  _ 

617  M.  Charles  Joret,  professeur 

17545  59,  rue  Madame 


552 


charaka-samhitA. 


After  this,  he  should,  uttering  the  prescribed  mantras  with 
prayers,  pour  libations  unto  Brahman  (the  Grandsire  of  the 
universe),  the  deity  of  fire,  Dhanwantari  (the  celestial  physician 
who  came  out  of  the  Ocean  when  it  was  churned  by  the  deities 
and  the  Asuras),f  the  Lord  of  creation  (Daksha),  the  twin  Agwins, 
Indra,  and  those  Rishis  who  have  been  authors  of  aphorisms  (re¬ 
lating  to  the  Science  of  Life). 

The  preceptor  should  first  utter  the  above  mantras ,  saying 
Swdhd.  The  disciple  should  follow  him  (in  uttering  the  mantras 
and  pouring  the  libations). 

Having  poured  the  libations,  he  should  cricumambulate  the 
fire,  keeping  it  on  his  right  side. 

After  the  circumambulation,  he  should  cause  a  number  of 
Brahmanas  to  pronounce  benedictions  (upon  him).J 

Lastly,  he  should  worship  a  number  of  physicians  (by  making 
respectful  salutations  unto  them,  or  bestowing  gifts  upon  them.)8 

The  preceptor  should,  in  the  presence  of  the  fire,  in  the 
presence  of  the  Brahmanas,  and  in  the  presence  of  the  physicians, 
command  the  pupil  in  these  words  : — 

Thou  shouldst  (during  the  period  of  pupilage)  lead  the  life  of  a 
Brahmachdrin.  Thou  shouldst  wear  a  beard  and  mustache  (with¬ 
out  submitting  to  the  operations  of  the  barber).  Thou  shouldst 
always  tell  the  truth.  Thou  shouldst  abstain  from  meat  and  from 
unclean  diet  (of  every  kind).  Thou  shouldst  not  harbour  envy.* 


t  Some  accounts  maintain  that  Dhanwantari  is  the  grandson  of  Brahman. 
He  is  the  greatest  of  the  professors  and  practitioners  of  the  Science  of  Medicine. 
To  this  day,  when  medicines  are  administered  to  any  patient,  the  latter  (or,  in 
case  of  inability,  his  friends  and  relatives),  utter  the  words — ■'  Victory  to 
Dhanwantari  ’ — and  then  takes  it.— T. 

+  This  rite  consists  in  inviting  a  number  of  Brahmanas,  making  them  gifts, 
and  obtaining  their  benedictions.  The  rite  of  '  Swastivachana  ’  is  prescribed 
for  all  undertakings  of  an  important  kind.  The  idea  is  that  the  Brahmanas,  by 
uttering  their  benedictions,  contribute  to  the  success  of  every  scheme. — T. 

*  I •  e.,  feel  unhappy  at  other  people’s  happiness. — T. 


C II A  RAKA-SAM I H  TA. 


553 


Thou  shouldst  not  bear  any  weapon.  There  should  be  nothing 
which  thou  shouldst  not  do  at  my  command  except  acts  hostile  to 
the  king,  or  acts  that  may  lead  to  another  person’s  death,  or  acts 
that  are  heinous  sins,  or  acts  productive  of  great  harm.  Thou 
shouldst  give  all  (thou  mayst  get)  unto  me.  Thou  shouldst  always 
regard  me  as  the  foremost  of  persons.  Thou  shouldst  always  hold 
thyself  in  subjection  to  me.  Thou  shouldst  always  bear  thyself  in 
a  way  that  is  agreeable  and  beneficial  to  me.  Thou  shouldst  behave 
as  a  son,  as  a  slave,  as  a  suppliant,  towards  me  while  thou  livest 
with  me.  Thou  shouldst  be  free  from  impatience.*  Thou  shouldst 
always  be  attentive.  Thou  shouldst  do  every  thing  with  mind  with¬ 
drawn  from  all  things  (and  concentrated  upon  what  thou  dost). 
Thou  shouldst  behave  with  humility.  Thou  shouldst  act  after 
reflection.  Thou  shouldst  not  murmur  at  or  find  fault  with  my 
orders.  Thou  shouldst  do  everytlung  with  my  permission.9 

Whether  or  not  1  impose  my  command  on  thee  before,  thou 
shouldst  always,  to  the  best  of  thy  might,  strive  to  achieve  the 
purposes  of  thy  preceptor. 

If  thou  desirest  to  achieve  success  of  treatment,  earn  wealth, 
acquire  celebrity,  and  win  Heaven  hereafter,  thou  shouldst,  rever¬ 
encing  kine  and  Brahmanas  above  all,  always  seek,  whether  stand¬ 
ing  or  sitting,  the  good  of  all  living  creatures. 

Thou  shouldst,  with  thy  whole  heart,  strive  to  bring  about  the 
cure  of  those  that  are  ill. 

Even  for  the  sake  of  thy  life  thou  shouldst  not  drain  those  that 
are  ill* 

Thou  shouldst  not,  even  in  imagination,  know  another  man's 
wife. 

Thou  shouldst  not,  similarly,  appropriate  other  people’s  posses¬ 
sions. 


t  Some  texts  read  ‘  samutsakena  ’  for  ‘  anutsakena.’  If  the  former  reading 
be  accepted,  the  meaning  would  be  ‘  thou  shouldst  be  always  eager  ( to  do  my 
bidding. — T. 

*1.  e.,  suck  out  or  extort  their  substance.  A  little  may  betaken,  but  not 
much. — T. 


554 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


Thou  shouldst  always  clad  thyself  in  homely  attire. 

Thou  shouldst  not  keep  any  connection  with  publicans,  or 
sinful  men,  or  with  those  that  are  abettors  of  sinful  behaviour. 

Thou  shouldst  speak  words  that  are  soft,  unstained  by  im¬ 
purity  (obscenity),  fraught  with  righteousness,  incapable  of  giving 
pain  to  pthers,  worthy  of  praise,  truthful,  beneficial,  and  properly 
weighed  or  measured. f 

Thou  shouldst  always  conduct  thyself  taking  note  of  place  and 
time. 

Thou  shouldst  always  act  heedfully.J 

Thou  shouldst  always  strive  to  acquire  knowledge,  to  cast  off 
sloth  (and  exert  manfully),  to  keep  ready  with  thee  the  imple¬ 
ments  and  medicines  thou  mayst  require. § 

Thou  shouldst  never  administer  medicines  unto  those  that  have 
incurred  the  displeasure  of  the  king,  or  those  that  are  ill-dis¬ 
posed  towards  the  king,  or  those  that  have  incurred  the  displeasure 
of  the  great,  or  those  that  are  ill-disposed  towards  them.^[ 

So  also  thou  shouldst  not  administer  medicines  unto  those  that 
are  of  exceedingly  perverse,  or  wicked,  disposition,  or  those  that 
are  exceedngly  poor,  or  those  that  never  vindicate  their  character 
when  it  is  aspersed,  or  those  that  are  on  the  point  of  death,  or  those 
that  have  not  their  masters  near  them,  or  those  women  that  have 
not  their  husbands  or  other  guardians  near  them.10* 

-j-  ‘  Mita  ’  is  weighed  or  measured.  The  idea  is  the  reverse  of  loquacity  or 
babbling. — T, 

J  ‘  Smritimata  ’  literally,  ‘  with  thy  memory  about  thee.’  Hence,  heed- 
f  ully,  or  not  heedlessly. — T, 

§  I.  e.,  medical  scriptures,  all  surgical  and  other  instruments,  drugs,  uten¬ 
sils  for  preparing  them,  &c. — T. 

‘  Mahajana  ’  literally  means  '  a  great  person.’  It  is  generally  used  to 
signify  a  person  that  has  been  crowned  with  success  of  penances,  or  one  that  has 
become  an  authority  for  holiness  and  good  conduct  and  knowledge.  It  implies 
also  a  person  of  noble  birth.  It  may  also  mean  the  great  body  of  people. — T. 

*  '  Asannihitefwaranam’  does  not  refer  to  ‘  strinam  ’  following  it.  It  implies 

those  persons,  minors  or  majors,  who  have  not  their  guardians  or  masters  near 
them.  A  person  has  fallen  down  from  his  horse  and  is  in  a  state  of  insensibility. 
A  difficult  surgical  operation  may  save  him,  or  may  not  save  him.  The  opera- 


CHA  R  A  KA -SA  M  HIT  A . 


555 


(After  becoming  a  physician)  thou  shouldst  not  accept  the  gift 
of  fish  and  meat  made  by  a  woman  without  the  knowledge  (or  per¬ 
mission)  of  her  lord  or  other  guardian.* 

While  entering  the  family  dwelling-house  of  the  patient,  thou 
shouldst  do  it  with  notice  to  the  inmates  and  with  their  permis¬ 
sion.  Thou  shouldst  (at  such  times)  be  accompanied  by  some  male 
member  of  the  family.  Thou  shouldst  cover  thy  person  properly. 
Thou  shouldst  (while  entering)  keep  thy  face  downwards.  With 
thy  wits  about  thee,  thou  shouldst,  with  understanding  and  mind 
properly  fixed,  observe  all  things.  Duly  conducting  thyself  in  this 
way  thou  shouldst  enter  (the  dwelling-house  of  the  patient.)f 

Having  entered,  thou  shouldst  not  devote  thy  words,  mind, 
understanding,  and  the  senses  to  anything  else  than  what  is  calcu¬ 
lated  to  do  good  to  the  patient,  or  to  any  other  object  connected 
with  the  patient  (than  his  recovery).  J 


tion,  however,  offers  the  only  chance.  What  is  the  physician  to  do?  The 
patient  is  insensible.  No  friend  or  guardian  is  near  to  consult.  Charaka’s  opinion 
is  that  such  a  patient  should  not  be  taken  up  for  treatment.  As  regards  women 
that  have  not  their  husbands  or  other  guardians  near  them,  the  prohibition  is 
due  to  the  danger  of  the  physician's  falling  on  evil  tongues. — T. 

*  Why  the  prohibition  touches  gifts  of  fish  and  meat  only,  does  not  seem  to 
be  clear.  What  the  Rishi  wishes  to  inculcate  is  that  the  physician  should  never 
seek  to  cultivate  the  good  will  or  friendship  of  the  women  of  the  families  he  may 
visit  professionally. — T. 

t  Dwelling  houses  in  India  consist  of  two  portions,  viz.,  the  inner  and  the 
outer  apartments.  The  outer  apartments  are  for  male  visitors  and  friends. 
The  inner  apartments  are  for  the  women,  and  can  be  entered  by  males  that 
are  members  of  the  family.  While  ailing,  persons  betake  themselves  to  the 
inner  apartments.  Hindu  women  live  in  seclusion.  Hence  these  words  of 
caution. —  T. 

$  The  physician  should  not  attend  to  anything  else  than  the  cure  of  the 
patient.  He  is  not  to  tell  stories  for  making  himself  agreeable  to  the.  inmates  of 
the  house,  or  to  negociate  loans  for  benefiting  them,  or  bring  about  marriage 
alliances.  His  conversation  should  be  confined  to  the  object  for  which  he 
has  been  summoned.-- -T. 


556 


CH  A  RA  KA  -SAM  HIT  A. 


Thou  shouldst  never  give  out  (to  others)  the  practices  of  the 
patient’s  house.* 

Even  if  thou  shouldst  be  certain  of  it,  thou  shouldst  not  speak 
of  the  diminution  of  the  patient’s  period  of  life  when  such  speaking 
may  shock  the  patient  or  any  body  else  (connected  with  him).+ 

Even  if  possessed  of  sufficient  knowledge  (of  medicine),  thou 
shouldst  not  boast  of  that  knowledge. 

Many  people  become  annoyed  with  even  an  Inspired  person  if 
he  boasts  (of  his  wisdom).11 

There  is  no  end  (to  reach)  of  Medical  Science.  Hence,  heed- 
fully,  thou  shouldst  devote  thyself  to  it.  In  this  connection,  one 
should  conduct  oneself  in  this  way.  Then,  again,  skilfulness  of 
practice  should  be  acquired  from  others,  without  feeling  any  humi¬ 
liation.:]: 

Unto  men  possessed  of  intelligence,  the  entire  world  acts  as 
a  preceptor. 

Unto  men  destitute  of  intelligence,  the  entire  world  occupies 
the  position  of  an  enemy. 


*  I.  e.,  the  physician  should  not  talk  to  others  about  the  possessions  of  the 
family,  their  wealth,  their  furniture,  dress,  beds,  &C.,  their  mode  of  living,  the 
arrangements  of  the  house-hold,  the  conduct  of  the  members,  male  and  female, 
that  may  fall  under  his  observation,  and  such  other  particulars.— T. 

f  I.  e.,  when  the  patient  may  be  shocked  or  anybody  interested  in  him  may 
be  shocked  ;  the  physician  should  speak  guardedly  on  the  probability  of  re¬ 
covery.  In  cases,  however,  in  which  the  patient  will  not  be  shocked,  the  physi¬ 
cian  may  speak  openly.  In  the  case,  for  example,  of  old  men  or  women,  that 
are  desirous  of  dying  in  sacred  places,  the  physician  should  speak  of  the  time 
when  death,  according  to  him,  may  probably  come.  In  such  cases  the  patient’s 
anxiety  is  relieved  by  the  disclosure. — T. 

J  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  Medical  Science  has  no  end  to  reach.  Hence, 
one  should  not  boast  after  having  acquired  some  knowledge  of  it,  even  if  that 
knowledge  surpasses  that  of  others.  Then,  again,  in  acquiring  skilfulness  of 
practice,  there  is  no  humiliation  involved  in  seeking  others,  i.  e.,  competent 
preceptors  and  practitioners. — T. 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  MHITA. 


557 


Hence,  observing  all  this,  an  intelligent  man  should  listen  and 
act  up  to  the  counsels  of  one  who  is  even  a  foe  when  these  happen 
to  be  instructive  and  praiseworthy,  capable  of  leading  to  fame  and 
long  life  and  prosperity,  and  beneficial  as  regards  his  worldy 
condition.18 

After  this,  the  preceptor  should  say  unto  the  pupil  these 
words : — 

Thou  shouldst  conduct  thyself  properly  towards  the  deities, 
Fire,  the  regenerate  ones  (vis.,  Brahmanas),  seniors,  those  that  are 
advanced  in  years,  those  that  have  been  crowned  with  success 
(through  penances),  and  those  that  are  professors  (of  diverse 
branchhes  of  learning). 

By  conducting  thyself  properly  unto  these,  this  (sacred)  fire, 
as  also  all  smells  and  tastes  and  grains  and  seeds,  and  all  the 
senses,  duly  impelled,  will  act  for  thy  benefit. 

By  conducting  thyself  otherwise  (towards  these),  they  will  act 
otherwise  to  thee. 

Upon  the  preceptor  saying  these  words,  the  pupil  should 
answer,  saying, — yes. 

If  the  pupil  does  as  he  is  commanded,  then  should  he  be 
taught.  It  he  behaves  otherwise,  he  should  be  regarded  as 
unworthy  of  being  taught.  The  preceptor  by  teaching  a  pupil  that 
deserves  to  be  taught  causes  him  to  obtain  the  full  benefits  of 
instruction. 

Besides  these,  several  other  beneficial  qualities,  not  spoken  of 
here,  come  of  themselves  to  both  the  preceptor  and  the  pupil. 

Thus  has  been  expounded  the  method  of  teaching  the 
science.18 

We  shall,  after  this,  expound,  after  the  manner  of  the  methods 
of  learning  and  teaching,  the  method  of  discussing  (among  fellow- 
students). 

A  physician  should  discuss  with  a  physician. 

When  one  discusses  with  another  that  is  possessed  of  a  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  same  science,  such  discussion  leads  to  increase  of 
knowledge  and  happiness. 

71 


,p558  CHARAKA-SAMHITA 

It  also  produces  a  thorough  conversance  with  that  science. 

It  bestows  the  power  of  speech  (eloquence). 

It  brightens  one’s  fame. 

If  there  be  doubts  (respecting  anything)  after  having  heard 
the  preceptor,  such  discussion  dispels  those  doubts  in  consequence 
of  the  aphorisms  being  once  more  rehearsed  in  his  hearing  (by  the 
disputant  on  the  other  side). 

If  there  be  no  doubts,  such  discussion  confirms  previously 
acquired  knowledge  by  repetition  (of  the  aphorisms)  in  the  per¬ 
son’s  hearing. 

Matters  unheard  before  are  heard  in  course  of  such  discussion. 

Watever  truths,  not  generally  imparted  and  much  prized,  are 
communicated  by  the  preceptor,  through  excess  of  satisfaction, 
unto  a  very  obedient  pupil,  come  out,  in  course,  of  such  discussion, 
the  learned  disputant  being  impelled  to  make  the  disclosure  by 
the  excitement  of  disputation  and  the  desire  of  victory  over  the 
opponent. 

For  these  reasons,  the  wise  applaud  discussions  with  fellow 
students.14 

Discussions  with  fellow  students  may  be  of  two  kinds  :  these  are 
i.  Peaceful  discussions,  and  2.  Hostile  discussions. 

A  discussion  with  a  person  that  is  possessed  of  knowledge, 
wisdom,  eloquence,  and  readiness  of  reply,  that  is  not  wrathful, 
that  is  free  from  errors,  that  is  not  malicious,  that  is  well  versed 
in  the  art  of  persuasion,  that  is  patient,  and  that  is  sweet-speeched, 
is  said  to  be  a  peaceful  discussion. 

In  discussing  matters  with  such  a  person,  one  may  discuss 
confidingly  and  even  enquire  (without  hesitation). 

If  such  a  person  confidingly  puts  a  question  for  knowing 
anything,  the  questioned  should,  with  equal  confidence,  return 
answers  to  the  questions  pnt. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  559 

The  latter  should  not  from  fear  of  ridicule  or  hostile 
criticism,  be  at  all  alarmed. 

He  should  not  laugh,  discomfiting  him. 

He  should  not  also  boast,  in  the  presence  of  other  people,  of 
having  discomfited  him. 

He  should  not,  again,  insist  upon  an  answer  (being  made  by  the 
other  person  to  any  question  he  may  have  put  and  which  the  other 
person  is  unable  to  answer). 

He  should  not  recapitulate  matters  which  are  well  known  (in 
answering  any  question  put  to  him). 

He  should,  by  gentle  words  and  manner,  persuade  the  other 
(to  adopt  what  he  says). 

After  display  of  gentleness  of  manner  and  speech,  he  should 
closely  devote  his  attention  to  the  matter  under  discussion. 

This  is  the  method  of  peaceful  (or  congenial)  discussions.18 

After  this,  one  should,  having  first  ascertained  one’s  own 
superiority,  engage  in  a  hostile  discussion  with  another. 

Before  beginning  the  discussion,  one  should  ascertain  the  result 
of  a  discussion  conducted  by  one^  opponent  with  somebody  else 
on  a  previous  occasion. 

One  should  also  ascertain  the  difference,  as  regards  superiority 
and  inferiority,  between  oneself  and  one’s  opponent. 

One  shouhd  also  take  particular  note  of  the  assembly  before 
which  the  discussion  is  to  take  place.* 

The  ascertainment  of  such  particulars  should  indicate  (settle)  the 
opportuneness  or  otherwise  of  engaging  in  the  discussion.f 


*  /.  e„  whether  the  assembly  is  partial  or  impartial,  or  friendly  or 
hostile. — T. 

t  !■  e.,  if  the  opponent  appear,  on  ascertainment,  to  have  got  victories  in 
discussions  with  others  on  previous  occasions,  if  his  superiority  be  marked, 
and,  lastly,  if  the  assembly  consist  of  persons  partial  to  him,  one  should  not 
engage  in  a  controversy  with  him.  Otherwise  one  may. — T. 


560 


charaka-samhitA. 


Hence,  they  that  are  wise  applaud  such  ascertainment. 

The  person  examining  the  superiority  or  inferiority  (of  his 
opponent),  should  regard  the  following  qualities,  displayed  in 
controversy  as  indicative  of  merit  and  the  following  as  indicative 
of  demerit. 

They  are  as  follow  : — 

Knowledge  acquired  by  listening  (to  preceptors),  wisdom 
acquired  by  study,  retention  (in  the  memory)  of  what  has  been 
acquired  (by  diverse  means),  readiness  in  bringing  out  the  stores 
conserved  in  memory,  power  of  speech  (or  eloquence) — these 
qualities  are  regarded  good. 

The  following  are  qualities  that  are  regarded  bad  : — 

Wrathfulness  (or  irritability),  want  of  mastery  over  the  subject, 
shyness,  and  heedlessness. 

One  should  weigh  these  respective  sets  of  qualities  for  ascer-  ' 
taining  their  predominance  or  otherwise  in  one’s  own  self  and  one’s 
opponent  in  disputation.16 

In  this  connection  it  may  be  said  that  disputants  may  be  of 
three  kinds  :  i.  Superior,  2.  inferior,  and  3.  equal,  as  regards 
the  result  of  a  weighing  of  the  qualities  indicated.  This  {viz., 
superiority,  inferiority,  and  equality)  is  not  concerned  with  the 
other  qualities.*17 

Without  doubt,  the  assembly  (before  which  the  disputation  is  to 
take  place)  may  be  of  two  kinds  :  1.  An  assembly  of  men  endued 
with  knowledge  and  wisdom,  and  2.  an  assembly  of  men  that  are 
ignorant. 


*  What  is  said  in  the  last  sentence  is  this  :  the  superiority,  inferiority,  and 
equality  spoken  of  here,  are  concerned  with  only  those  qualities  that  are  men¬ 
tioned  in  connection  with  disputation  or  controversy.  They  do  not  have  reference 
to  the  other  qualities  which  the  disputants  may  possess.  For  example,  one  of 
the  disputants  may  be  superior  to  the  other  in  birth,  in  personal  beauty,  in 
wealth,  in  respectability  of  dress,  and  a  hundred  other  particulars.  Yet  such 
superiority  would  be  of  no  avail  in  the  controversy,  and  is  not  at  all  referred 
to  by  the  Rishi  in  this  aphorism. — T 


charaka-samihtA. 


56' 


Though  (principally)  of  two  kinds,  it  may  be  of  three  kinds, 
according  to  difference  of  causes  noted  below  :  1.  an  assembly 

that  is  friendly,  2.  an  assembly  that  is  indifferent,  and  3.  an 
assembly  that  is  already  committed  to  one  side.*15 

Amongst  these,  disputation  should  never  be  entered  into  (with 
an  opponent)  in  an  assembly  that  is  committed  to  one  side,  whether 
the  assembly  consists  of  members  possessed  of  knowledge  and 
wisdom  and  eloquence  as  regards  statements  and  reply,  or  of 
members  that  are  ignorant. 

In  an  assembly  of  the  ignorant,  if  the  members  happen  to  be 
friends  or  if  they  are  indifferent,  one  may,  even  if  not  possessed 
of  knowledge  and  wisdom  and  eloquence,  enter  into  a  disputation 
with  a  person  who  is  of  blazing  fame  but  who  happens  to  be  an 
object  of  aversion  with  all  respectable  men. 

While  arguing  with  such  a  person,  one  may  flourish  wordy 
bolts  consisting  of  crooked  and  long  aphorisms. 

Frequently  indulging  in  ridicule,  assuming  the  while  great 
satisfaction  of  countenance,  and  turning  towards  the  auditory  and 
expressing  the  while  by  signs  that  it  is  the  highest  court  of  appeal, 
one  should  not  give  one’s  opponent  an  opportunity  of  speaking 
even  when  the  latter  is  very  much  desirous  of  speech. 

If  the  opponent  utters  any  word  that  is  obsolete,  he  should 
be  immediately  told  that  such  a  word  is  never  used  (by  the 
wisest 

Or,  one  may  tell  one’s  opponent  that  his  proposition  has  not 
been  at  all  established. 

If  the  opponent  summons  one  again,  one  should  tell  him, — 
Go,  and  study  for  a  full  year,  sitting  at  the  feet  of  your  preceptor 
(and  then  come  for  disputing)!— 


*  In  other  words,  friendly,  impartial,  and  hostile. — T. 
t  ‘  Kashta-gavdam,’  as  explained  by  Chakrapani,  means  'aprasiddhartha.' 
viz.,  a  word  whose  meaning  is  not  well-known,  or  whose  sense  has  been 
forgotten.  .  Of  course,  words  that  have  become  obsolete  come  under  ‘  kashta- 
Snvda.’ — T. 


562 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


Or,  he  may  be  thns  addressed, — This  much  (that  thou  hast 
done  today)  is  enough  ! — 

If  a  disputant  be  once  defeated,  and  has  been  shouted  at  as 
‘‘Vanquished,  vanquished,”  one  should  not  again  engage  in  a 
disputation  with  him. 

Some  say  that  while  engaged  in  a  hostile  disputation  with  even 
a  superior  person,  one  may  indulge  in  such  language  and  manner. 

They,  however,  that  are  possessed  of  wisdom,  do  not  applaud 
hostile  disputation  with  one  that  is  superior.19 

If  the  assembly  be  friendly,  one  may  engage  in  hostile  disputa¬ 
tions  with  an  opponent  that  is  inferior  or  that  is  regarded  as 
equal. 

If  the  assembly  be  indifferent  (2.  e.,  impartial  or  uninclined  in 
favour  of  either  party)*  and  consists  of  members  that  are  endued 
with  heedfulness,  information  acquired  from  converse  with  various 
persons,  knowledge,  wisdom,  retentive  faculty,  and  power  of 
speech,  one  should  talk  with  great  carefulness  and  mark  the 
measure  of  the  merits  and  defects  of  one’s  opponent. 

If  upon  marking  his  merits  and  demerits,  one  comes  to  regard 
him  as  one’s  superior,  one  should  not  then  engage  in  a  disputation 
with  him.  One  should,  however,  while  declining  a  disputation,  still 
take  care  to  conceal  one’s  inferiority. 

When,  however,  one  becomes  impressed  with  the  inferiority  of 
the  opponent,  one  should  soon  discomfit  him.20 

In  this  connection,  the  following  are  certainly  the  means  that 
may  be  adopted  for  quickly  discomfiting  disputants  that  are 
inferior.  They  are  these  : 

An  opponent  that  is  weak  in  the  Scriptures  should  be  vanquish¬ 
ed  with  citations  of  lengthy  aphorisms.f 


*  ‘  Qrutahina  ’  is  one  that  has  not  properly  studied  the  medical 

scriptures. — T. 

f  ‘Vijnanahina’  is  one  who  has  not  properly  seized  the  sense  of  the 
scriptures  though  he'  has  read  them  through.  What  is  recommended  for 
vanquishing  such  a  one  in  a  disputation  is  something  like  an  indulgence  in 
Greek-quotations,  which,  as  has  been  aptly  remarked,  very  often  do  duty  for 
reasons. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


563 


An  opponent  that  is  bereft  of  wisdom  should  be  vanquished 
by  the  use  of  phrases  fraught  with  words  whose  sense  is  difficult 
to  catch.* 

An  opponent  that  is^unable  to  quickly  catch  the  sense  of  the 
words  he  hears,  should  be  vanquished  by  reciting  lengthy  apho¬ 
risms  fraught  with  crooked  words. 

An  opponent  that  is  wanting  in  reproductive  faculty  should  be 
vanquished  by  using  diverse  kinds  of  words,  as  also  words  each 
of  which  has  diverse  senses. f 

An  opponent  that  is  bereft  of  clear  and  eloquent  utterance 
should  be  vanquished  by  jeering  imitations  of  his  half-uttered 
words  and  expressions. 

An  opponent  that  is  vain  though  not  pos-essed  of  skill  and 
mastery  over  the  science,  should  be  vanquished  by  one's  putting 
him  to  shame  (by  exposure  of  his  ignorance). ij: 

An  opponent  that  is  wrathful  should  be  vanquished  by  provok¬ 
ing  his  wrath. 

An  opponent  that  is  timid  should  be  vanquished  by  exciting 
his  fear. 

An  opponent  that  is  heedless  should  be  vanquished  by  ad¬ 
herence  to  method.21 

{Here  are  two  verses). 

In  hostile  disputations  (with  an  inferior  opponent),  one  should 
conduct  oneself  according  to  the  above  directions. 

As  regards  an  opponent  that  is  possessed  of  a  real  mastery 
over  the  science  (and  that  is,  therefore,  superior),  one  should  not 
engage  in  hostile  disputations  with  him. 


*  ‘  Pratibha  ’  is  that  faculty  by  which  what  is  retained  in  the  mind  is 
quickly  reproduced  when  needed.  This  is  the  reproductive  faculty  of  the 
Hamiltonian  school.  There  are  men  who  are  learned  and  who  possess  retentive 
memory,  but  when  the  occasion  comes,  cannot  readily  bring  out  their  stores 
of  knowledge.  Such  men  are  said  to  be  '  Pratibhahina. — T. 

f  An  ‘  avifarada  is  one  that  is  a  ‘  pragalbha  ’  though  '  apandita.’ — T. 
t  /.  e.,  disposing  it  to  be  inclined  favourably  towards  one. — T. 


5^4 


CH  A  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  reason  of  this  is  that  the  language,  used  in  hostile  disputa¬ 
tions,  brings  about  intense  enemity  as  regards  some  men. 

There  is  nothing  that  a  person  excited  by  wrath  may  not  do. 
There  is  nothing  that  such  a  person  may  not  say.  Hence,  they 
that  are  wise  do  not  applaud  disputations  in  assemblies  of  the 
good.22"28 

By  these  means  one  may  soon  vanquish  an  opponent  that  is 
inferior. 

When  a  hostile  discussion  is  about  to  begin,  before  actually 
engaging  in  it,  one  should  endeavour  to  act  as  follows  : 

Making  an  understanding  with  the  assembly,  one  should  cause 
it  to  name  that  as  the  subject  of  discussion  with  which  one  is 
perfectly  familiar,  or  which  will  be  exceedingly  difficult  to  one's 
opponent,  or,  one  may  cause  such  a  subject  to  be  brought  up  as 
runs  counter  to  the  sentiments  of  the  assembly.* 

When  the  assembly  is  seated,  one  should  say, — It  is  not  proper 
for  both  of  us  to  say  anything  (regarding  the  subject  to  be  taken 
up  for  discussion).  Here  is  your  assembly.  It  will  fix  the  subject 
of  discussion  as  also  the  limitations  that  should  regulate  the 
discussion,  agreeably  to  its  own  wishes,  as  also  to  considerations 
of  propriety,  and  to  our  intentions. 

Saying  these  words,  one  should  observe  silence.24 

In  this  connection  it  should  be  said  that  the  following  are 
regarded  as  limitations  for  regulating  discussions :  this  should  be 
said  ;  this  should  not  be  said  ;  if  this  happens,  the  di  sputant  shall 
be  regarded  as  vanquished.25 

The  following  are  the  categories  which  the  physician  must  be 
acquainted  with  in  order  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  the  ways  of 
discussion  or  disputation  : 

*  I.  e.,  which  the  assembly  is  sure  to  discountenance.  Chakrapani  cites 
such  examples  as  “  there  is  no  future  world,”  or  “  there  is  nothing  like  the 
effects  of  action  in  determining  one’s  course  of  existence.”  It  is  well-known  that 
the  belief  in  a  next  world,  or  in  karmaphala,  is  universal.  The  negative,  as 
regards  both  these,  is  sure  to  be  discountenanced  by  every  one. — T. 


CHARAKA  SAMI-UTA.  565 

These  (technical)  terms  should  be  understood  by  physicians 
with  a  view  to  learn  the  course  of  (medical)  disputation.  The  are 
i»  Vada,  2.  Dravya,  3.  Guha,  4.  Karma,  5.  Samanya, 
6  Vigesha,  7.  Samavaya,  8.  Pratijna,  9  Sthapana,  10.  Prati- 
sihapana,  11.  Hetu,  12.  Upanaya,  13.  Nigamana,  14.  Uttara, 
15.  Drishtanta,  16.  Siddhanta,  17.  £avda,  18.  Pratyaksha, 
19.  Anumana,  20.  Aupamya,  21.  Aitihya,  22.  Samgaya,  23.  Pra- 
yojana,  24.  Vyabhichara,  25.  Jijnasa,  26.  Vyavasaya,  27.  Artha- 
prapti,  28.  Sambkava,  29.  Anuyojya,  30.  Ananuyojya,  31.  Anu- 
yoga,  32.  Pratyanuyoga,  33.  Vakyadosha,  34.  Vakyapragamsa, 
35.  Cchala,  36.  Ahetu,  37.  Atiiakala,  38.  Upalambha,  39.  Pari- 
hara,  40.  Pratijnahani,  41.  Abhyanujna,  42.  Hetvantara,  43, 
Arthantara,  and  44.  Nigrahasthana.  ?*zs 

Of  these,  the  following  on  Vada:  Vada  (disputation)  is  discus¬ 
sion  with  each  other,  agreeably  to  the  scriptures,  and  in  a  spirit  of 
contradiction. 

In  brief,  this  disputation  is  of  two  kinds  :  Jalpa  and  Vitanda. 

Of  these,  the  discussion  between  two  persons  that  have  adopted 
opposite  sides  (of  a  question),  is  Jalpa.  Vitanda  is  Jalpa  conduct¬ 
ed  perversely. 

In  illustration  :  the  proposition  of  one  of  the  parties  is — There 
is  re-birth  ;  the  proposition  of  the  other  is — There  is  no  re-birth. 
Each  seeks  to  establish  his  own  proposition  and  demolish  his 
antagonist’s  by  adducing  reasons.  This  is  Jalpa. 

A  perversion  of  Jalpa  is  called  Vitanda.  Verily,  Vitanda  is 
merely  the  imputation  of  faults  to  the  proposition  taken  up  by  the 
other  side.27 

*  Instead  of  endeavouring  to  give  the  English  renderings  of  these  techni¬ 
cal  words,  it  is  more  convenient  to  present  them  in  their  original  forms.  The 
Rishi,  in  the  succeeding  portion  of  this  Lesson,  carefully  explains  every  word 
and  the  Commentators  add  illustrations  in' a  great  many  cases.  Many  of  these 
terms  belong  to  the  Nyaya  school  of  philosophy',  and  are  well-known  to 
readers  conversant  with  the  methods  of  Hindu  dialecticians. 

As  each  of  these  words,  therefore,  has  been  fully  explained  in  the  subsequent 
aphorisms,  it  is  not  necessary  to  render  them  into  English,  even  if  accurate 
renderings  were  possible. — T. 


566 


CHARAK-SAMHITA 


Dravya  (substance),  Guna  (attribute),  Samanya  (similarity), 
Vigesha  (dissimilarity),  and  Samavaya  (combination), — these  have 
been  explained,  by  means  of  their  respective  indications,  in  the 
Place  of  flokas  Sutrasthana  before.*23 

Pratijna  is,  verily,  the  proposition  that  is  to  be  established  : 
as, — The  soul  is  ever-existent.f29 

Then  as  to  Sthapana  :  Sthapana  is  of  what  has  been  called 
Pratijna  (or  proposition). 

This  Sthapana  (or  establishment)  is  to  be  made  by  Hetu  (rea¬ 
son),  Drishtanta  (example),  Upanaya  (similarity),  and  Nigamana 
(inference  or  conclusion). 

The  proposition  comes  first. 

After  this  comes  the  establishment.  For  what  is  to  be  estab¬ 
lished  if  there  be  no  proposiiion  ? 

Thus  in  illustration  of  the  above:  ‘The  Soul  is  ever-existent  ’ — 
is  a  proposition.  The  Hetu  (or  reason)  is — In  consequence  of  its 
being  uncreated. 

Drishtanta  (example)  :  as — Space  (which  also  is  increate  and 
ever-existent). 

Upanaya  (application)  :  as — Space  is  increate,  so  is  the  Soul. 

Nigamana  (Inference  or  conclusion)  as, — Hence,  the  Soul  is 
ev  r-existent.J30 


*  Vide  p. — Sutrasthana,  ante.  Sutrasthana,  or  place  of  aphorisms,  is 
sometimes  referred  to  as  flokasthanam,  or  the  place  of  flokas,  i.  e.,  verses,  be¬ 
cause  the  whole  of  that  division  is  written  in  verse. — T. 

f  ‘  Purusha  ’  is,  literally,  ‘  that  which  lies  in  pura  or  the  body;'  hence, 
the  Soul,  which  though  not  of  the  body  resides  within  it.  The  Hindu  idea  is 
that  the  Soul  is  ever-existent,  that  it  is  as  ancient  as  ‘  Iswara  ’  or  the  Supreme 
Being  ;  that  its  being  invested  with  a  body  or  material  case  is  the  result  of 
acts  in  a  previous  state  of  existence,  i*that  re-birth,  i.  e.,  re-investment  in  a 
material  case,  is  going  on  for  ever  ;  that  Emancipation  consists  in  its  being 
freed  from  the  obligation  of  such  re-investment. — T. 

%  From  the  language  employed  above,  it  is  evident  that  it  is  borrowed  from 
the  Gautama-Sutras,  with  very  slight  alterations.  In  the  Gautama-Sutras,  the 
words  are  ‘Sadhya-nirdefa’  for  ‘Sadhya-vachanam’  of  Charaka.  According  to 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  M II  IT A. 


567 


As  to  Pratistliapana  :  Pratisthapana  is  the  establishment  of  a 
proposition  that  is  contradictory  in  sense  to  the  proposition  first 
mooted.  For  instance  :  The  soul  is  not  ever-existent.  (This  is  a 
proposition  contradictory  in  sense  to  the  proposition  first  mooted, 
vis.,  The  soul  is  ever-existent). 

The  Hetu  or  reason  (of  this)  is  the  fact  of  its  being  apprehend¬ 
ed  by  the  senses. 

Drishtanta  (or  example)  :  as — a  Jar.  It  is  apprehended  by  the 
senses  and  is  not  ever-existent. 

Upanaya  (or  application)  :  as — As  is  a  jar  so  is  the  soul. 

Nigamana  (inference  or  conclusion)  :  as — Hence  it  (the  soul)  is 
not  ever-existent.*31 


Gautama,  Nyaya  (or  reasoning)  is  ‘  Panchanga  ’  or  five-limbed  ;  the  five  limbs 
are,  as  here  noted,  Pratijna,  Hetu,  Drishtanta,  Upanaya,  and  Nigamanai. 
Later  logicians  of  India  (such  as  the  famous  Raghunath  Shiromani,  the  founder 
of  the  Nadiya  School  of  Nyaya,  in  his  ‘P'adartha-khandam,’)  have  re- construct¬ 
ed  Nyaya  by  taking  it  as  consisting  of  only  three  limbs,  viz.,  Pratijna,  Hetu, 
and  Nigamana.  The  Mimansakas,  particularly  in  their  ‘  Bhatta-Chintamani, 
appear  to  be  of  the  same  opinion.  The  fact  is,  to  those  familiar  with  the 
Greek  system,  the  five-limbed  Nyaya  of  Gautama  would'  certainly  appear  to  be 
very  crude.  The  presence,  again,  of  Drishtanta  and  Upanaya  among  those  five 
limbs  would  seem  to  add  absurdity  to  crudity.  The  fact,  however,  is  that 
Gautama  did  not  distinguish  between  Inductive  and  Deductive  reasoning.  In 
the  latter,  Drishtanta  and  Upanaya  ate  not  needed.  In  the  former,  they  are- 
of  great  service.  Then,  again,  according  to  the  Greek  system,  Logic  is  a 
formal  Science,  i.  e.,  Science  of  only  the  form  of  thought.  Hindu  Logic, 
instead,  is  concerned  not  only  with  form  but  also  with  substance  or  meaning. 
Hence,  the  latter  is  actually  conterminous  with  every  branch  of  knowledge- 
The  proposition  ‘  a  horse  has  wings  ’’  is  quite  logical  according  to  the  Greek 
system.  The  Hindu  system  rejects  it  as  absurd.  The  end  of  logic,  with  the- 
Hindus,  is  to  acquire  true  knowledge  whereby  to  achieve  Emancipation.  No 
branch  of  knowledge  has  any  value  in  the  eyes  of  the  Hindu  Rishis  unless  it 
furthers,  by  at  least  a  step,  man’s  efforts  to  conquer  woe  and  -attain  to  tha- 
immutable  felicity  which  Emancipation  offers.  Drishtanta  is  a  mere  example. 
Upanaya  is  indicating  the  relation  of  similarity  between  the  proposition  and  the 
example.  Hence,  it  is  an  expression,  in  terms,  of  the  resemblance  existing  be¬ 
tween  the  proposition  and  the  example. — T. 

*  As  printed  in  some  Bengal  editions,  the  text  of  this  aphorism  is  given! 
very  viciously.  Gangadhara’s  text  is  much  better. — T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHITA. 


568 

As  regards  Hetu  :  Hetu,  verily,  is  cause  of  apprehension.  That 
is  Pratyaksha  (Direct  perception),  Anumana  (Ratiocination), 
Aitihya  (Testimony),  and  Upamana  (Analogy). 

Since  through  these  Hetus  things  are  apprehended,  therefore 
is  their  condition  as  such  (that  is,  of  being  the  cause  of  apprenhen- 
sion)*3a 

Upanaya  and  Nigamana  have  both  been  spoken  of  while 
explaining  Sthapana  and  Pratishapana  {vide  aphorisms  30  and 
31  ante  of  this  Lesson). 

As  to  Uttara  (Answer)  :  Uttara,  verily,  is  the  ascription  of 
dissimilarity  of  attributes  when  a  Hetu  (cause  or  reason),  setting 
forth  similarity  of  attributes,  has  been  assigned,  or  the  ascription 
of  similarity  of  attributes  when  a  Hetu,  setting  forth  dissimila¬ 
rity  of  attributes,  has  been  assigned. 

For  instance  :  one  says, — Diseases  have  attributes  similar  to 
those  of  their  Hetus  (causes)  j  (hence)  all  afflictions  caused  by 
cold  have  similarity  of  attributes  with  their  Hetus  (or  causes); 
hence  contact  with  cold,  night  dew,  and  wind,  enhances  their 
severity. 

Unto  such  a  person,  the  disputant  on  the  other  side  should 
answer  that  diseases  have  attributes  dissimilar  to  those  of  their 
Hetus  (causes) ;  since  in  developing  (the  sensation  of)  burning  and 
heat,  and  inflammation,  of  the  diverse  limbs  of  the  body,  there  is 
dissimilarity  in  respect  of  Hetus,  those  Hetus  being  contact  with 
cold,  night-dew,  and  wind. 

This  contradictory  statement  would  be  an  answer.83 

As  to  Drishtanta  (Example) :  Drishtanta,  verily,  is  that  which 
effects  an  equality  of  apprehension  among  both  the  ignorant  and 


*  The  word  ‘  tattwa,’  literally,  means  ‘thatness,’  if  such  a  word,  which  is 
convenient,  could  be  used.  Here,  it  refers  to  the  condition  of  being  the 
cause  of  apprehension.  The  Rishi  first  defines  Hetu  as  '  upalabhdhi-karanam 
then  distributes  Hetu  into  four  varieties  ;  then  concludes  by  adding  that  since 
it  is  through  Hetu  that  things  are  apprehended,  Hetu  properly  comes  under 
the  definition  at  the  outset. — T. 


:ha  ra  kasa  miiitA. 


569 


the  learned,  and  which  illustrates  the  proposition  to  be  established  ; 
such  as  fire  (is  example)  of  heat;  water,  of  liquid;  Earth,  of 
stability ;  the  Sun,  of  the  light  which  discovers  objects. 

Another  instance  of  example  would  be, — As  the  sun  is  a 
discoverer  of  objects  so  is  an  aphorism  of  Sankhya*3* 

As  to  Siddhanta  (determination)  :  Siddhanta,  verily,  is  that 
determination  which  is  established,  after  being  proved  by  means 
of  Hetus  (or  reasons)  by  observant  people  after  an  examination 
made  in  various  ways.f 

This  Siddhanta  is  of  four  kinds,  viz.,  Sarvatantra-siddhanta, 
Pratitantra-siddhanta,  Adhikarna-siddhanta,  and  Abhyupagama- 
siddhanta.J3* 

Amongst  these,  that,  verily,  is  Sarvatantra-siddhanta  which 
occurs  in  all  treatises  bearing  on  the  subject. 

For  instance  :  There  are  causes  of  diseases  ;  there  are  diseases  ; 
there  are  means  for  (the  alleviation  of)  curable  diseases.§36 

Pratitantra-sidahanta,  verily,  is  that  which  occurs  in  particular 
treatises. 

For  instance  :  In  some  treatises  it  is  said  that  there  are  eight 
tastes,  in  others  that  there  are  six  tastes. 

In  some  treatises  it  is  said  that  there  are  five  senses  ;  in 
others  that  there  are  six  senses. 

In  some  treatises,  it  is  said  that  all  diseases  are  caused  by 
(vitiation  or  excitement  of)  the  wind.  In  others  that  some  diseases 
are  caused  by  the  wind  and  some  are  due  to  the  action  of  evil 
spirits.87 

*  ‘  PrakS^aka  ’  is  one  that  discovers  a  thing  or  causes  it  to  appear  to  the 

beholder.  Hence,  illuminator.  The  sun  is  an  illuminator.  An  aphorism  of 
Sankya  is  an  illuminator,  for  it  discloses  a  truth  or  truths  of  grave  import. — T. 

f  ‘  Siddhanta’ is  the  point  or  truth  that  is  finally  established  with  the  aid 
of  hetus.  It  is  the  final  determination  or  decision  to  which  the  distputants 
arrive. — T. 

J  Each  of  these  terms  is  explained  in  the  aphorisms  that  follow. — -T. 

§  ‘  Siddhanta  ’  being  a  determination,  '  Sarvatantra-siddhanta  ’  is  that 

determination  which  occurs  in  all  the  treatises  bearing  upon  the  subject  to  which 
the  siddhanta  helongs.  Hence,  what  is  meant  is  an  universally  accepted  propo¬ 
sition  or  truth. — T. 


57° 


CM  A  RA  KA -SA  M  HI  TA. 


Adhikaraua-siddhanta,  verily,  means  those  topics  which  become 
d  -termined  (by  implication)  while  a  particular  topic  is  being 
determined. 

For  instance  ;  He  that  is  emancipated  never  does  acts  bound 
up  (with  fruits),  because  of  his  absence  of  desire. 

This  being  established,  the  fruits  of  actions.  Emancipation,  the 
individual  that  acts,  and  re-birth,  become  determined.*3® 

As  to  Abhyupagama-siddhanta  : 

Abpyupagama-siddhanta,  verily,  is  that  statement  which,  though 
unproved,  unexamined,  and  untaught  (in  any  authoritative- 
treatise),  is  still  accepted  by  a  physician  at  the  time  of  disputation. 

For  instance  ;  substance  is  not  foremost :  attributes  are  fore¬ 
most.  We  shall  assume  this. 

These  are  the  four  kinds  of  Siddhanta.f33 

As  to  £avda  (words).  £avda,  verily,  is  a  combination  of 
letters. 

It  is  of  four  kinds:  i.  that  whose  meaning  is  addressed  to 
the  senses  ;  2.  that  whose  meaning  is  not  addressed  to  the 
senses ;  3.  that  which  corresponds  with  what  is  true ;  and 
4.  that  which  does  not  correspond  with  what  is  true. 


*  One  becomes  emancipate  when  one  is  freed  from  the  obligation  of  re¬ 
birth  ;  re-birth  is  the  condition  to  which  every  soul  or  chit  is  subject.  The 
mode  of  such  birth  is  determined  by  acts,  so  that  good  acts  lead  to  birth  as  a 
superior  creature  certain  to  enjoy  felicity,  and  bad  acts  to  birth  as  an  inferior 
creature  certain  to  endure  misery.  In  every  birth  or  state  of  existence,  the 
fruits,  good  or  bad,  of  the  acts  of  previous  lives  are  enjoyed  or  endured.  New 
acts  are  done,  and  the  creature  dies  with  a  remmant  of  acts  the  fruits  of  which 
he  is  to  enjoy  or  endure  in  his  next  life.  Emancipation  is  effected  by  yoga  as 
the  means.  It  is  absorption  into  the  Supreme  Soul,  or  Godhead,  or  Brahma 
when  such  absorption  takes  place,  separate  or  individual  existence  ceases.. 
Every  soul  or  chit  is  a  part  of  the  Subreme  Soul. — T. 

f  The  last  kind  of  Siddhanta  is  evidently  an-  hypothesis,  assumed  or 
granted  tentatively,  for  purposes  of  disputation. 

The  hypothesis  refered  to  is  about  the  greater  importance  of  attributes 
compared  to  the  substance  or  essence  to  which  they  belong  or  inhere.— A 


CHA  RA  KA  -SA  M  HI  TA. 


57« 


Among  these,  the  following  are  instances  of  words  whose 
meanings  are  addressed  to  the  s  nses  : 

Through  these  causes  the  faults  become  excited  ; 

Through  six  operations  the  excited  faults  become  mitigated  ; 

If  the  sense  of  hearing  and  the  rest  exist,  sound  and  the  rest 
are  capable  of  being  apprehended. 

Next,  as  to  those  words  whose  meanings  are  not  addressed 
to  the  senses : 

There  is  an  after  state  of  existence  ;  There  is  Emancipation 
{from  re-birth). 

As  to  words  which  correspond  with  what  is  true  :  True  words 
are  those  which  correspond  with  what  is  real  : 

Instructions  are  laid  down  in  medical  treatises;  there  are 
remedies  for  the  cure  of  diseases  that  are  curable  ;  efforts  produce 
results. 

Words  that  are  the  reverse  of  these  are  called  untrue  or  false. 

As  too  Pratyaksha  (  or  direct  knowledge  )  :  That,  verily,  is 
Pratyaksha  which  a  person  apprehends  by  himself  through  his  mind 
and  the  five  senses. 

Among  these,  the  Pratyakshas  apprehended  by  the  mind  are 
pleasure,  pain,  desire,  aversion,  and  the  like.  Sound  and  the  rest 
are  the  Pratyakshas  apprehended  by  the  senses:*41 

*  The  word  'atrnan'  here  is  used  in  the  sense  of  'mind'’  and  not  ‘soul.' 
In  Hindu  philosophy,  the  soul  is  that  to  which  or  whom  the  mind  and  the  senses 
and  the  whole  material  case  belongs.  The  soul,  at  rebritb,  becomes  invested 
with  these.  The  soul  feels  neither  pleasure  nor  pain.  Actions  touch  it  not. 
This  is  one  theory.  The  other  is  that  the  soul  is  touched  by  actions  and  does 
feel  pleasure  and  pain.  When  the  soul  becomes  freed  from  the  obligation  of 
rebirth,  it  becomes  Emancipated.  It  then  returns  to,  or  becomes  absorbed  in, 
the  Supreme  Soul,  of  which,  of  course,  it  is  a  part.  How  to  bring  about  this 
union  between  the  soul,  incarnated  or  in veste  d  with  a  material  case,  and  the 
Supreme  Soul  or  Brahma,  is  the  great  problem  of  life,  according  to  Hindu 
philosophy. 

This  definition  of  Pratyaksha  slightly  differs  from  that  given  by  Gautama. 
The  latter  says  that  ‘Indriyartha-sannikarshjam  Jnanam’  is  Pratyaksham, 
meaning,  that  knowledge  which  arises  from  a  contact  of  the  senses  with  their 
objects.  The  definiton  has  been  objected  to  by  a  host  of  Commentators  who 
regard  it  as  too  wide  for  it  includes  knowledge  that  is  net  Pratyaksham. 


572 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMI/ITA. 


As  to  Anumana  (  or  Inferenece  )  :  Anumana,  verily,  is  reason¬ 
ing  based  on  good  reasons.* * * § 

For  instance  (  as  has  been  said  before  )  t  : 

Fire  is  inferred  from  the  power  of  digesting  ;  strength  is 
inferred  from  the  capacity  of  performing  athletic  sports. 

As  to  Aupamya  (Analogy)  :  Aupamya,  verily,  is  that  which 
consists  in  the  explanation  (or  illustration)  of  one  topic  by  help 
of  the  resemblance  to  it  of  another. 

For  instance,  the  explanation  of  the  disease  called  Dandaka 
(Rigidity  of  the  whole  body)  by  reference  to  a  wooden  pole  ; 
that  of  Tetanus  by  reference  to  a  bow  ;  and  that  of  a  healer  of 
diseases,  by  reference  to  an  arrow  (that  is  well-pointed  and  that 
has  hit  the  mark).J43 

As  to  Aitihya  (Testimony) :  Aitihya,  verily,  consists  in  the 
utterances  of  the  Inspired.  For  instance  :  the  Vedas  and  the 
rest.§44 

As  to  Samcaya  (Doubt)  :  Sanifaya,  is  verily7-,  uncertainty  in 
matters  tint  are  doubtful. 

For  instance  :  Is  there,  or  is  there  not,  untimely  death  ||?4S 


*  The  word  ‘Anumana’  is  used  to  signify  both  the  process  of  reasoning  and 
the  result  of  that  process.  Here,  the  definition  given  seems  to  refer  to  only 
the  process.— T- 

-f-  I.  E.,  in  the  Lesson  called  “The  three  aspirations.’’  Vide  Lesson  XI, 
Sutrasthana,  ante.  There  many  instances  are  given  of  Anumana. — T. 

J  ‘Dandaka’  is  that  disease  in  which  the  whole  body  assumes  a  thorough 
rigidity  like  to  what  appears  after  death.  In  explaining  such  rigidity,  a  tough 
stake  or  pole  made  of  wood  may  be  named.  So  in  explaining  the  attitude  the 
body  assumes  in  Tetanus,  one  may  name  a  bow,  for  the  body  frequently  becomes 
as  curvilineal  as  a  stringed  bow-staff.  A  physician  also  that  is  successful  may 
be  compared  to  an  arrow  that  is  sharp-pointed  and  that  hits  the  mark. — .T. 

§  It  would  seem  that  Aitihya  is  not  common  testimony.  It  is  the  testimony 
of  the  wise  or  the  Inspired. — T. 

||  The  doubt  here  is  this  :  according  to  one  theory  there  cannot  be  death  at 
any  time  save  the  ordained  one.  According  to  another,  death  may  take  place 
at  any  time,  and  hence  may  come  before  the  proper  time  or  prematurely.  The 
occurrence,  therefore,  of  premature  or  untimely  death,  is  a  fact  involved  in 


PART  XIX. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH. 


PUBLISHED 

BY 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVTRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita  (in  original)  with 
Commentaries;  Bengali  and  Hindi  Translator  of  Charaka- 
Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita.;  Editor  of  Chikitsa- 
Sammil'ani  (Medical  Journal  in  Bengali) ;  Prac¬ 
titioner  OF  THE  HinDU'SySTEM  OF 
Medicine,  &c.,  &c.,  &c. 


CALCUTTA: 

'  Printed  by  K.  0.  Dey. 

“Deva  Press”,  17,  Canal  Street,  Entally. 
and 

Published  at 

206,  Cornwallis  Street. 


(  The  right  of  translation  is  reserved. ) 


ife= 


-M 


OPINIONS  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 


Professor  Z&v<Ea,:sr  duller  :~I  have  no  doubt  ; 
iglish  translation  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  imi 
id  to  help  you  in  any  way  you  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  N 
*  *  I  am  surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  tra 

ore  attention  *  *  -*  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  1 

Sir  ZbvdZorrler  ^77"illia,m.s,  ZE2Z.a.X.ZE3. : — I  hav 

the  successive  parts  of  the. Cnararca  and  Susruta  Samhitas.  I 
dition  to  my  library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  1 
XZ>r.  ZE^eirrlrold.  IR,ost,  O.X.IE3  ,  late  Librarian  to 
Dur  excellent  translation  *  *  *  a  most  valuable  and  prai: 
t  fail  to  make  ancient  Hindu  Medicine  better  understoo 
est  *  *  *  I  shall  draw  the.  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  yoi 
,rk  *  *  *  Many  important  additions  to  our  Sanskrit  dictiona 
ur  translation. 

-A/UL&tin  ZEPlInt,  Esq.,  New  York,  U.  S.  A. 
sasure  the  first  fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka 
id  to  receive  the  rest  ot  the  worx.  It  cannot  fail  to  be  of  gre 
ofession,  which  will  be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

ZE3Z.  Edgren,  UEsq..,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden  : 
anything  Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  ; 
ight  I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  transla 
Professor  Ji..  V.  ’Ts7vr illiscrrr  Ta-lsson,  Col 
S.  A.  I  must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  c 
ry  much  like  to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  th 
i  doing.  Be  assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appr 
:erest  in  India  and  antique  lore. 

-bvXons.  X3irtlr,  Paris : — Your  efforts  to  place 

ancient  literature  a  work  or  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  1 
the  men  of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  1  shall 
the  notice  of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who 
searches. 

ZLvXorrs.  IS.  St.  Eiilstir©,  Paris  .—I  praise  you  i 
*h  you  all  success.  The  work  is  or  interest  to  all  learned  i 
d  the  commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility,.  I 
r  Journal) des  Savants  as  soon  as  1  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  c 
ZPro  52.33  or  ZEE.  TsbODTbi,’  Bonn  University.  Ge'rm'v 
dertaken  will  interest'  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men 
eir  scunce.  I  shall  not  fail  to  draw-  the  ^attention  of  seme 
snow  personally,  to  the  ancient' Work  of  Charaka. 

ZEEsrr  IEr2*.  O-a^rToe,  Prinzenstram  Koningsburg  Germ> 
ion  or  Cnaraica  Saintiira  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historica 
portant  work  of  the  medicinal  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred.  Croft,  ZMZ.  O.  X.  ZE3  Dire 

or  all  the  things  which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  dayman  c 
d  such  a  guide  to  life  cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 

T a,mes  TTTV  ZEeese,  ZEsqi..,  Westminister ,  Maryla\ 
dertaken  a  great  and  difficult  work,. and  one  which,  it  seems  1 
tion  and  encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  r 
d  taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health 

T7vrillia,rrr  ZEZzrrette  Cole  rrra,ru  ZEsqu  t 


NOTICE. 


Parts  XVII  and  XVIII  have  been  issued 
about  a  month  ago-  Part  XIX  is  now  issued- 
Part  XX  is  almost  ready  and  will  be  issued 
within  a  month  at  the  most. 

The  attention  of  subscribers  and  others  is 
earnestly  solicited  to  the  fact  that  if  they  have 
any  missing  parts,  they  should  lose  no  time 
in  asking  for  them,  for  it  will  be  practically 
impossible  for  us  to  supply  them  hereafter. 

The  Sutrasthana  has  been  completed  in  part 
XIV.  The  Vimanasthana  will  probably  be  com¬ 
pleted  in  part  XX,  Each  Sthana  (or  division) 
may  be  separately  bound  up. 

It  is  a  matter  of  singular  good  fortune  to  us 
that  almost  all  our  subscribers  are  persons  of 
learning  and  high  social  position-  All  that  is 
needed,  therefore,  is  to  only  remind  them  of 
their  arrears  of  subscription  for  inducing  them 
to  remit  the  same  without  delay-  It  is  well 
known  to  them  that  our  ability  to  make  faster 
progress  entirely  depends  upon  their  kindness 
and  courtesy- 


A.  C.  KAVIRATNA. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS. 


The  contents  of  this  Part  are  varied  and  of  great  interest. 
Many  of  the  observations  occurring  hear  will  show  that  Medicine 
with  the  ancient  Hindus  was  a  Science. 

Instructions  are  continued  about  the  manner  of  conducting  dis¬ 
putations  in  Medical  Science. 

Various  technical  terms  are  explained  and  fallacies  exposed. 

The  subject  is  important  from  the  Rishi’s  point  of  view  in  as  much 
as  disputations  on  Medical  Science  facilitate  the  treatment  of  dis¬ 
ease  in  consequence  of  the  clearess  of  the  intellect  they  bring  about. 

Explanations  are  given  of  the  elements  in  connection  with  Action. 
These  are  Karana  (cause),  Karana  (means),  Karyya-yoni  (springs  of 
action),  Karyya  (action),  Karyya-phala  (fruits  of  action),  Anubandha 
(adjuncts),  De?a  (place),  Kala  (time),  Pravritti  (exertion)  and 
Upaya  (instruments). 

The  physician  should  examine  these  ten  elements  of  action 
when  he  takes  up  the  treatment  of  a  disease. 

The  application  is  explained  of  the  ten  elements  of  action 
with  reference  to  physicians  and  the  treatment  of  disease. 

The  physician  is  himself  the  Karana  (cause).  Medicine  is 
Karana  (means).  The  absence  of  harmony  in  the  patient’s 
system  is  Karyya-yoni,  and  so  on. 

As  regards  these  ten  kinds  of  examinable  objects,  the 
especialities  of  each,  as  also  the  particular  way  in  which  each 
is  to  be  examined,  are  then  set  down. 

First  occur  the  qualifications  of  the  physician  (or  the  Karana 
of  the  action  called  treatment). 

Then  is  explained  what  is  Medicine  (or  Karana).  The  points 
of  examination  in  regard  to  Medicine  are  fully  set  forth. 


[  ii  ] 


The  topic  is  fraught  with  great  interest  and  the'manner  in  which  it 
his  been  treated  will  show  that  Hindu  physicians  were  not 
emperics  after  all  the  quacks  they  are  supposed  to  have  been. 

Next  occur  the  points  in  connection  with  treatment  which 
deserve  to  be  carefully  studied  before  treatment  -can  be  pro¬ 
nounced  to  be  rational  or  successful. 

Passing  over  Karyya-phala!  (fruits  of, action)  and  Anubandha 
(adjuncts),  the  remarks  on  .  De$a  (place)  are  fraught  with  great 
practical  interest.  Deqa  implies  the  habitat  of  the  patient  ;  it 
also  means  the  patient  himself,  for  the  patient  is  the  field  with 
which  treatment  is  concerned.  The  points  in  connection  with 
the  patient  that  deserve  to  be  examined  are  fully  set  out.  The 
Observations  on  this  head  will  show  the  care  which  Hindu 
physicians  took  in  diagnosing  disease  and  administering  medi¬ 
cine.  The  history  of  even  "the  patient’s  parentage  is  directed 
to  be  enquired  into. 

The  different  natures  of  men  as  dependent  on  the  predo¬ 
minance  of  the  faults,  viz.,  Phlegm,  Bile,  and  Wind,  are  then 
fully  explained. 

The  different  varieties  of  means  as  dependent  on  the  predo¬ 
minance  of  the  several  ingredients  of  the  body  or  the  Dhatus, 
are  then  explained.  Some  have  -skin,  some  blood,  some  flesh, 
some  fat,  some  bones,  some  marrow,  some  vital  seed,  some 
mind,  as  the  predominant  essence  in  their  constitutions.  The 
characteristics  of  each  are  explained. 

The  dimensions  of  the  different  limbs  or  parts  of  the  body 
are  then  laid  down.  The  measurements  stated  are  curious  and 
are  singularly  correct. 


As  to  Prayojana  (Object).  :  • 

Prayojana,  verily,  is  that  for  (the  accotri^ 
actions  (or  operations)  are  undertaken.  -. 


$ment  of)  which 


For  instance  :  If  there  be  untimely  death,  I  shall  then  have 
recourse  to  such  things  and  practices  as  prolong  the  period  of  life 
and  avoid  all  such  things  and  practices  as  shorten  life,  so  that 
untimely  death  may  not  assail  me.46 


As  to  Vyabhichara  (Exception)  :  Vyabhich5ra,  verily,  is  going 
astray. 


For  instance  :  this  medicine  is  suited  to  this  disease  or  is  not 
suited  to  it.*47 


As  to  Jijnasas  (Examination) :  Jijnasas,  verily,  is  examination. 
For  instance  :  examination  of  Medicines.  (This  will  be  explain¬ 
ed  hereafter)  .f48 


As  to  Vyavasaya  (Determination)  :  Vyavasaya,  verily,  is 
determination. 


For  instance :  This  disease  is  one  of  wind ;  this  is  its 
medicine.49 

As  to  A'rthaprapti  (Implication) :  Arthaprapti  is  the  ascertainment 
of  one  unexpressed  topic  from  a  topic  that  has  been  expressed. 

For  instance  :  When  it  is  said  that  this  disease  is  incapable  of 
being  cured  by  a  soothing  and  nutrive  course  of  practices  (i.  e., 
Santarpana),  it  is  implied  that  it  is  curable  by  an  opposite  course 
of  practices  ( i .  e.,  Apatarpana). 

So  also,  when  it  is  said  that  this  one  should  not  eat  during  the 
day,  it  is  implied  that  he  should  eat  at  night-time.50 


*  The  sense  attached  to  Vyabhichara  is  this:  many  instances  are  seen  point¬ 
ing,  at  first,  to  the  existence  of  a  uniformity.  Some  instance  is  observed  that  is 
of  a  different  kind.  This  is  a  Vyabhichara.  The  Baconian  rule  of  Induction 
consists,  briefly,  of  the  following  :  collect  agreeing  instances;  collect  disagreeing 
instances  ;  rej  ect  superfluous  causes,  and  then  make  the  inference.  The  disagree¬ 
ing  instances  are  all  Vyabhicharas. — T, 

f  The  words  put  within  paranthesis  seem  to  be  an  interpolation. — T. 

73 


574 


CHARAKA-SA  M  HIT  A. 


As  to  Sambhava  (or,  originating  cause) :  Sambhava,  verily,  is 
this  :  that  from  which  something  springs  is  said  to  be  its  Sambhava. 

For  instance  :  the  six  elements  (vi'2.,  mother,  father,  soul, 
suitability,  food-juice,  and  strength)  are  the  Sambhava  of  concep¬ 
tion  (the  foetus  in  the  womb).  Baneful  practices  are  the  Sambhava 
of  disease.  Beneficial  practices  are  the  Sambhava  of  health.51* 

As  to  Anuyojya  (Defectiveness  of  statement).  Anuyojya,  verily, 
is  this  :  that  statement  which  is  fraught  with  fault  (or  defectiveness) 
is  said  to  be  Anuyojya;  or,  where  general  topics  are  asserted, 
intending  that  only  particular  topics  are  to  be  apprehended,  such 
general  assertions  are  Anuyojya. 

For  instance  :  when  it  is  said  that  this  disease  is  curable  by 
Sam^odhana,  the  Anuyojya  consists  in  the  fact  of  either  Vamana 
(emetics)  or  Virechana  (purgatives)  only  being  intended. t6a 

As  to  Ananuyojya  :  (or  Completeness  of  statement)  :  Ananu- 
yojya  is  the  reverse  of  the  above. 

For  instance  :  This  disease  is  incurable. 

As  to  Anuyoga  (or  Question) :  Anuyoga,  verily,  is  that  which 
is  a  question  (or  enquiry),  or  part  of  a  question  (or  enquiry)  as 
regards  a  whole  treatise,  or  a  part  of  a  treatise,  addressed  by 
persons  to  others  that  are  of  the  same  branch  of  learning  with 
themselves,  for  acquiring  knowledge  general  and  special  as  also 
for  ascertaining  texts  and  counter-texts.  Or,  when  one  asserts 
that  Purusha  is  eternal,  and  the  other  enquires,  what  is  the  reason 
(of  the  assertion),  such  enquiry  is  said  to  be  an  Anuyoga.54 


*  The  six  dhatus  or  elements,  rather,  ingredients,  of  Garbha  or  Concep¬ 
tion,  meaning  the  germination,  of  the  foetus  in  the  womb,  are  mentioned  in 
Qarira-sthana,  Lesson  IV.,  post.  I  have  taken  Satmya  as  equivalent  to 
Suitability.  This,  probably,  has  reference  to  the  suitability  of  the  two  parents 
to  each  other.  Sattwa  implies  strength,  whence,  perhaps,  springs  the  vital 
seed.  Hindu  physicians  do  not  think  that  the  vital  seed  is  localised  anywhere 
in  the  body.  It  springs  from  desire  and  strength. — T. 

-j-  Practically,  Anuyojya  arises  where  something  has  to  be  added  in  order 
to  assist  at  a  right  apprehension.  “Bring  me  the  box”  is  the  order  given  to 
the  page  when  the  master  wishes  his  ebony  box  to  be  brought  from  among 
many  others  in  a  particular  room. — T. 


CHA  RAKA  -  SA  M  HIT A. 


575 


As  to  Pratyanuyogt  (or  enquiry  about  enquiry) :  Piatyauu- 
yoga,  verily,  is  Anuyoga  about  Anuyoga. 

For  instance,  when  the  Anuyoga  has  been — what  is  the  reason 
(of  this)? — another  Anuyoga  may  follow  about  the  reason  of  the 
reason  assigned.55 

As  to  Vakya-dosha  (or  faults  of  speech)  :  Vakya-dosha,  verily,, 
occurs,  for  example,  in  sayings  where  there  is  insufficiency,  or 
redundancy,  or  want  of  meaniug,  or  misjoinder,  or  contradiction. 
These  being  absent,  the  true  sense  is  not  lost.*56 

A  speech  that  is  defective  in  any  one  of  these,  viz.,  proposition, 
reason,  example,  analogy,  and  conclusion,  is  said  to  be  defective 
or  insufficient. 

Or,  that  which  should  be  solved  by  laying  down  many  reasons 
but  is  solved  by  only  one  reason,  is  also  regarded  as  defective  or 
insufficient. 

These  (defects)  being  absent,  the  true  sense  is  not  lost. 

As  to  redundancy  :  That  is  redundancy  which  is  the  reverse  of 
defectiveness. 

Or,  that  is  redundancy  which  consists  of  a  citing  of  the  scrip¬ 
tures  of  Vrihaspati  or  Uganas  or  any  such  irrelevant  matter  while 
the  subject  matter  of  talk  is  connected  with  medical  scriptures. 

Or,  that  which  is  a  repetition  of  matter  that  is  even  relevant 
is  redundancy  in  consequence  of  such  repetition. 

Such  repetition  is  of  two  kinds :  viz.,  repetition  as  regards 
sense  (or  meaning,)  and  repetition  is  respect  of  words. 

A  repetition  of  sense  is  where  one  uses  different  words  ex¬ 
pressive  of  the  same  meaning,  as  Bheshaja,  Aushadha, 
Sadhana,  &c. 

A  repetition  of  words  is  a  repeated  use  of  the  same  word,  as 
Bheshaja ,  Bheshaja.™ 

Unmeaningness,  verily,  is  where  a  speech  affords  no  sense  but 


*  The  presence  of  these  is  destructive  of  the  true  sense.  Hence,  their 
absence  is  conducive  to  the  true  sense  being  caught. — T. 


576 


CHAR  AKA -SA  MHITA . 


consists  of  a  group  of  letters  only,  such  as  those  which  have 
been  distributed  into  five  classes.*59 

Incoherence,  verily,  is  a  combination  of  words  each  of  which 
has  a  meaning  but  which  meanings  are  unconnected  with  each 
other;  for  example,  whey — wheel — race — thunder — morn.50 

As  to  Contradiction :  Contradiction  of  speech  is  that  which  is 
opposed  to  the  example  (cited,)  also  to  the  conclusion,  and  the 
occasion. 

Amongst  these,  Example  and  Conclusion  have  been  already 
spoken  of.  As  regards  Occasion,  it  is  of  these  kinds  :  occasion 
relating  to  the  Science  of  Life,  that  relating  to  Sacrifices,  that 
relating  to  the  scriptures  on  Emancipation,  &c. 

Amongst  these,  as  regards  occasion  relating  to  the  Science  of 
Life, — Medicine  consists  of  four  ingredients. 

As  regards  occasion  relating  to  Sacrifices, — Animals  should  be 
offered  up  as  sacrifices  (to  the  deities). 

As  regards  occasion  relating  to  the  scriptures  on  Emancipation, 
— compassion  to  all  creatures.  Amongst  these,  anything  uttered 
inconsistently  with  the  occasion  is  impertinent. t61 

*  The  letters  of  the  Sanskrit  alphabet  consist  of  five  classes,  called  vargas , 
a  varga  consisting  of  5  letters.  There  are  some  additional  letters  as  the  comple¬ 
ment  of  the  alphabet.  Mere  letters  uttered  in  any  order  would  not  give 
sense. — T. 

f  What  is  meant  by  ‘Viruddha’  is  hostile,  or  impertinent,  using  the  latter 
term  in  its  original  sense.  A  speech  that  is  opposed  to  the  example  cited,  or 
to  the  conclusion,  is  of  this  kind.  What  is  said  of  occasion  is  this :  When 
the  Science  of  Life  is  the  subject  of  talk,  one  should  speak  of  Medicine  as 
consisting  of  four  ingredients,  viz.,  drugs,  physician,  patient,  and  attendant  or 
nurse.  If  one  speaks,  at  such  a  time,  of  propitiation  of  the  deities,  and  similar 
rites,  as  possessed  of  curative  virtue,  one .  should  be  held  as  saying  what  is 
impertinent. 

So,  on  occasions  relating  to  Sacrifices,  in  which  animals  are  ordained  to  be 
slaughtered,  if  one  says  that  animals  should  not  be  slaughtered,  or  that  com¬ 
passion  towards  all  creatures  should  be  the  rule  of  human  conduct,  one  must 
be  held  as  saying  what  is  impertinent. 

Also  when  the  subject  of  talk  is  the  Scriptures  on  Emancipation,  one 


should 


CH  A  RAKA-SA  M  HIT  A . 


577 


Perfection  of  Speech :  Perfection  of  speech  is  as  follows : 
that  speech  which  is  not  insufficient,  and  redundant,  not  meaning¬ 
less,  not  incoherent,  and  not  inconsistent,  which  is  not  fraught 
with  well-expressive  and  suitable  words,  is  unobjectionable, 
hence  it  is  applauded  (as  perfect).62 

As  to  chicane  (Cchala)  :  chicane,  verily,  is  speech  fraught  with 
cunning,  plausibility,  and  diversion  of  sense,  and  which  consists 
of  words  only  as  its  essence.  It  is  of  two  kinds  :  i.  chicane  as 
regards  words  only,  and  2.  chicane  based  on  the  undistributed 
middle. 

Of  these,  chicane  as  regards  words  only  is  as  follows': 

One  says, — This  physician  is  a  Navatantra. 

The  physician  may  say  in  reply, — I  am  not  a  Navatantra  but 
an  Ekatantra.  The  other  side  may  say, — I  don’t  mean  to  say 
that  you  are  a  Navatantra  (that  is,  a  person  of  nine  scriptures) 
but  that  you  have  studied  your  scriptures  only  recently. 

The  physician  may  say, — I  have  studied  the  scriptures  not  nine 
times  but  many  hundreds  of  times. 

This  is  an  illustration  of  chicane  as  regards  words.*65 

As  to  chicane  of  undistributed  middle  (Samanya :)  of  such 
chicane  the  following  is  an  example.  One  says  that  medicine  is 
for  allaying  disease.  The  other  may  say  that  an  existent  thing 
is  for  allaying  an  existent  thing. 


not  speak  of  anything  except  compassion  to  all  creatures  as  the  prime  duty. 
A  reference  to  animal  slaughter  at  such  a  time  would  be  impertinent. — T. 

*  The  word ‘Nava,’ in  Sanskrit,  means  either  nine  or  new.  When,  there¬ 
fore,  the  first  speaker  addressed  the  physician  as  a  ‘Navatantra,’  the  physician, 
instead  of  taking  ‘Nava’  as  new,  takes  it  as  implying  nine.  His  answer,  there¬ 
fore,  is  ‘I  am  an  Ekatantra,’ that  is,  ‘of  one  tantra.'  When  the  first  speaker 
rejoins,  saying, — No,  I  don’t  mean  to  say  how  many  tantras  you  have,  but 
my  intention  is  to  say  that  you  have  studied  your  scriptures  nava  or  newly, 
the  physician,  taking  ‘Nava'  even  here  as  meaning  nine,  answers,  saying, — No, 
I  have  studied  the  scriptures  not  nine  times  but  many  hundreds  of  times. 

The  fact  is,  chicane  as  regards  words  consists  in  taking  a  word  in  a  sense 
different  from  that  in  which  it  is  employed.  It  is  a  sort  of  punning. — T. 


578 


charaka-samhitA. 


The  first  one  may  then  say, — Is  this  your  meaning,  vie.,  that 
disease  is  an  existent  thing,  and  medicine  is  also  an  existent 
thing?  If  an  existent  thing  allays  an  existent  thing,  then  bron¬ 
chitis  being  an  existent  tiling,  and  phthisis  also  being  an  existent 
thing,  in  consequence  of  botli  being  existent  things,  bronchitis 
allays  phthisis.  This  is  an  illustration  of  chicane  of  the  undistri¬ 
buted  middle.*61 

As  to  fallacy  of  reasoning  ( Ahetu ) :  Fallacy  is  (of  three  kinds) 
viz.,  i.  Prakarana.sama  (Begging  the  question),  2.  Samgaya- 
sama  (fallacy  of  assumption),  and  3.  Varnya-sama. 

Prakarana-sama  (Begging  the  question)  is  as  follows  : 

One  says, — The  soul,  which  is  distinct  from  the  body,  is 
eternal. 

The  other  answers, — Since  the  soul  is  distinct  from  the  body, 
therefore  is  it  eternal,  the  body  being  not  eternal.  The  soul’s 
being  different  from  the  body  is  the  reason  of  its  being  eternal. 
This  is  a  begging  of  the  question.  That  which  is  to  be  proved 
cannot  constitute  a  reason.f65 

Sampayasama  (or  fallacy  of  assumption  based  on  doubt),  verily, 
is  where  that  which  is  a  cause  of  doubt  is  regarded  as  dispelling 
(or  settling  the  doubt). 

It  is  as  follows  : 

This  one  has  shown  acquaintance  with  only  a  portion  of  the 
scriptures  bearing  on  the  Science  of  Life.  A  doubt,  therefore, 
arises  as  to  whether  this  one  is,  or  is  not,  a  physician. 

He  who  hears  this,  says, — 

This  one  has  shown  an  acquaintance  with  a  portion  of  the 
scriptures  bearing  on  the  Science  of  Life.  Hence,  he  is  a  physician. 


*  A  better  example  of  this  kind  of  chicane  is  as  follows  :  Apes  eat ;  horses 
eat ;  hence,  (as  both  eat)  Apes  are  horses.  The  fact  is,  by  Cchala-Samanya 
is  meant  the  fallacy  of  the  undistributed  middle. — T. 

+  Here  there  is  clearly  a  begging  of  the  question.  Whether  the  soul  is, 
or  is  not,  distinct  from  the  body,  is  to  be  proved.  Instead  of  being  proved, 
it  is  assumed,  and  as  the  body  is  not  eternal,  the  distinctness  of  the  soul  from 
it  is  taken  as  the  reason  of  its  being  eternal. — T. 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  M  HI  TA . 


579 


The  reason  of  the  doubt  is  not  specified  here.  (It  is  ignored). 

This  also  is  an  illustration  of  fallacy  That  which  is  the 
reason  of  a  doubt  should  not  be  regarded  as  dispelling  the 
doubt.*66 

As  to  Varnyasama  (or  the  fallacy  of  assumption  based  on 
similarity). 

This  fallacy  lies  where  the  reason  is  not  different  from  what  is 
to  be  predicated  of  the  subject. 

Example  :  Some  one  says, — The  Intellect  (Buddhi)  is  not 
eternal,  because  not  tangible,  like  sound. 

Here  the  predicate  of  sound  should  be  proved,  so,  the  predi¬ 
cate  of  Intellect  also  should  be  proved. 

In  the  proposition,  however,  there  is  similarity  as  regards  bolh 
the  terms  {viz., the  subject  and  the  example  or  reason).  Hence, 
it  is  an  instance  of  Varnyasama  fallacy.t67 

As  to  Atitakalam  (impropriety  of  time)  :  Impropriety  of  time 
arises  where  that  which  should  be  stated  first  is  stated  afterwards. 

In  consequence  of  the  time  having  passed  of  such  a  statement, 
the  person  making  it  becomes  capable  of  being  discomfited  in 
disputation.  J68 

As  to  Upalambba  (attribution  of  fault  or  censure):  Upalambha, 
verily,  is  the  attribution  of  fault  to  the  reason  adduced  (of  a 
proposition). 

The  faults  (of  reasoning)  have  been  explained  above  under  the 


*  This  is  another  form  of  begging  the  question.  That  which  is  to  be 
proved  is  assumed  as  proved  and  regarded  as  the  reason  of  an  assertion. — T. 

f  This  form  of  fallacy  is,  of  course,  a  fallacy  of  assumption.  Stated  fully, 
in  the  syllogistic  form,  the  argument  stands  thus  : 

(a)  All  that  is  not  tangible  is  not  eternal,  (b)  Sound  is  not  tangible, 
(c)  Therefore,  sound  is  not  eternal,  (d)  Intellect  is  intangible  (as  sound). 
Taking  it  with  (a),  Intellect  is  not  eternal.  The  predicate  of  Intellect  and  that 
of  sound  are  similar  ;  that  of  sound  is  assumed.  Like  it,  that  of  Intellect  is 
also  assumed,  the  major  proposition  lying  in  the  back  ground,  viz.,  things 
intangible  are  not  eternal. — T. 

+  No  example  of  this  kind  of  impropriety  of  speech  is  given. — T. 


580 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHITA. 


heading  of  Ahetu  (or  fallacy)  which  always  assumes  the  aspect  ot 
Hetu  (or  reason).*69 

As  to  Parihara  (avoidance  or  correction  of  fault)  :  Parihara  is 
the  avoidance  or  correction  of  a  fault  (that  is  pointed  out). 
Example  :  When  the  soul  resides  in  the  body,  the  signs  of  life  are 
always  noticeable.  When  the  soul  leaves  the  body,  those  signs 
are  no  longer  noticeable.  Hence  the  soul  is  distinct  from  the 
body,  and  is  eternal  (the  body  being  not  eternal).!70 

As  to  Pratijna-hani  (rejection  of  proposition)  : 

Pratijna-hani,  verily,  is  where  one,  upon  being  refuted,  rejects 
the  poposition  first  adopted  (or  advanced)  by  him. 

Example  :  The  proposition  first  advanced  is — Purusha  is  eternal. 

Refuted  by  a  disputant,  he  rejects  the  proposition  and  says,— 
Purusha  is  not  eternal.71 

As  to  Abhyanujna  (acceptance)  : 

Abhyanujna,  verily,  is  acceptance  by  one  of  what  is  attributed 
to  him  by  the  other  side,  whether  agreeable  or  disagreeable. J72 

As  to  Hetwantara  (attribution  of  a  reason  other  than  the 
proper  one) :  Hetwantara,  verily,  occurs  where  one,  instead  of 
advancing  the  proper  reason,  advances  a  different  (or  wrong) 
reason.78 


*  ‘Upalambha’  is  a  general  term,  including  the  attribution  of  faults  to  the 
reason  or  reasons  adduced  by  the  other  side.  In  common  parlance,  it  means 
censure. — T. 

t  'Parihara'  is,  literally,  avoidance.  When  an  adversary  points-  out  a 
defect  or  fallacy  of  Speech,  of  the  kinds  explained  above,  the  speaker  is  at 
liberty  to  amend  the  defect  or  correct  the  reasoning,  by  asserting  something 
new  or  modifying  the  statement  made.  This  is  Parihara.  It  should  be  borne 
in  mind  that  the  Rishi,  in  this  lesson,  lays  down  the  cannons  of  correct  disputa¬ 
tion.  He  is  obliged  to  borrow  some  terms  from  the  dialectical  philosophy  as  it 
had  been  developed  in  his  time.  It  seems  that  the  age  of  this  passage  is 
antecedent  to  the  appearance  of  the  great  work  of  Gautama. — T. 

J  Chakrapani  gives  the  example  of  the  attribution  of  theft.  A  says  to  B, — 
•'you  are  a  thief.”  B  replies — ‘‘you  also  are  so.”  Here  there  is  acceptance 
by  B.  of  the  charge  preferred. — T. 


C  HA  RA  KA  -SA  MHITA. 


58i 

As  to  Arthlntara  (impertinence  or  irrelevancy):  AithSntara 
arises  where  (for  example)  the  indications  of  Prameha  (diseases  of 
the  male  organ)  are  cited  when  it  is  necessary  to  cite  those  of 
Fever.'4 

As  to  NigrahasthSna  (discomfiture) :  Nigrahasth&na,  verily,  is 
the  enduring  of  discomfiture  (at  the  hands  of  an  opponent). 

It  consists  in  the  misapprehension,  or  incapacity  of  apprehen¬ 
sion,  of  something  repeated  thrice,  in  an  assembly  of  the  learned 
(or  the  wise;.  Or,  it  is  censure  of  that  which  is  not  censurable, 
or  non-censure  (approval)  of  that  which  is  censurable.'’ 

PratijnSLhani  (rejection  of  the  original  proposition),  Abhyanujnl 
(acceptance  of  an  attributed  fault  or  censure),  KaiStita  (impro¬ 
priety  of  time),  Ahetavah  (fallacies  of  reasoning),  Nyunam  (defect¬ 
iveness  of  speech),  Atiriktam  (redundancy  of  speech),  Vyartham 
(senselessness),  Aparthakam  (incoherence  of  speech),  Punaruktam 
(repetition),  Niruddham  (contradiction),  Hetwantara  (attribution 
of  a  reason  other  than  the  proper  one),  and  ArthSntwara  (imperti¬ 
nence  or  irrelevancy), — these  are  also  causes  of  discomfiture. 

Thus  have  the  terms  belonging  to  the  (art  or)  course  of  disputa¬ 
tions,  as  laid  down,  been  explained.'* 

Disputations,  if  set  afoot,  of  physicians,  should  be  on  (questions 
of)  the  Science  of  Life  and  not  on  those  bearing  upon  any  other 
Science.'' 

In  disputations,  as  regards  all  matters,  conclusions  are  only 
developments  of  questions  and  answers. 

Carefully  reflecting  on  the  questions  (to  be  proposed)  and  the 
answers  (to  be  given),  one  should  employ  one's  words. 

One  should  never  utter  what  is  not  true,  or  what  is  incon¬ 
sistent  with  the  Scriptures,  or  what  is  not  the  result  of  close  exa¬ 
mination,  or  what  does  not  prove  anything  (or  conduce  to  any 
important  result),  or  what  is  doubtful,  or  what  is  obscure. 

Everything  one  says  should  be  fraught  with  reason.  They  that 
utter  only  such  speeches  as  are  fraught  with  reason,  have  clear 
intellects* 

*  Or,  speeches  fraught  with  reason  are  clear. — T. 


74 


5§2 


charakasam/htA. 


All  wordy  disputations  (on  the  Science  of  Life)  facilitate  the 
treatment  of  disease,  in  consequence  of  the  clearness  of  the  intel¬ 
lect  being  enhanced. 

The  intellect,  when  unafflicted  (by  errors,  prejudices,  &c.) 
brings  about  success  in  every  undertaking.78 

For  the  instruction  of  physicians,  we  shall,  in  this  Lesson,  lay 
down  a  few  aphorisms  under  this  head.  The  wise  applaud  the 
essay,  with  knowledge,  of  undertakings." 

The  actor,  with  unsurpassable  intensity  of  resolution,  should, 
for  accomplishing  it,  set  himself  to  achieve  an  act  that  is  fraught 
with  desirable  results,  being  deeply  engaged  on  it,  and  after  hav¬ 
ing  properly  ascertained  (K3rana)  cause,  (Karana)  means,  (Kryya- 
yoni)  springs  of  actions,  (Karyya)  action,  (Karyya-phala)  fruits  of 
action,  (Anubandha)  adjuncts,  (Defal  place,  (Kala)  time,  (Pra- 
vritti)  exertion  and  (Up3ya)  instruments.80 

Amongst  these,  Kdrana  is  that  which  does  an  act.  That, 
again,  is  (otherwise)  called  Hetu,  as  also  Actor.*1 

Karana,  again,  is  that  which  constitutes  the  means  for  instru¬ 
ments)  for  (the  use  of)  the  actor  who  sets  about  with  a  resolution 
to  achieve  the  action  intended." 

K&ryya-yoni  is  that  which,  undergoing  a  modification,  becomes 
developed  into  action.*" 

KSryya  is  that  purpose  for  the  achievement  of  which  the  actor 
moves.'4 

K&ryya-phala,  is  that  for  the  attainment  of  which  the  accom¬ 
plishment  is  undertaken  of  an  action.’* 

Anubandha  is  that  condition  of  happiness  or  misery  resulting 
from  the  action,  which  invariably  attaches  to  the  actor  after  the 
accomplishment  of  the  action." 

De$a  is  the  place  or  seat  of  an  action.87 

K&Ia,  again,  is  time  (in  the  form  of  Seasons,  &c.).88 

f  Earth  or  mud  is  ‘Karyya-yoni’  of  a  jar,  gold  of  a  ring,  &c.  The  word 
implies  material  cause.-— T. 


charaka-samhitA 


583 


Pravritti  is  the  exertion  put  forth  for  achieving  an  action. 
It  is  also  known  by  the  names  of  Kriyd,  Karma ,  Yatna,  and 
Kdryya-samdrambha  (or  commencement,  including  progress  of  an 
act').81 

Up&ya ,  again,  consists  of  facilities  and  proper  aids  of  those 
three,  viz.,  K5rana,  Karana,  and  Karyya-yoni,  to  the  exclusion  of 
the  remaining  three;  viz.,  K&ryya,  KSryya-phala,  and  Anubandha. 

It  is  called  Updya  because  of  its  agency  in  the  accomplishment 
of  acts. 

When  an  action  is  accomplished,  there  is  no  more  need  of 
Updya. 

When,  again,  the  action  is  accomplished,  the  Upayas  do  not 
exist  as  Upayas. 

As  regards  phala  (fruits),  these  appear  after  the  accomplish¬ 
ment  of  the  act. 

After  (the  manifestation  of  the)  phala  appears  what  is  known 
as  Anubandha  (or  adjuncts).*10 

These  ten  (elements  of  action)  should  first  be  examined.  An 
inclination  having  action  for  its  purpose,  when  it  arises  after 
such  examination,  is  regarded  as  beneficial. t 

*  This  definition  of  what  are  called  ‘UpSya’  is  undoubtedly  accurate. 
•Upiya’  is  to  be  differentiated  from  ‘Karana’  which  has  been  rendered  means, 
and  ‘Karyya-yoni’  by  which  is  meant  material  cause.  Take  the  example  of 
an  earthen  jar.  The  potter  is  the  KSrana  or  Kartri.  The  wheel  is  the 
Karana.  Soft  earth  or  clay  is  the  Karyya-yoni  or  material  cause.  What, 
then,  are  the  Upayas  ?  First,  they  are  aids  or  facilities  of  the  first  three,  viz., 
the  doer,  the  means,  and  the  material  cause,  that  is,  of  the  potter,  the  wheel, 
and  clay.  They  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  other  three,  viz.,  Karyya,  Kiiryya- 
phala,  and  Anubandha,  that  is,  the  jar  (as  made),  keeping  of  water  and  other 
things,  and  the  comfort  of  the  person  keeping  such  things  in  the  jar.  Hence, 
by  Upaya  should  be  taken  such  things  as  spade  for  digging  the  earth,  water 
for  softening  it,  a  vessel  |for  fetching  that  water,  fire  for  baking  it,  kiln  wherein 
to  bake  it,  &c. — T. 

fThis  is  a  literal  version. 

In  other  words,  the  desire,  in  the  sense  of  determination  for  action,  if  it  arises 
after  such  an  examination,  is  regarded  as  beneficial. — T. 


5  84 


CHA  RA  KA  -  SA  M  HI  T A . 


Hence,  the  physician  who  sets  himself  to  treat  a  disease, 
should,  before  commencing  (his)  operations,  examine,  by  (the  usual 
methods  of)  examination,  the  (ten)  elements  which  deserve  to  be 
examined,  and  then  begin  the  treatment,81* 

In  this  connection,  if  a  physician,  or  one  that  is  not  a  compe¬ 
tent  physician,  were  to  question  a  physician  about  the  following 
points,  vis., 

how  many  methods  of  examination  should  be  adopted  by 
a  physician  desirous  of  administering  emetics,  purgatives, 
enemata  oily  or  dry,  and  cerebral  purgatives  (errhines), 

And  how  many  subjects  are  there  which  such  a  one 
should  examine, 

and  which  should  form  the  especial  subject  of  examination 
in  this  connection,  and  how  it  is  to  be  examined, 
and  what  is  the  need  (or  use)  of  examination, 
and  what  the  cases  are  in  which  emetics  &c.,  are  to  be 
administered, 

and  what  the  cases  are  in  which  they  are  not  to  be  adminis¬ 
tered, 

and  what  the  certain  treatment  is  in  cases  where  the  symptoms 
indicate  both  the  adoption  and  rejection  of  emetics  and  the  like, 
and  what  the  particular  drugs  are  that  are  fit  for  use  as 
emetics  and  the  like, 

the  physician,  thus  questioned,  desirous  of  confounding  the 
interrogator,  may  answer  him,  saying., 

there  are  diverse  methods  of  examination,  there  are  variations 
of  the  mode  of  examining  corresponding  with  the  variations  of 
the  subjects  of  examination. 

Do  you  enquire  in  how  many  ways,  according  to  differences 
in  the  nature  of  the  methods  of  examination,  a  particular  subject  of 
examination  is  to  be  examined,  or  how  many  kinds  of  distinction 
there  are,  as  regards  the  different  subjects  of  examination,  accord¬ 
ing  to  differences  in  the  nature  of  the  methods  of  examination  ? 

•fThe  original  is  pleonastic.  The  version  offered  is  a  literal  one. — E. 


charaka-samhitA. 


585 


I  enquire  of  this  because  it  is  probable  that  I  may  not  satisfy 
you  by  telling  you  of  the  differences  in  the  nature  of  the  methods 
of  examination  when  what  you  wish  to  know  is,  perhaps,  the  dis¬ 
tinctions  that  occur  in  the  subjects  of  examination  owing  to  differ¬ 
ences  in  the  nature  of  the  methods  of  examination  adopted.’** 

If  the  interrogator  (i e.  the  competent  or  incompetent  physi¬ 
cian  who  enquires)  answers  the  (above)  question,  the  interrogated 
physician  should  then,  after  reflection,  reply  to  the  questions  put, 
duly  observing  the  methods  of  reply.  Indeed,  if  the  interrogator 
answers,  and  the  interrogated  does  not  wish  to  confound  him, 
and  thinks  that  the  opportunity  for  reply  is  suitable,  he  should 
then  reply  to  the  questioner  agreeably  to  the  latter's  wishes  by 
telling  all  that  has  been  said  on  the  subject  by  inspired  teachers.” 

With  the  wise,  examination  is  of  two  kinds,  vie.,  Direct  and 
Inferential.  Besides  these  two,  there  is  Instruction  (imparted 
by  the  Inspired).  Hence,  Examination  is  of  three  kinds. 

Thus  Examination  is  of  two  kinds  ;  numbering  Instruction, 
it  is  of  three  kinds.’* 

The  ten  kinds  of  examinable  objects,  vie.,  those  having 
K&rana  for  their  first,  which  have  been  already  enumerated, 
we  shall  now  show,  applying  them  to  physicians  and  the  rest. 

In  this  connection,  the  K&rana  (  cause)  for  the  accomplish¬ 
ment  of  action  is  the  physician.  The  Karana  (or  instrument)  is 
medicine. 

The  K&ryya-yoni  (material  cause)  is  absence  of  harmony, 
among  the  dhcLtus  or  constituent  elements  of  the  body. 

The  K&ryya  (action,  or,  rather,  result  of  energy  spent)  is  res¬ 
toration  of  harmony  among  the  dh&tus. 

*The  language  of  the  second  half  of  the  original  is  needlessly  diffuse.  The 
sense  may  be  expressed  in  fewer  words.  I  have,  however,  tried  to  give  as  faith¬ 
ful  a  rendering  as  possible.  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  the  subjects  of  exami¬ 
nation  are  ten,  vie.,  Karana,  Karana,  KSryyayoni,  K&ryyaphala,  Anubandha, 
Defa,  K&la,  Pravritti,  and  Up&ya.  The  methods  of  examination  are  different.- 
Then,  again,  each  of  the  ten  subjects  is  capable  of  being  examined  in  different 
ways.  The  author  explains  himself  fully  lower  down. — T. 


586 


CHA  BA  KA-SAMHITA. 


The  KSryya-phala  (or  fruit  or  result  of  action)  is  the  attainment 
of  happiness,  ( i .  e.,  ease  or  health). 

The  Anubandha  (after-consequences)  is  continuance  of  life. 

Adhisthana  (substratum  of  action)  is  the  place  where  the  patient 
resides,  as  also  his  body. 

The  Kala  (time)  is  year  (including  seconds,  minutes,  hours, 
days,  weeks,  fortnights,  seasons,  &c.),  as  also  the  condition  of  the 
patient  with  respect  to  age  (viz.,  infancy,  youth,  manhood, 
decrepitude,  &c.),  or  his  condition  during  day  or  night,  morning  or 
evening,  &c. 

The  Pravritti  (effort,  or  energy,  put  forth  for  accomplishing  an 
act)  is  the  taking  up  of  the  treatment  by  the  physician. 

The  Up5ya  (or  suitability  and  adaptation  of  Karana  and  the 
others),  is  the  suitability  of  the  physician  and  the  medicines  and 
their  proper  adaptation  to  the  object  that  is  to  be  accomplished, 
viz.,  cure. 

As  regards  the  topics  embraced  by  Upaya,  they  have  been  expound¬ 
ed  above,  viz.,  where  this  subject  has  been  first  taken  up. 

Thus  have  the  ten  iexaminable  objects)  having  K&rana  for  their 
first,  been  exemplified  by  applying  them  to  physician  and  the 
rest,  numbering  ten  in  all. 

Indeed,  KSrana  and  the  rest  have  thus  been  applied  one  after 
another  to  physician  and  the  rest.95* 

Amongst  these  ten  kinds  of  examinable  objects,  the  especialities 
of  each,  as  also  the  particular  way  in  which  each  is  to  be  examined, 
are  now  setli  fort. 

K5rana  (or  cause)  is  the  physician.  This  has  been  said  above. 
As  regards  his  examination  :  he  is  a  Bhishak  (physician)  who 
applies  (administers)  medicines  (for  curing  ailments).  He  is  well- 


*The  concluding  portion  of  the  aphorism  is  needlessly  tautological. 


CHA  RA  KA  -SAM  HI!  A. 


587 


versed  in  carrying  out  the  sense  of  the  aphorisms.  To  him  Life  is 
known  in  all  its  bearings.”* 

Wishing  to  bring  about  duly  a  harmony  of  the  dhatus,  the  phy¬ 
sician  should,  at  the  outset,  examine  himself,  as  regards  his  own 
qualifications,  in  comprehending  the  attributes  (of  his  patients  or 
of  the  dhatus  that  have  fallen  away  from  a  state  of  harmony). 

Beholding  the  object  or  result  he  is  to  achieve,  he  should  con¬ 
sider  as  to  whether  he  is  able  to  achieve  that  object  or  result.97 

In  this  connection,  these  are  the  qualifications  of  physicians, 
equipt  with  which  a  physician  becomes  able  to  bring  about  the 
harmony  of  dhdtus. 

They  are  as  follow  : — 

Clear  apprehension  of  the  (medical)  scriptures,  experience 
gained  by  actual  observation  of  treatment  ;  cleverness  or  skill ; 
(purity  both  external  and  internal);  dexterity  of  hand  gained  by 
practice  ;  equipment  with  all  the  necessary  appliances  of  treatment 
(such  as  drugs,  instruments  of  all  kinds,  &c.);  possession  of  all  the 
organs  of  knowledge  and  action  (t'.e.,  freedom  from  such  defects 
as  blindness,  deafness,  &c.,  and  lameness,  &c.);  knowledge  of  the 
nature  (of  both  human  beings  and  inanimate  objects) ;  and  capacity 
to  deal  with  exigencies.98 

Karana  (instrument),  again,  is  medicine.  That  is  medicine 
which  serves  as  an  appliance  (or  instrument)  in  the  hands  of  the 
physician  while  endeavouring  to  bring  about  harmony  of  dhatus. 
It  is  distinguished  from  all  these  which  have  (before)  been 
included  in  the  word  Upaya.t 

*A  physician  is  called  a  Bhishak.  This  conies  from  Bhishaj,  meaning  one 
that  deals  with  drugs.  Bheshaja  is  drug.  The  three  requisites  of  a  physician 
are,  first,  that  he  should  be  conversant  with  the  use  of  drugs  ;  secondly  that  he 
should  be  conversant  with  the  sense  of  the  medical  scriptures  and  be  able  to 
act  according  to  them  ;  and,  thirdly,  that  he  should  know  the  subject  of  life  in 
all  its  bearings. — T. 

fWhat  is  said  in  the  last  sentence  is  this  :  certain  things  ge  by  the  name 
of  Up&ya  or  means.  (Vide  aphorism  90  ante.)  Karan*  is  an  Upaya,  (but 
then,  as  such,  it  is  distinguished  from  the  others.  As  GangSdhara  explains, 
medicine  as  Karana  in  the  hands  of  the  physician,  who  is  k&rana,  is 
"sadhakatamah  Upaya,”  i.c.,  the  most  efficacious  of  all  Upiyas  or  means. — T. 


588 


CHAR  AKA.S  A  M  HI  TA . 


It  is  of  two  kinds,  in  consequence  of  the  differences  of  the 
grounds  on  which  it  may  rest ;  i.  that  which  rests  on  the  grace  or 
power  of  the  deities,  and  2.  that  which  rests  on  observation  and 
reason.  Among  these,  medicine  resting  on  the  grace  or  power  of 
the  deities  consists  of  these :  Mantras  (set  phrases  and  words 
taken  from  the  scriptures  or  other  sources);  charms  (worn  on  the 
body);  gems  ;  auspicious  rites  ;  offerings  made  to  the  deities  (such 
as  flowers,  vegetables,  animals  that  are  regarded  as  clean,  &c.); 
gifts  (to  the  deities);  Homa  (libations  of  ghee  or  meat  poured  on 
the  sacred  fire  with  the  aid  of  mantras)',  observances  (such  as  abs¬ 
tention  from  particular  kinds  of  food  and  drink  at  particular  times, 
wearing  of  beards,  &c.);  expiatory  rites  and  penances ;  fasts,  gifts 
(to  Brahmanas,  &c);  propitiatory  rites  (such  as  reciting  those  sec¬ 
tion  sof  the  Markandeya  Purana  which  go  by  the  name  of  Chandt, 
&c.);  bows  and  prostrations  (unto  Brahmanas  and  deities,  &c.);  and 
sojourns  to  sacred  spots  and  waters. 

Medicine  that  rests  on  observation  and  reason,  consists  of 
these  : 

Correctives  and  alleviatives  ;  and  endevours  whose  results  are 
directly  observable. 

This  medicine,  in  consequence  of  difference  of  features,  is  of 
two  kinds  :  viz.,  1.  consisting  of  what  is  material,  and  2.  consisting 
of  what  is  not  material. 

Of  these,  the  immaterial  is  that  which  is  fraught  with  Up§ya 
or  means;  these  are  Up5ya  (or  means),  viz.,  exciting  (in  the  mind  of 
the  patient)  terror,  amazement,  grief,  and  joy;  administering 
rebukes,  striking  and  binding  the  patient  with  ropes,  inducing 
sleep,  rubbing  and  champooing  the  body,  and  similar  other  prac¬ 
tices  which  cannot  be  regarded  as  material  agents  and  which  have 
.  been  spoken  of  as  means  o,f  success  (in  treatment). 

Those  medicines  that  consist  of  material  objects  are  used  (as 
i  emetics  and  the  rest)  for  bringing  about  vomiting  and  the  rest.” 


C  HA  RAKA  -SA  MHITA. 


589 


Of  such  even  this  is  the  (method  of)  examination : 
it  is  such ; 
its  nature  is  such ; 
its  attributes  are  such ; 
its  potency  is  such  ; 
it  grows  (or  occurs)  in  such  a  region  ; 
it  grows  in  such  a  season  ; 
it  has  been  taken  up  in  this  way  ; 
it  has  been  kept  in  such  a  way ; 
it  has  been  subjected  to  these  processes ; 
it  is  fraught  with  ( i.e .,  used  in)  such  a  measure 
it  is  administered  in  such  desease  ; 
it  is  suitable  to  such  a  patient ;  and 
it  removes  or  allays  such  faults. 

Whatever  other  medicine  there  may  be  like  unto  that  (or  those) 
spoken  of  above,  it  should  also  be  examined  according  to  this  or 
any  other  special  method  and  then  applied.100* 

Absence  of  harmony  among  the  dhatus  (constituent  elements  of 
the  body)  constitutes  the  ‘  kSrya-yoni'  (ground  of  action). 

Its  indication  is  the  accession  of  an  abnormal  condition  (of  the 
body  or  of  the  dhatus).  Its  examination  consists  in  an  observation 
of  the  symptoms  that  indicate  an  increase  or  decrease  of  the  sources 
of  disease.  The  examination  of  abnormality  (disease)  also,  con¬ 
sists  in  an  observation  of  such  symptoms  as  indicate  curability  or 
incurability,  mildness  or  virulence.101 


*  ‘  It  is  such  j  implies  that  it  is  this  sort  of  thing  ;  or  that  its  species  is 

such.  Thus,  in  examining  a  flower,  the  physician  should  first  ascertain  its 
genus  ;  then  its  species  ;  &c.  He  should  then  enquire  about  its  ‘  prakriti'  or 
nature.  ‘Prakriti,’  it  seems,  is  not  different  from  genus  or  species  on  the  one 
hand  and  attributes  on  the  other.  ‘  Prabhava’  is  potency.  It  has  been  ex¬ 
plained  in  Sutrasthana.  Much  depends  on  the  character  of  the  spot 
where  an  herb  or  plant  grows.  A  plant  growing  in  a  garden,  and  another 
of  the  same  species  on  a  hill,  do'  not  posesess  the  same  attributes. 
Much,  again,  depends  on  the  season  in  which  an  herb  is  taken  up,  and  the 
manner  in  which  it  is  kept  after  being  taken  up. — T. 


75 


590 


charaxa-samhitA. 


The  ‘  karya  ’  (that  for  the  accomplishment  of  which  the  actor 
sets  about)  is  the  restoration  of  the  (disturbed)  harmony  of  the 
dhatus. 

Its  indication  is  the  alleviation  of  the  'vikara’  (or  the  abnormal 
condition  called  disease). 

Its  examination  consists  in  an  observation  of  these ; — 

The  disappearance  of  the  disease  ; 

The  accession  of  voice  and  complexion ; 

The  growth  of  the  body  [i.e.,  repair  of  the  waste); 

The  increase  of  strength  j 

A  desire  for  the  usual  articles  of  enjoyment ; 

Liking  (relish)  for  food  at  the  time  of  eating  ; 

Digestion,  at  the  proper  time,  of  food  that  has  been  taken  ; 

Accession  of  sleep  at  the  proper  time. 

Disappearance  of  dreams  due  to  abnormal  conditions  ; 

Happy  awakening  from  slumber  ; 

The  free  discharge  of  wind,  urine,  stools,  and  vital  seed  ;  and 

The  complete  disappearance  of  obstructions  to  the  free  action 
of  mind,  intellect,  and  the  senses.102* 

The  ‘  karya  phala’  or  result  of  action  is  the  attainment  of 
happiness.  Its  indications  are  cheerfulness  (or  felicity  of)  mind, 
intellect,  senses,  and  body.105 

The  ‘Anubandha’  (or  necessary  adjuncts  of  the  result  of  action) 
is  life. 


*'Abhyvaharya’  implies  the  usual  acticles  of  enjoyment.  The  special  mention 
of  food  (ahara),  immediately  after,  shows  that  ‘abhyavahara’  includes  all  other 
articles  except  food. 

‘Vaikarika  Swapna’  means  such  dreams  as  diseased  persons  get  ;  these 
differ  from  the  pleasant  dreams  of  healthy  people. 

The  free  action  of  every  organ  is  an  infallible  indication  of  health.  Hence 
the  free  discharge  of  wind,  of  urine,  of  stools,  and  of  the  vital  seed,  is  a  neces¬ 
sary  condition  of  sound  health.! 

In  Hindu  philosophy,  the  Mind  is  distinct  from  the  Intellect.  The  former 
is  called  'Manas’,  the  latter  ‘Buddhi.’  ‘Manas’  is  regarded  as  the  sixth  (the 
internal)  sense. — T. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA 


59i 


Its  indication  is  a  continuity  of  the  vital  breaths.104 

Place  (of  action)  is  the  country  (or  habitat  of  the  patient)  and 
the  patient  himself  (viz. ,  his  body). 

Amongst  these  (two),  the  examination  of  country  (or  habitat)  is 
for  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  the  patient,  as  also  for  ascertainment 
of  (the  qualities  of)  drugs. 

In  tin's  connection,  the  following  is  (the  method  of  examination) 
for  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  the  patient.  It  is  this  : — 

In  what  region  (or  country)  has  the  patient  taken  his  birth,  or 
has  grown,  or  has  caught  the  desease  ? 

In  that  country  these  are  the  articles  of  food  and  drink,  these 
the  sports,  &c.,  these  the  practices,  this  the  measure  of  strength, 
this  the  sort  of  constitution,  these  the  practices  suitable  to  health 
and  life,  these  the  faults  that  predominate  in  the  constitutions, 
these  the  inclinations,  these  the  ailments  of  the  people, 
and  these  are  beneficial,  and  these  are  not  beneficial  to  them.105* 

For  acquisition  of  an  accurate  knowledge  of  medicines,  it  is 
necessary  to  examine  the  soil  (from  which  they  are  obtained). 
The  examination  of  soil  will  be  laid  down  in  the  Division  called 
Kalpa.106 

The  patient  is  the  ‘de^a’  or  field  of  action  (treatment). 

His  examination  has  for  its  object  the  ascertainment  of  the 
(unexhausted  period  of  his  life  or  the  ascertainment  of  the  measure 
of  strength  and  faults. lorf 


*'Iyam  bhaktih’  implies  ‘these  are  the  inclinations’  of  the  inhabitants  or 
natives  of  the  country.  For  example,  the  people  of  this  country  like  to  bathe  every 
day  once  or  twice  ;  to  walk  about  with  bodies  uncovered  ;  to  eat  rotten  fish  ;  to 
labour  at  night  time  ;  to  marry  more  than  one  wife  ;  & c. — T 

f ‘Karya-defa’  is,  literally,  the  field  of  action  ;  that  is,,  the  ground  on  which 
the  action  operates.  The  actor  being  the  physician,  the  action  being  treatment, 
the  patient  is  the  field  or  ground  of  that  action. 

The  examination  of  the  patient  has,  really,  one  object  in  view,  viz.,  the  ascer¬ 
tainment  of  the  fact  as  to  the  period  for  which  the  patient  may  yet  live.  This  is 
dependent  on  ascertainment  of  the  measure  of  the  patient’s  strength,  including 
the  measure  in  which  the  faults  (wind,  bile  and  phlegm)  have  been  excited.  It 


592 


CHA  RA  KA  ■  SAM  HIT  A. 


In  this  connection,  even  this  is  the  object  of  ascertaining  the 
measure  of  the  particulars  about  strength  and  faults. 

A  strong  medicine,  suddenly  administered  by  an  undiscrimina¬ 
ting  physician,  may  kill  a  patient  of  little  strength. 

Indeed,  an  exceedingly  strong  medicine  of  a  fiery,  watery  and 
windy  character,  or  the  use  of  heat,  alkaline  ashes,  and  surgical  in- 
truments,  is  incapable  of  being  borne  by  patients  of  little  strength. 

These,  in  consequence  of  their  unbearable  and  exceedingly 
violent  action,  quickly  become  destructive  of  life.108 

Observant  of  this,  good  physicians  treat  a  patient  of  little 
strength  with  such  medicines  as  do  not  enhance  his  weakness,  as 
are  mild  and  exceedingly  gentle  in  their  operation,  as  are  so 
graduated  as  to  become  stronger  and  stronger  day  by  day,  as  bring 
about  cure  and  as  do  not  increase  the  danger. 

These  rules  are  specially  observable  in  the  case  of  females. 
They  are  of  unsteady,  mild,  open,  and  weak  hearts  ;  they  are  ex¬ 
ceedingly  delicate  and  weak,  and  in  need  of  comfort  and  conso¬ 
lation.109 

So  also,  when  a  weak  patient  is  afflicted  by  a  violent  disease, 
a  medicine  of  little  strength,  administered  by  an  undiscriminating 
physician,  fails  to  bring  about  a  cure. 

Hence,  the  patient  should  be  examined  in  respect  of  his  normal 
constitution  in  health,  of  the  abnormal  condition  that  has  set  in, 
of  the  predominance  of  some  particular  element  in  his  constitution 
(such  as  blood,  or  flesh,  &c.,  of  his  compactness  or  otherwise,  the 
make  of  his  proportions  such  as  stature,  &c.,  '.of  what  things  are 
suitable  to  his  constitution,  of  his  mental  disposition,  of  his  power 
of  eating  of  his  power  of  exercise,  and  of  his  age.1I0J 

is  believed  by  many,  who  are  unacquainted  with  the  Ayurvedic  method  of 
treatment,  that  its  professors  cause  the  patients  to  observe  undue  fasts.  This  is 
an  erroneous  impression.  The  strength  of  the  patient  is  always  sought  to  be 
kept  up  by  proper  means. 

*‘Asadhakam  bhavati’  means  ‘does  not  become  effective,’  i.  e.,  does  not  bring 
about  the  result  anticipated  ;  or,  does  not  bring  about  a  cure.  The  words 
used  in  the  original  are  all  technical ;  ‘prakrititah’  has  reference  to  the  usual 


charaka-samhitA. 


593 


For  ascertainment  of  the  measure  of  strength  (of  the  patient), 
these  (ten)  incidents  beginning  with  (prakriti)  the  normal  constitu¬ 
tion  in  health,  we  shall  explain  here.  They  are  as  follow. 

The  nature  of  the  vital  seed  (of  the  sire)  and  the  blood  (of  the 
mother)  ; 

The  nature  that  is  dependent  on  the  time  (with  respect  to  the 
mother)  of  gestation  ; 

The  nature  of  the  mother  as  regards  her  food  and  sports  (during 
the  period  of  gestation  )  ; 

The  nature  of  the  modifications  which  the  great  elements  (earth, 
water,  light,  air,  and  ether  or  space)  undergo:  all  these  exercise  an 
influence  on  the  foetus* 

The  foetus  is  affected  by  that  fault  or  those  faults  which  affects 
or  affect  those  causes,  and  to  the  same  extent  also  in  which  the 
causes  themselves  are  affected. 

Commencing,  therefore,  from  the  moment  of  existence  as  foetus 
the  nature  of  human  beings  come-;  to  be  recognised  as  dependent 

constitution  in  health  ;  ‘vikrititah’  has  reference  to  the  reverse  of  the  above, 
i.  e.,  to  the  abnormal  condition  that  has  set  in  ;  'saratath’  has  reference  to  the 
predominance  of  particular  elements  ;  some  men  are  called  ‘raktasara,’  some 
are  called  ‘twak-sara,’  some  ‘fukra-sara,’  &c. 

‘Ahara-fakti’  has  reference  to  the  power  of  taking  food,  «.  e.  the  measure  of 
appetite  and  the  power  of  digestion.  Every  one  of  these  is  explained  below  in 
this  very  lesson. — T. 

*The  Hindu  medical  scriptures  say  that  the  sire’  vital  seed  and  the  mother’s 
blood  form  the  foetus.  The  nature  of  these  two  determine  the  nature  of  the 
foetus. 

‘Kala-gabtha  faya-prakritim’  has  reference  to  the  time  of  gestation,  i.  e., 
the  age  of  the  mother  at  the  time  of  conception.  It  may  also  refer  to  the  con¬ 
dition  of  her  body,  viz.,  hale  or  diseased.  So  also,  it  may  refer  to  the  season 
and  other  circumstances  relating  to  the  time  of  conception.  Thus,  conception 
may  take  place  during  a  season  of  extraordnary  cold  or  extraodinary  heat,  or 
during  a  plague,  the  excitement  or  fear  caused  by  a  war,  &c. 

The  reading  ‘maturahara  &c.’  is  better  than  ‘aturahara  &c.’  ChakrapSni  and 
Gangadhara  both  accept  the  former  reading. 

The  great  elements,  viz.,  earth,  water,  &c.,  undergo  modifications.  These 
modifications  exercise  an  influence  on  the  foetus. 

The  correct  reading  is  ‘avekshyate'  and  not  ‘apekshyate.’ — T. 


594 


CHA  R  A  KA-SA  MhItA. 


on  the  predominance  or  ortherwise  of  such  a  fault  or  faults. 

For  this  reason, 

Some  persons,  by  nature,  have  the  wind  predominating  in 
thie  constitutions  ; 

Some  have  the  bile  predominating  in  their  constitutions  ; 

Some  have  the  phlegm  predominating  in  their  constitutions  ; 

Some  have  any  two  of  the  three  faults  or  all  the  three  faults 
combined  together  in  predominant  measure  ;  and 

Some  have  all  the  three  faults  combined  in  harmonious 
proportions. 

We  shall  explain  the  characteristics  of  these  several  kinds 
of  human  beings.*111 

Phlegm  is  oily,  smooth,  soft,  sweet,  firm,  thick,  mild,  moist,  heavy, 
cool,  slippery,  and  transparent. 

In  consequence  of  its  oiliness,  persons  in  whose  constitution 
it  predominates,  have  a  body  that  is  oily. 

In  consequence  of  its  smoothness,  their  bodies  are  smooth. 

In  consequence  of  its  mildness,  they  have  bodies  which  are 
agreeable  to  look  at,  delicate,  and  clear  (in  the  sense- of  freedom 
from  filth). 

In  consequence  of  its  sweetness,  they  have  a  large  measure  of 
vital  seed  ;  they  indulge  largely  in  sexual  congress,  and  they  have 
a  large  number  of  children. 

In  consequence  of  its  firmness,  their  bodies  become  firm, 
compact,  and  fixed.  + 

In  consequence  of  its  thickness,  they  have  bodies  with  limbs 
all  fully  grown  and  developed. 


•What  is  said  here  is  this  :  some  men  have  the  wind,  some  the  bile,  some 
the  phlegm,  predominating  in  their  constitutions.  Some,  again,  have  any  two 
of  these  predominating,  while  some  have  all  ithe  three  existing  in  harmonious 
proportions.  Upon  such  predominance  the  nature  (or  prakriti)  of  a  man  is  said 
to  depend.  This  nature  has  its  origin  in  the  condition  of  the  great  elements  at 
the  time  of  one’s  existence  as  a  foetus, 
t-f-  e.,  not  subject  to  quick  changes. — T. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  M  Hi  7  A. 


595 


In  consequence  of  its  mildness,  tlieir  exertions,  food,  and  sports, 
are  always  mild.* 

In  consequence  of  its  moisture,  they  are  slow  in  action,  nor  are 
they  quickly  upset  or  agitated. 

In  consequence|ot  its  heaviness,  their  tread  is  fiim,  careful, 
and  slow.f 

In  consequence  of  its  coolness,  their  appetite,  thirst,  heat  of 
body,  perspiration,  and  diseases  (born  of  the  excitement  of  the 
faults),  are  mild.J 

In  consequence  of  its  slipperiness,  their  bodies  are  smooth  and 
their  joints  are  strong  and  compact. 

In  consequence  of  its  transparency,  they  are  possessed  of  faces 
with,  cheerful  expression,  and  of  complexion  and  voice  that  are 
agreeable. § 

In  consequence  of  their  being  endued  with  these  attributes, 
people  in  whose  constitution  phlegm  predominates  become  possess¬ 
ed  of  strength,  wealth,  learning,  energy,  mildness  of  disposition, 
and  length  of  life.11®  $ 

Bile  is  hot,  keen,  liquid,  endued  with  the  scent  of  raw  meat, 
sour,  and  pungent. 

In  consequence  of  its  heat,  they  in  whose  constitutions  bile 
predominates  become  incapable  of  bearing  heat  (of  any  kind)  ; 
their  bodies  are  dry,  delicate,  and  void  of  filth;  they  become  en¬ 
dued  with  a  very  large  number  of  freckles,  dark  spots  on  the  cheek, 
moles,  and  the  eruptions  called  Pidaka ;  they  become  endued 

*1.  e.,  they  are  not  characterised  by  great  activity,  nor  do  they  take  a  large 
measure  of  food  ;  their  sports,  again,  are  not  active. — T. 

j-Chakrapani  explains  that  ‘Saragati’  implies  'an  incapacity  to  trip,  or  fall 
down;’  ‘adhishthitagati’  implies  a  treading  with  the  entire  soles  of  the  feet. 
‘Avasthitagati’  implies  slowness  of  tread, — T. 

$ ‘Dosha,’  the  last  word  of  the  compound,  is  explained  by  Gangadhara 
as  meaning  the  diseases  that  spring  from  the  excitement  of  the  faults.— T. 

§‘Prasanna-darcana’ implies  either  as  endued  with  cheerful  expression,  or 
as  agreeable  to  behold.  In  either  case,  it  implies  loveliness. — T. 

$  Some  texts  read  ‘cantah’  after  ‘ojaswinah.’  I  adopt  it  in  the  version  given 
above. — T. 


596 


CHAR  A  KA.Sa  MHITA. 


with  keenness  of  hunger  and  thirst;  they  soon  become  subject  to 
wrinkles,  gray  hair,  and  baldness  ;  and  their  faults  are  quickly 
excited;*  their  beards,  bristles,  and  hair;  become  soft,  sparse,  and 
of  a  tawny  hue.  In  consequence  of  its  keenness,  they  in  whose 
constitution  the  bile  predominates  become  persons  of  keen  prowess; 
their  digestive  power  becomes  keen  ;  they  eat  and  drink  copiously  ; 
they  become  incapable  of  bearing  pain  ;  and  quarrelsome  or  prone 
to  mischief.  In  consequence  of  its  liquid  character,  their  joints 
and  flesh  become  loose  and  soft,  and  their  perspiration  and  dis¬ 
charge  of  urine  and  stools  become  copious.  In  consequence  of  its 
being  endued  with  the  scent  of  raw  meat,  their  breasts,  armpits, 
mouth,  head,  and  the  whole  bo  dy,  have  a  foetid  smell  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  its  pungency,  with  sourness  ;  their  vital  seed  is  scanty  ; 
they  indulge  sparingly  in  sexual  congress  ;  and  the  number  of 
children  they  have  is  small. 

In  consequence  of  their  being  endued  with  these  attributes, 
persons  in  whose  constitutions  the  bile  predominates,  acquire 
mediocre  strength  and  a  mediocre  period  of  life  ;  they  become  po¬ 
ssessed  of  knowledge,  wisdom,  wealth,  and  all  sorts  of  valuable 
possessions.11* 

The  Wind,  without  doubt,  is  dry,  light,  restless,  copious,  fast- 
moving,  cool,  rough,  and  transparent. 

In  consequence  of  its  dryness,  persons  in  whose  constitutions 
the  wind  predominates,  become  endued  with  bodies  that  are  dry, 
lean,  and  small-sized.  Their  voice  always  becomes  harsh,  weak, 
broken,  indistinct,  and  uncontinuous.*  Such  men  are  wakeful 
(that  is,  they  do  not  sleep  long  or  soundly). 


f ‘Doshcih’  here  may  be  taken  as  referring  to  wrinkles,  &c  that  precede  the 
word.  But  following  G&ngadharas  explanation  of  the  word  as  it  occurs  in  the 
previous  aphorism,  it  should  be  taken  as  implying  the  faults  i.  e.  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm. — T. 

*  ‘Pratata’  is  ‘always’  or  ‘generally.’  ‘Sakta,’  as  applied  to  voice,  means 
I  ‘avyakta,’  that  is,  indistinct.  Chakrapani  takes  it  as  the  equivalent  of  ‘baddha,’ 
that  is,  choked.  ‘Jarjjarita,’  is  explained  as  asamhata,'  that  is,  not  continuous. 
Hence,  asthmatic. — T. 


CHA  RARA-SAMHITA 


597 

In  consequence  of  its  lightness,  their  motions,  exertions,  food, 
and  practices  are  light  and  quick  * 

In  consequence  of  its  restlessness  (unsteadiness),  their  joints, 
eyes,  eyebrows,  cheeks,  lips,  tongues,  heads,  shoulders,  hands,  and 
feet,  become  restless. t 

In  consequence  of  its  copiousness,  they  talk  much,  atld  their 
arteries,  large  and  small,  including  the  five  branches  and  extensions, 
are  too  many. 

In  consequence  of  its  speed,  they  are  hasty  in  all  their  under¬ 
takings  ;  they  are  soon  agitated  ;  their  minds  change  quickly, 
they  are  soon  inspired  with  fear ;  they  are  hasty  in  their  likes  and 
dislikes;  they  succeed  in  understanding  as  soon  as  they  hear 
but  their  memory  is  not  tenacious  J 

In  consequence  of  its  coolness,  they  are  unable  to  bear  cold. 
They  are  exceedingly  susceptible  to  cold,  shivering,  and  stupour. 

In  consequence  of  its  roughness,  their  hair,  beards,  bristles, 
nails,  teeth,  face,  hands,  feet,  and  other  limbs  become  rough. 

In  consequence  of  its  transparency,  their  limbs  become  suscep¬ 
tible  of  bursting,  and  their  joints  creak  when  they  walk  or  stand 
up  or  sit  down.f! 

In  consequence  of  their  being  endued  with  these  qualities, 
persons  in  whose  constitutions  the  wind  predominates,  generally 
become  possessed  of  little  strength,  and  short-lived,  and  infecund 
as  regards  offspring ;  they  are  not  capable  of  much  exertion  ;  and 
they  are  of  little  wealth  (incapable  as  they  are  of  much  exertion  for 
earning).114 

*  Motions  and  exertions  may  be  light  (in  the  sense  of  not  being  heavy  or 
elephantine)  and  quick.  As  applicable  to  practices  even,  the  adjectives  are 
not  unnitelligible.  But  light  and  quick  in  food  is  scarcely  intelligible.— T. 

f  I.  e.  twitches  and  jerking  motions  are  observable  in  these  limbs.  Over 
these  motions  the  man  has  no  control.  They  are  all  involuntary.— T. 

XI.e.  they  are  quick  in  apprehending  and  as  quick  in  forgetting  what  they 
bear  or  learn. — T. 

$  'Sandhi-Qavda-Gaminah'  as  explained  by  Gang&dhara  is  ‘Satatam  ga- 
mane  Sandhayah  Qavdayante  yesham,’  i,  e.  they  whose  joints  creak  at  the  time 
they  walk  or  move.— T. 


76 


59& 


CH  A  RAKA-SA  M Hi  TA . 


In  consequence  of  a  union  of  the  faults,  the  indications  become 
united.* 

They  in  whom  the  three  faults  exist  in  a  state  of  harmony 
become  endued  with  a  harmonious  mixture  of  all  the  qualities. 
By  these  indications  should  the  physician  examine  a  patient  about 
his  normal  state  (as  dependant  on  the  predominance  or  otherwise 
of  this  or  that  fault  or  faults  in  his  constitution).115 

Next,  as  to  abnormal  conditions  :  an  abnormal  condition  has 
been  said  to  be  a  deviation  from  what  is  normal, 

In  this  connection,  the  physician  should  examine  the  abnormal 
condition,  by  observing  the  particulars,  as  regards  strength,  of 
cause,  constituent  elements  (of  the  body,  such  as  juice,  blood, 
flesh,  fat,  bones,  marrow,  and  vital  seed)  faults  (i.  e.,  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm),  nature  or  normal  condition,  and  place  (meaning  seat  or 
habitat  of  the  disease),  time  (*.  e.,  season  of  the  year  as  also  age  of 
the  patient).  He  should  examine.it  by  observing  the  symptoms  of 
the  patient  as  well. 

Without  observing  the  particulars,  as  regards  strength,  of 
cause  and  the  rest,  there  can  be  no  knowledge  of  the  degree  of 
strength  of  the  disease.. 

That  disease  is  strong  (or  violent)  in  which  the  constituent  ele¬ 
ments  (of  the  body,  the  faults,  nature  or  normal  condition),  place 
(or  seat  of  disease),  and  time  (that  is,  season  or  age),  draw  an 
agreement  with  one  another,  but  whose  cause  or  causes  and  symp¬ 
toms  are  possessed  of  strength.t 

*/.«.  if  a  person  happens  to  have  both’  phlegm  and  wind  in  a  larger  measure 
than  bile,  the  qualities  which  phlegm  and  wind  generate  become  united  in  him. 
So  in  the  case  of  one  in  whom  bile  and  phlegm,  or  bile  and  wind  predominate, 
a  mingling  is  observed  of  the  attributes  of  each.--T. 

t  An  illustration  occurs  in  the  following  ;  the  patient  is  a  child  of  phlegmatic 
temperament.  He  is  afflicted  by  bronchitis,  (caused  by  excitement  of  phlegm). 
The  place  is  a  marshy  region.  The  season  is  winter.  The  seat  of  the  disease 
is  the  chest.  Here  the  fault,  the  normal  condition,  place,  and  time  are  all  in 
agreement.  If  the  cause  (exposure  for  many  hours  to  cold  blasts  of  wind)  and 
symptoms  (violent  coughing,  accompanied  by  an  inflamed  appearance,)  are 
possessed  of  strength,  the  disease  is  regarded  strong. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  599 

When  the  reverse  of  this  happens,  the  disease  is  regarded  as  of 
little  strength. 

That  disease  is  regarded  as  of  middle  strength  in  which  among 
the  constituent  elements,  faults,  &c.,  there  is  agreement  between 
some  only,  and  whose  cause  or  causes,  and  symptoms,  are  possessed 
of  middle  strength.*115 

Next,  as  to  examination  according  to  Sara  (predominating 
essence  or  element) :  there  are  eight  Saras  of  human  beings. 

We  shall  lay  down  instructions  about  them  for  exact  knowledge 
of  the  measure  of  one's  strength. 

They  are  i.  skin,  2.  blood,  3.  flesh,  4.  fat,  5.  bones,  6.  marrow, 
7.  vital  seed,  and  8.  mind, 

They  that  have  the  skin  for  their  predominating  essence  or 
element,  have  their  skin  endued  with  the  following  qualites :  oili¬ 
ness,  smoothness,  softness,  agreeable  colour,  and  possession  of  hair 
that  is  fine,  thin  or  scanty,  deep-rooted,  and  delicate  ;  their  skin, 
again  seems  to  be  possessed  of  splendour. 

The  predominance  of  this  element  (via.  skin)  indicates  the 
possession  of  happiness,  good  luck,  prosperty,  diverse  objects  of 
enjoyment,  understanding,  learning,  health,  objects  of  diversion 
and  joy,  and  longevity  of  life. 

Of  men  that  have  the  blood  as  the  predominating  element  in 
their  constitutions,  the  symptoms  are  these :  viz.,  the  ears,  the  eyes, 
the  mouth,  the  tongue,  the  nose,  the  lips,  the  palms  of  the  hands, 
the  soles  of  the  feet,  the  nails,  the  forehead,  and  the  virile  organ, 
are  all  oily  and  red  in  colour,  of  a  handsome  make,  and  possessed 
of  splendour.f 

The  predominance  of  this  element  indicates  the  possession  of 
happiness,  eminence,  intelligence,  strength  of  mind,  delicacy  (of 
features),  middling  strength  (of  body)  and  an  incapacity  to  bear 
pain.11' 

*  The  correct  reading  is  'hetulinga-valam’  and  not  (as  in  some  Bengal 
editions)  1  hetuvalalingam.’ — T. 

f  ' Snigdha-raktani'  may  mean  'of  a  mild  red  color’  ' Qreemanti’  is 
explained  by  Chakrap&ni  as  'Qobha-yuktam  that  is  possessed  of  beauty. — T. 


6oo 


CHAR  AKA -SAM  HIT  A. 


Of  men  that  have  the  flesh  as  the  predominating  element  in 
their  constitution,  the  symptoms  are  these  :  viz.,  their  temples, 
forehead,  throat,  eyes  (or  rather,  eye-lids),  cheeks,  jaws,  neck, 
shoulders,  chest,  armpits,  breast,  and  the  joints  of  the  arms  and 
the  legs,  are  covered  with  compact,  heavy  and  agreeable-look¬ 
ing  flesh. 

The  predominance  of  this  element  indicates  the  possession  of 
forgiveness,  endurance,  un covetousness,  wealth,  learning,  happi¬ 
ness,  sincerity,  health,  strength,  and  longevity  of  life.118 

Of  men  that  have  the  fat  as  the  predominating  element  in 
their  constitution,  the  symptoms  are  a  complexion  that  is  oily, 
a  voice  that  is  so,  and  eyes  and  hair  and  bristles  and  nails  and 
teeth  and  lips  and  urine  and  faec  es  that  are  oily. 

Such  predominance  indicates  wealth,  power,  happiness,  enjoy¬ 
ment  (of  all  agreeable  articles),  liberality,  and  sincerity,  as  also 
an  enjoyment  of  all  sorts  of  delicacies  119 

They  who  have  bones  for  the  predominating  element  in  their 
constitution  have  these  parts  of  the  body,  viz.  the  heels,  ankles, 
knees,  the  portion  of  the  arm  from  the  elbow-joint  to  the  fingers1- 
ends,  shoulder-joint,  chin,  head,  and  joints,  and  bones,  nails,  and 
teeth,  thicker  than  those  of  other  people. 

They  are  possessed  of  great  energy  and  perseverence,  addicted 
to  acts,  capable  of  bearing  pain  and  fatigue,  endued  with  bodies 
firm  and  compact,  and  possessed  of  longevity  of  life.120 

They  who  have  the  marrow  for  the  predominating  element  in 
their  constitution  have  limbs  that  are  soft,  as  also  great  strength, 
oily  complexion  and  voice,  and  joints  that,  are  thick,  long,  and 
round. 

They  become  long-lived,  endued  with  great  strength,  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  scriptures,  science,  and  offspring.  They  become 
entitled  to  the  respect  of  all.121 

They  who  have  the  vital  seed  for  the  predominating  element  in 
their  constitution  become  possessed  of  an  amiable  disposition, 
and  amiable  (or  agreeable)  looks.  Their  eyes  seem  to  be  full  of 


C  HA  RA  KA  -SA  M  HIT  A . 


601 

milk.  They  are  capable  of  largely  indulging  in  sexual  congress* 
Their  teeth  are  of  an  oily  (shining)  complexion,  round,  strong, 
equal  in  size,  close  to  each  other,  and  handsome  .+  Their  complex¬ 
ion  and  voice  are  agreeable  and  oily.  Their  bodies  are  shining 
and  their  hips  are  large  (and  heavy).  They  are  fond  of  women. 
They  are  regarded  by  women  as  dear  objects  of  enjoyment.  They 
are,  besides,  endued  with  great  strength.1™ 

They  who  have  the  mind  for  the  predominating  element  of 
their  constitution  are  possessed  of  happiness,  power,  health, 
wealth,  honors,  and  offspring ;  they  are  endued  with  strong  memo¬ 
ry,  as  also  with  great  reverence  (for  deities  and  seniors) ;  they 
are  very  grateful,  possessed  of  wisdom  and  purity  (both  external 
and  internal) ;  they  have  great  energy  and  perseverance,  much 
cleverness  and  considerable  patience ;  they  fight  with  great 
prowess  in  battle  ;  they  are  never  cheerless  or  melancholy.  They 
are  always  firm.  Their  understandings  and  hearts  are  deep  and 
grave.  They  are  exceedingly  atttentive  to  all  things  that  are 
beneficial  (to  themselves  or  to  others.)12' 

All  these  varieties  of  men  have  now  been  explained  according 
to  their  respective  chracteristics.124 

Now,  those  men  in  whose  constitutions  all  the  elements  exist  in  a 
large  and  harmonious  measure,  become  endued  with  great  strength 
and  great  honors  (in  every  direction).  They  become  capable  of 
enduring  toil  and  pain  in  all  kinds  of  acts  :  they  are  inspired 
with  confidence  in  their  own  abilities ;  they  are  exceedingly 
attentive  to  everything  that  is  beneficial  ;  their  bodies  become  firm 
and  little  subject  to  decay.  J  Their  tread  and  other  kinds  of 
motion  are  well-balanced  ;  their  voice  is  deep,  oily,  and  rever¬ 
berating  ;  they  are  possessed  of,  happiness,  power,  wealth,  all  kinds 
of  enjoyable  articles,  and  honours  ;  the  symptoms  of  decay  do  not 
appear  soon  on  their  bodies,  nor  do  these  symptoms  become  pro- 


*  The  word  1  praharsha-vahulah’  is  thus  explained  by  Gangadhara.  He 
is,  no  doubt,  correct. — T 

f  ‘  Qikhara’  is  explained  by  Qhakrapani  as  meaning  handsome  (Qobhana) . — T 
t  "  Samahita-Qarirah'  means  with  bodies  not  subject  to  decay, — T. 


6(32 


CHARAKA-SAMhITA. 


nounced  ;  they  are  not  subject  to  changes  (of  temper)  upon  slight 
reasons  ;  they  are  blessed,  again,  with  numerous  progeny,  all  of 
whom  are  endued  with  equal  qualities  ;  they  become  also  long- 
lived. ia! 

Those  men  that  are  possessed  of  attributes  which  are  the 
reverse  of  these,  are  regarded  as  possessed  of  no  pith.* ias 

Persons  endued  with  a  predominance,  in  a  middling  measure, 
of  any  of  the  eight  elements,  have  attributes,  corresponding  with 
the  above,  in  a  middling  measure.1*7 

Thus  have  been  explained  the  eight  different  kinds  of  pith  as 
regards  human  beings.  These  explanations  are  given  for  a  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  differences  in  respect  of  the  measure  of  strength  of 
different  men.1** 

It  has  been  said  that  a  person  should  be  examined  by  the  test 
of  his  pith.  This  has  been  laid  down  for  preventing  a  physician 
from  arriving  at  an  erroneous  conclusion  by  a  sight  of  the  body  alone 
of  the  patient.  Such  conclusions  should  never  be  formed,  viz.,  that 
this  one  is  endued  with  strength  because  this  one’s  body  is  large  ; 
or  that  this  one  is  of  little  strength  for  this  one’s  body  is  lean  j  or, 
that  this  one  is  very  strong  because  this  one’s  body  is  of  very  large 
proportions  ;  or,  that  this  one  is  possessed  of  very  little  strength 
because  this  one’s  body  is  of  very  small  dimensions.  It  is,  in¬ 
deed,  seen  that  men  whose  bodies  are  of  small  dimensions  or  whose 
bodies  are  lean  are  still  possessed  of  strength.  In  this  connection, 
a  proof  is  offered  by  ants  (which  are  very  diminutive  creatures) 
btearing  away  large  weights.139 

Next,  as  regards  (examination  of  the  patient  by  observation 
of  his)  body :  the  words  samhanana,  sanghata,  and  samyojana  are 
of  the  same  import. 

*  It  will  be  seen  that  the  word  '*  sara”  has  been  rendered  "  predominance 
of  (constituting)  element.”  This  long  periphrasis  becomes  inconvenient  in 
rendering  such  short  compounds  as  ‘  Twak-sara’,  '  Rakta-sara,’  &c.  The  fact 
is,  if  ‘sara’  be  baken  as  equivalent  to  'pith’  in  the  sense  of  ‘essence,’  the  peri¬ 
phrasis  may  be  abandoned  with  this  explanation.  ‘Twak-sara’  may  be  rendered 
as  ‘Skin-pithed  ;’  so  ‘Rakta-sara’  as  ‘Blood-pithed,’  &c.  Hence  ‘Asara’  imply¬ 
ing  the  absence  of  ‘SSra,’  may  be  rendered  as  ‘having  no  pith’  — T. 


CHA  RAKA -SAMH/TA 


603 


In  respect  of  this,  that  body  is  said  to  be  firm  or  compact 
which  consists  of  symetrical  and  well-formed  bone.s,  well-knit 
joints,  and  well-placed  flesh  and  blood. 

Those  men  who  are  possessed  of  firm  and  compact  bodies 
become  endued  with  strength. 

Those  men  whose  bodies  are  of  an  opposite  kind,  are  poss¬ 
essed  of  little  strength. 

In  consequence  of  bodies  being  of  a  middle  character  between 
the  superior  and  the  inferior,  their  possessors  become  endued  with 
middling  strength  1S0 

Next,  as  regards  (examination  of  the  patient  by  his)  dimensions  : 
Instructions  are  now  to  be  given  as  regards  the  dimensions  of  the 
body  measured  by  one’s  fingers.  The  height,  the  breadth  (inclu¬ 
ding  circumference)  and  length,  in  their  order.181 

As  regards  the  feet  :  their  breadth  is  six  fingers  ;  and  their 
length  is  fourteen  fingers. 

The  lower  part  of  the  leg  (from  the  ankle  to  the  knee)  is 
eighteen  fingers,  in  height  ;  its  circumference  is  sixteen  fingers. 

The  knees  are  four  fingers  in  height  ;  their  circumference  is 
sixteen  fingers. 

The  thighs  are  thirty  fingers  in  circumference,  and  eighteen 
fingers  in  height  (or  length). 

The  testicles  are  six  fingers  in  length,  and  eight  fingers  in  cir¬ 
cumference. 

The  male  organ  is  six  fingers  in  length,  and  five  fingers-  in  cir¬ 
cumference. 

The  circumference  of  the  female  organ  is  twelve 
fingers. 

The  breadth  of  the  waist  is  sixteen  fingers. 

The  length  of  the  anal  canal  is  ten  fingers. 


604 


CH A  BA  KA -SA  M HIT. d 


The  abdomen  is  twelve  fingers  in  height  (or  length)  and  ten 
fingers  in  breadth. 

The  height  (or  length)  of  the  flanks  is  twelve  fingers,  and  their 
breadth  is  ten  fingers. 

The  interval  between  the  breasts  is  twelve  fingers. 

The  length  or  breadth  of  each  breast  is  two  fingers. 

The  height  of  the  chest  is  twelve  fingers,  and  its  width  is 
twenty-four  fingers. 

The  width  of  the  heart  is  three  fingers. 

The  shoulder-joints  are  eight  fingers  (in  length). 

The  shoulders  are  six  fingers  (in  length). 

The  upper  arms  are  each  sixteen  fingers  (in  length). 

The  lower  arms  are  each  fifteen  fingers  (in  length). 

The  palms  (from  the  wrist  to  the  end  of  the  middle  finger)  are 
each  twelve  fingers  (in  length). 

The  arm-pits  are  each  eight  fingers  (in  length). 

The  lower  part  of  the  spine  (from  the  mouth  of  the  anal  canal 
to  the  waist)  is  twelve  fingers  in  length. 

The  back  (meaning  the  spinal  column  from  the  waist  to  the 
lower  part  of  the  neck)  is  eghteen  fingers  (in  length  or  height). 

Of  four  fingers’  height  and  two  and  twenty  fingers’  circumference 
is  the  neck. 

The  height  of  the  face  is  twelve  fingers,  and  its  circumference 
is  four  and  twenty  fingers. 

The  mouth  is  five  fingers  (in  length). 

The  chin  is  four  fingers  (in  breadth). 

The  (upper  and  the  lower)  lip  is  four  fingers  (in  length). 

The  ear  is  four  fingers  (in  height) 

The  space  between  the  two  eyes  is  four  fingers. 

The  nose  is  four  fingers  (in  length). 

The  forehead  is  four  fingers  (in  height). 


^Professor  IB.  X3.  0©"Well,  Cambridge  : — A  careful  translation  of  this 
ancient  work will  be'very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may 
succeed  in  translating  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

IB.  G-.  IBccles,  IBsca. ,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York  ■. — The  matter  is  certainly 
of  great  interest  to  me. 

IE.  IE5.  IDavis,  IBsq..,  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences, 
Philadelphia-. —  1'nank  you  for  tnis  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  medical 
literature. 

IB,  jPx..  Cas.tle,  IBs©!.. — Even  a. superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with 
its  importance.  •  1  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

IDr.  XX.  O,  ”'nX7“oo<3.,  Philadelphia  -. — I  have  fouud  it  exceedingly  interesting  and 
sincerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  librarv.  I  have  written  quite  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  semi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America.. 

IDr.  Xvdlittra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  of  Cashmere  -. — No  medical  man’s  library 
,  should  be  without  Gharaka  ;  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied 
this  great  work  .of  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

IDr.  Oscar  OXAeToerg-,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North- 
Western  University  ;  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition  -.—l  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to  speak 
of  it  in  the  Apothecary . 

Brcfessor  Xj  IB.  Bscysr,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  • — 
Be  assured  1  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking.  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

jfb-ToTsot  XX.  IBlicls:  IBsq..,  iq,  East  38th  Street,  New  York  : — Wish  you  a 
success  in  your  praiseworthy  undertaxing. 

JNXorxs.  'X*.  0-sToToa.rd.,  Derselhof  ber  Traise,  Darmstadt  .- — The  difficulties  you 
SDeak  of  in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with, — a  German  proverb  says 
what  takes  much  time,  comes  out  weli.  . 

IDr.  XX.  XT.  TXTli.elpleTr,  X=Ib.  ID.,  G-.  IMI.  ID.,  IB.  IB.XvdI.  S.  Saint 
.  Louis,  U  S.  A..  Editor  Meyer  Brothers’  Druggist : — 1  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  it  in 
our  Columns  and  advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the 
entire  English  writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  yon  for  placing  this  matter  at 
their  disunsah  The  work  is  certainly  highly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  general  interest. 

fhkf  ons.  XX,  Xj3  SoiH.c3.or,  Librarie  Etrangere,  174,  Boulevaise,  Saint  Germain  ■— - 
Beg  to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charalca. 

Olrarles  IBice,  IBscj,.,  Ne w  York  Wish  you'every  success  that  can  recompense 
you  for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  .you  a  copy 'of  a  review  which  I 

TX7".  O.  Eoanerjee,  XBsq. ,  6,  Pdrk  Street  Calcutta  .■—My  dear  Pundit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  1  spoke  ;  when  1  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you  fabout  . 
drawing  their  attention  to]  your  excellent  work:  Writing  again  sometime  after, — An 
Aviirvedic  physician  of  note  *  *  considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts  to 

diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

3Bain.l  33in.rtlxol©m.,  3y£.  ID.,  Philadelphia-. — I  have  been  exceedingly  struck 
with  the  profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  .go  beyond  anything  that  I 
have  ever  met  before  in  Medical  literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s 
'reflections. 

-  XX.  -ifh..  ID.  IBlxillips,  IBsq.  ,  O.  S.  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Maimensimg: — 
The  translation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  ate  interesting  even  to  a  lavman. 

3B  O.  XDu.tt,  IBsct.  o.  S.  O  X  IB.  Magistrate  and  Collector  Your  patriotic: 
.labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  .  You  have  so  admirably  begun  *  «  *  You  deserve 
the  especjal  acknowledgements  of  the  medical  profession. 

Gr.  Grierson.,  IBscL.,  O.S..  Gya  -.— It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall 
be  obliged  by  yourgetting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work 

XDr.  G-rifE-tib.  lEva-m-S,  XX.ID.,  Brynkynall,  Bangor,  North  Wales.— The 
■  book  -is  exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin 
growth  and  development  of  medical  science,  also  illustrates  some  ancient  social  customs 
of  India. 


CEO.  H.  CLARK,,  tf.  A.  M-  D.  Philadelphia  :-As 
I  go  over  each,  fasciculus  I  always  arrive  at  cue  com 
elusion  and  that  is  this if  the  physicians  of  the 
present  day  would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopia  all 
the  modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their 
patients  according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there 
would  he  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and  fewer 
chronic  invalids  in  the  world-  I  look  forward  with 
pleasure  to  the  completion  of  the  work,  for  I  am 
anxious  to  have  it  all- 

F.  H.  Skrine,  Esq.,  X.O.S.:— Xhave  read  Charaka- 
Samhita  with  interest.  It  is  marvellously  like 
Syppocrates®  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is 
wonderful  to  note  the  comparatively  advanced  views 
held  hy  the  sages  of  your  country  and  hew  complete¬ 
ly  they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we 
moderns  fatter  ourselves  are  due  t©  the  enlightenment 
of  this  age. 


PART  XX. 


47357 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 

TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH  . 


PUBLISHED 

BY 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAYIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita  (in  original)  with 
Commentaries  ;  Bengali  and  Hindi  Translator  of  Charaka- 
Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita  ;  Editor  of  Chikitsa- 
Sammilani  (Medical  Journal  in  Bengali)  ;  Prac¬ 
titioner  of  the  Hindu  System  of 
Medicine,  &c.,  &c.,  &c. 

CALCUTTA: 

Printed  at  the 

“Peacock  Press”,  17,  Canal  Street,  Entally. 

AND 

Published  at 

200,  Cornwallis  Street,  Calcutta. 


(  The  right  of  Translation  is  reserved.  ) 


OPINIONS  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 


Profsssor  Xv'Ea,2 s  A^Cullex  : — I  have  ho  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an 
English  translation  af  Cnaraka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  oe  very 
glad  to  help  you  in  any  way  you  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893.  he  says  — 

*  *  *  I  am  surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted 

more  attention  *  *  »  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edwatd,  was  much 

interested  in  it. 

Sir  3\Xon.ier  "^X7'illia,ra.s,  XC.C.I.E.  I  have  received  your  kind  gift 
of  the  successive  parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Snmhitas.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable 
addition  to  mv  library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

IDl.  Trots irt.Tn  Old.  -PoO-ii.  O.X-.3X.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office. —  »  *  * 

Your  excellent  translatioa  *  *  *  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will 
rot  fail  to  make  ancient  Hiadu  Medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the 
West  *  *  *  I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious 
work  *  *  *  Many  important  additions  to  our  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 
yonr  translation. 

-A-Xistln.  Elirvt,  Esq..,  New  York  U.  S.  A.  I  have  read  with  much 
pleasure  the  first  fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhiia  and  shall  be  very 
glad  to  receive  the  rest  of  the  work.  It  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical 
profession,  which  will  be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

XX.  Ecig-rerx,  Esq..,  Gothcnburgh  Sweden  : — I  am  deeply  interested 
in  anything  Indian,  and  1  need  not  say  tnat  1  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever 
insight  I  rrvfty  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professci  A.  V.  ~r:F7~  illiaraa.  Talcsom.,  Columbia  College,  New  York, 
V.  S.  A.  : — 1  must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should 
very  much  like  to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  werk  you 
are  doing.  Be  assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep 
interest  in  India  and  antique  lore. 

XvXons.  Eirtlh.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers 
of  ancient  literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  beth  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and 
;to  the  men  of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  1  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work 
to  the  notice  of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these 
researches. 

XvXoxxs.  33.  St.  3rXila,ire,  Paris  : — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and 
wish  you  all  suocess.  The  wotk  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men 
and  the  commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in 
the  Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Piofsssor  XX.  CTs/COToi,  Bonn  University,  Germany  : — The  work  you  have 
undertaken  will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  tile  History  of 
their  science.  I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom 
1  know  personally,  to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

XXerr  33,.  <3"a,r"tos,  Prinzenstram  Keningsburg,  Germany  ■. — The  English  trans¬ 
lation  of  Charaka  Samhita  is  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most 
important  work  of  the  medicinal  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Croft,  Zbvffi.  -A-.,  C.  X.  E.  Director  of  Public  Instruction. 

Bengal: — I  have  been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination  in  part 
IV  of  all  the  things  which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts 
and  such  a  guide  to  life  cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 

T a,mes  V7.  Eeese,  Esq..,  Westminister,  Maryland,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  have 
undertaken  a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  appro¬ 
bation  and  encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought 
and  taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  the  cure  of  disease. 

T7s7_illia,m.  Emette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California,— 

*  *  *  As  each  succssive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent. 

*  *  *  There  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  .mind,  occidental 
medical  science,  therapeutic  and  hygienic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has 

dxa.s.  X3.  Sajorrs,  Esq.,,  Philadelphia,  U,  S.  A.  * —  You  are  entitled  to  the: 
greatest  praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  jonrnal  under  my  editorial  manage¬ 
ment — will  begin  to  review  nooks,  etc  ,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Cixa,s  O.  Ccuitman  HXsq.,  St  Louis,  Ohio  U.  S\  A.  : — The  work  interest 
me  very^highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night,  tuken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our 
medical  societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expiessions 
of  interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 


ABSTRACT  OP  CONTENTS. 


The  measurements  of  the  different  limbs  of  the  body  are  com¬ 
pleted  in  this  part.  (Apporism  132). 

Longevity,  happiness,  power,  wealth,  &c.,  depend  on  the 
possession  of  a  body  of  proper  measurements. 

The  particulars  are  then  set  forth  of  the  examination  of  a 
patient  as  regards  his  powers  of  assimilation.  (Apporisms  134-35). 

The  next  topic  is  the  examination  of  a  patient  as  regards 
Sattwa  or  mind.  The  different  kinds  of  mind  and  there  charac? 
teristics.  (App.  136-38). 

Then  comes  examination  as  regards  capacity  for  food.  Stren¬ 
gth  and  period  of  life  depend  upon  capacity  for  food.  (App.  139.) 

Then  comes  examination  as  regards  capacity  for  exertion, 
und  r  this  are  set  forth  the  characteristics  of  the  different  periods 
of  life,  viz ,  boyhood,  manhood,  and  decrepitude.  (App.  140-42). 

Then  comes  an  explanation  of  the  Seasons  and  their  distinc¬ 
tive  features  as  also  their  effects  on  the  human  constitution. 
Ths  Tim-liness  and  Untimeliness  of  Medicines  are  al.-o  explained 
(App.  144-51). 

Explanation  of  the  terms  Pravritti,  up&ya,  and  Pratipatti. 

(App.  152-53)- 

The  drugs,  which  are  used  as  emeties,  &c.,  are  here  laid  down 
under  several  heads.  (App.  156). 

A  list  here  occurs  of  Purgatives.  (App.  157). 

Last  come  six  groups  of  Enemata  (App.  159-  to  end  of  the 
fasciculus). 


NOTICE. 


The  attention  of  subscribers  and  others  is 
earnestly  solicited  to  the  fact  that  if  they  have 
any  missing  parts,  they  should  lose  no  time 
ia  asking  for  them,  for  it  will  be  practically 
impossible  for  us  to  supply  them  hereafter. 

The  Sutrasthana  has  been  completed  in  part 
XIV.  The  Vimanasthaaa  will  soon  be  com' 
pleted.  Each  Sihana  (or  division)  may  be 
separately  bound  up. 

It  is  a  matter  of  singular  good  fortune  to  us 
that  almost  all  our  subscribers  are  persons  of 
learning  and  high  social  position.  All  that  is 
needed,  therefore,  is  to  only  remind  them  ef 
their  arrears  of  subscription  for  inducing  them 
to  remit  the  same  without  delay.  It  is  well 
known  to  them  that  our  ability  to  make  faster 
progress  entirely  depends  upon  their  kindness 
and  courtesy. 


A.  C.  K  AVI  BATH  A. 


CHARAKA-SAMJIITA.  605 

Tiie  head  is  six  fingers  in  height  and  two  and  thirty  fingers 
ir.  circumference.* 

Thus  has  been  explained  the  measurements  of  the  different  .<  ^ 
limbs  one  after  another.  /Jk  , 

The  entire  height  of  the  body  (from  the  soles  of  the  feet  to  tha 
top  of  the  head)  is  four  and  eighty  fingers  (that  is,  three  and  3 
half  cubits).  Its  breadth,  and  circumference  also,  are  each  of  thev 
same  measurement. +m 

In  this  connection,  (it  should  be  said)  longevity  of  life,  strength, 
the  element  called  of  as,  happiness,  power,  and  wealth  and  many 
other  agreeable  incidents,  are  in  the  command  of  one  possessing  a 
body  endued  with  limbs  of  the  aforesaid  proportions. 

The  reverse  (of  these)  is  seen  in  one  whose  body  falls  short  of, 
or  exceeds,  the  standard  measurements. ISS 

Next,  as  to  examination  (of  the  patient)  as  regards  power  of 
assimilation.  That  is  called  assimilable  (*.  e.,  suitable  to  the  con¬ 
stitution)  which,  indulged  habitually,  agrees  with  the  constitution. 

In  this  connection,  (it  should  be  said  that)  those  persons  with 
whom  ghee,  milk,  oil,  juice  of  flesh,  and  all  the  five  tastes,  agree  in 
consequence  of  habitual  use,  are  endued  with  strength,  capable  of 
bearing  hardship,  and  long-lived. 

Those  persons  (on  the  other  hand)  who  habitually  live  on  dry 
articles  of  food  and  with  whom  only  one  taste  agrees,  are  generally 
seen  to  be  endued  with  little  strength,  incapable  of  bearing  hard- 


*  The  height  of  the  head,  as  explained  by  Chakrapani,  is  measured  from  the 
top  of  the  neck  upwards. — T. 

f  The  height  of  the  foot  is  4  fingers  ;  that  of  the  leg,  18  ;  that  of  the  knee,  4  ; 
that  of  the  thigh,  18  ;  that  of  the  lower  part  of  the  spinal  column,  12  ;  that  of  the 
back,  18  ;  that  of  the  neck,  4 ;  and  that  of  the  head,  6.  Thus,  in  all,  the  total 
height  is  84  fingers,  or  3  cubits  and  a  half,  a  cubit  being  of  the  breadth  of  24 
fingers.  The  total  of  the  several  breadths  given,  as  also  that  of  the  several 
circumferences,  would  similarly  come  up  to  34  fingers. 

77 


jiijy 


6o6 


CHA  RAKA -SA  MHITA. 


ship,  not  blessed  with  length  of  days,  and  not  capable  of  accom¬ 
plishing  much.*134 

Those  persons  with  whom  some  of  the  tastes  (but  not  all) 
agree,  are  seen,  in  consequence  of  such  a  characteristic,  to  be  of 
middling  strength.135 

Next,  as  to  examination  (of  the  patient)  in  respect  of  sattwa  or 
mind  (or  mental  energy) :  the  mind  is  known  by  the  name  of 
sattwa. 

It  is  the  ruler  of  the  body,  owing  to  its  connection  with  the 
soul  (or  self). 

It  is  of  three  kinds,  according  to  difference  of  strength,  viz., 
superior,  middling,  and  inferior.  Hence,  persons  may  be  classed 
under  three  heads,  viz.,  as  possessed  of  superior  mind,  of  middling 
mind,  and  of  inferior  mind. 

Amongst  these,  they  that  are  possessed  of  superior  minds,  are 
spoken  of  as  having  the  mind  for  their  essence  (or  predomina¬ 
ting  element).  They  have  been  treated  of  (by  us)  while  (we  were) 
speaking  of  the  essences  (or  predominating  elements)  of  men. 

Even  if  they  happen  to  have  small-sized  bodies,  they  may  be 
seen  to  be  unmoved,  in  consequence  of  the  superiority  of  their 
minds,  under  serious  ailments  either  constitutional  or  acci¬ 
dental.136 


*  'Satmya,’ as  rendered  on  previous  occasions,  is  assimilability  or  suitabi¬ 
lity.  A  certain  article  is  said  to  be  ‘  satmya  ’  with  regard  to  one,  and  ‘  asatmya  ’ 
with  regard  to  another.  Continued  or  habitual  use  without  injury  is  the  basis  of 
‘satmyata.’  Thus,  from  habitual  use,  ghee,  milk,  flesh,  &c.,  become  ‘satmya’  to 
one,  while  from  absence  of  use,  these  may  be  '  asatmya ’  to  another.  Habitual 
use  may  make  even  a  virulent  poison  ‘  satmya  ’  or  agreeable  to  a  person. 

The  last  word. of  the  aphorism  is  1  alpasadhanah.’  Gangadhara  explains  it  as 
‘  incapable  of  accomplishing  much.’  Chakrapani  explains  it  as  equivalent  to 
not  ‘  requiring  medicines  of  diverse  kinds.’  It  is  difficult  to  settle  what  the 
precise  sense  of  the  term  is.  I  incline  to  accept  the  first  explanation. — T. 


C  HABAKA-SA  MHITA 


607 

They  that  are  ot  middling  minds,  thinking  of  others  discovering 
fortitude  under  pain,  succeed  in  quieting  their  own  selves  with  the 
help  of  their  own  minds,  or,  with  that  of  the  minds  of  others.*187 

They  that  are  of  inferior  minds  do  not  succeed  in  quieting 
(themselves),  by  mustering  mental  energy  through  their  own 
exertions  or  through  (encouragement  offered  by)  others.  It  is 
seen  that  even  if  they  happen  to  be  of  gigantic  proportions  (of 
body)  they  do  not  succeed  in  bearing  pain  that  is  even  very  slight. t 

They  are  always  accessible  to  fear,  grief,  cupidity,  heedlessness, 
and  vanity. 

Hearing  a  discourse  on  anything  that  is  awful,  or  terrible,  or 
disagreeable,  or  abominable,  or  repulsive,  or  beholding  any  (wild 
or  fierce)  animal,  or  a  person  (in  authority,  such  as  a  constable  or 
other  police  officer),  or  flesh  (in  the  form  of  limbs  cut  into  pieces 
and  strewn  around),  or  blood,  they  become  subject  to  melancholy, 
or  paleness  of  complexion,  or  swoons,  or  extraordinary  excite¬ 
ment  (reaching  to  the  point  of  madness),  or  delusions,  or  falls, 
or  even  death  itself.138 

Next,  as  to  examination  (of  the  patient)  in  respect  of  capacity 
for  food.  One’s  capacity  for  food  is  to  be  ascertained  from  one’s 
capacity  for  eating  as  also  capacity  for  digesting;  since  strength 
and  period  of  life  are  both  dependent  upon  food.lssJ 

*  The  original  is  very  terse.  I  have  slightly  expanded  it,  following  the 
commentators.  The  sense  is  simple.  What  is  said  here  is  that  they  that  are  of 
middling  minds  succeed  in  quieting  themselves  under  pain,  |not  in  consequence 
of  the  innate  strength  of  their  own  minds  but  at  the  sight  of  other  people  keep¬ 
ing  themselves  quiet  under  pain.  It  is  the  example  of  men  of  superior  minds 
that  acts  on  them.  Then,  again,  when  others  encourage  and  assure  them,  such 
encouragement  and  assurance,  succeed  in  quieting  them. — T" 

t  In  the  original  there  are  two  ‘api’s  ’  or  even’s.  I  reproduce  them  in  the 
English  version. — T. 

t  ‘  Ahara-fakti  ’  is  capacity  for  food.  It  includes  not  simply  capacity  for 
eating,  but  also  capacity  for  digesting.  This  capacity  should  be  ascertained 
(in  examining  a  patient)  because  the  measure  of  the  patient’s  strength  and  the 
measure  of  his  period  of  life,  both  depend  upon  his  capacity  for  food.  The 
particle  ‘  hi  ’  in  the  last  part  of  the  aphorism,  is  equivalent  to  ‘  yasmat  ’  or 
‘  since.’  It  indicates  the  reason  the  Rishi  assigns  for  such  examination. — T. 


6o8 


CHA  RA  KA -SAM  HI  TA 


Next,  as  to  examination  (of  the  patient)  in  respect  of  capacity 
for  exertion :  capacity  for  exertion  should  be  ascertained  from 
capacity  for  action  (such  as  capacity  for  bearing  weights,  the 
length  of  time  for  which  one  can  undergo  physical  labour,  &c.,)  ; 
since  by  capacity  for  action  the  strength,  which  is  of  three  kinds, 
of  a  person  is  capable  of  being  judged.*140 

That  condition  of  the  body  which  is  dependent  on  the  measure 
of  Time  (for  which  the  body  has  existed)  is  called  Age. 

This  Age,  according  to  difference  of  duration,  is  of  three  kinds, 
viz.,  Boyhood,  Manhood,  and  Decrepitude. 

Amongst  these,  Boyhood  is  (the  period  characterised  by)  imma¬ 
turity  of  the  constituent  elements  (of  the  body),  non-appearance 
of  hirsute  appendage,  delicacy  (of  constitution  both  physical 
and  mental),  incapacity  to  bear  fatigue  (and  the  pain  it  brings 
about),  non-development  of  strength,  and  predominance  of  phlegm. 

This  continues  till  the  sixteenth  year.  The  constituent  ele¬ 
ments  then  begin  to  grow  and,  further,  the  mind  remains  restless, 
till  the  thirtieth  year,  as  has  been  laid  down. 

Manhood  (or  the  middle  age)  is  characterised  by  strength, 
vital  seed,  manliness,  prowess,  apprehension,  retention,  recollec¬ 
tion,  speech,  wisdom,  and  the  attributes  of  all  the  constituent 
elements  attaining  to  evenness. 

It  is  also  the  period  of  vigour,  and  of  the  mind  being  no  longer 
restless.  The  attributes  of  all  the  constituent  elements  are  in  a 
state  of  unbrokenness. 

It  is  the  period  when  the  bile  is  in  a  state  of  predominance. 

This  continues  till  the  sixtieth  year,  as  has  been  laid  down. 

After  this,  the  period  that  comes,  is  characterised  by  the 
constituent  elements  of  the  body,  the  senses,  strength,  manliness, 
prowess,  apprehension,  retention,  recollection,  speech,  and  wisdom, 
all  beginning  to  decay. 

*  The  three  kinds  of  strength  here  refered  to  are  I.  Superior,  2.  Middling, 
and  3.  Inferior,  as  observed  by  Gangadhara. — T. 


CHAR.4KA-SAMHITA.  609 

The  attributes  of  the  constituent  elements  begin  to  fall  away 
(or  degenerate). 

It  is  the  period  when  the  mind  is  in  a  state  of  predominance. 

Everything  else  begins  to  gradually  decay. 

This  continues  till  the  hundredth  year.141 

In  this  epoch  {kali),  the  measure  of  (human)  life,  is  a  century. 

There  are  men  who  live  more  than  a  hundred  years  or 
less  than  that  period. 

As  regards  this  last  class  of  persons,  disregarding  all  incidents 
that  are  abnormal,  noting  only  the  diversities  of  the  strength  of 
Nature  and  the  rest,  the  physician  should  ascertain  the  measure  of 
life  from  the  (usual)  indications,  and  divide  it  into  the  three 
periods  (named).* 

Then,  again,  according  to  the  strength,  that  is  of  three  hinds, 
{viz.,  superior,  middling,  and  inferior),  of  abnormal  conditions, 
the  strength,  of  three  kinds,  is  ascertained,  of  the  faults  {viz.,  wind, 
bile,  and  phlegm). 

After  this,  the  physician,  distributing  medicines  into  three 
kinds  (according  to  their  strength),  viz.,  keen,  mild,  and  middling, 
should  administer  them  agreeably  to  the  strength  (ascertained  as 
above  of  the  faults  (excited).142 


*  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  the  normal  period  oflife  is  a  hundred  years. 
Sometimes  men  live  beyond  that  period,  or  less  than  that  period.  In  either  of 
the  two  last  cases,  the  limits  of  boyhood,  manhood,  and  decay  will  not  correspond 
with  30  years  and  60  years,  as  stated  in  the  previous  aphorism.  The  physician, 
while  examining  a  patient,  is  directed  to  ascertain,  by  disregarding  all  abnormal 
incidents  and  regarding  only  the  normal  ones,  the  period  of  his  life.  Suppose, 
according  to  his  computation,  the  patient’s  period  of.  life  comes  up  to  120  years, 
such  a  person’s  boyhood,  instead  of  terminating  at  30,  would  terminate  at 
36  ;  so  also  his  manhood  would  terminate  at  72.  Similarly,  in  the  case  of  one 
whose  period  of  life  is  computed  as  extending  to  80  years,  his  boyhood  would 
terminate  at  24,  and  manhood  at  48.  Instructions  have  been  laid  down,  in 
"Indriya-sthana,”  and  also  in  the  “Jati-Sutriya”  section  of  “  Qarira-sthana,’’ 
for  ascertaining  the  period  of  life, — T, 


charakasamhitA. 


For  ascertaining  the  measure  of  the  period  of  life,  instructions 
will  be  laid  down,  in  “  Iudriya  sthana”  and  also  in  “  Jati-sutriya” 
about  the  indications  (tliat  manifest  themselves).*  148 

Time  is  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  the  year  and  the  age  of  the  patient. 
Among>t  these,  the  year  is  divided  into  two,  or  three,  or  six,  or 
twelve  parts. 

These  are,  again,  subdivided  (into  smaller  portions),  with  a 
view  to  help  the  cau-e  of  treatment. t144 

Amongst  these,  having  dividrd  the  year  into  six  portions, 
instructions  shall  be  laid  down  in  respect  of  what  acts  of  treat¬ 
ment  should  be  when  adopted. 

Winter,  summer,  and  the  rainy  season,  characterised  respect¬ 
ively  by  cold,  heat,  and  rains3  are  the  three  divisions  of  the  year. 
Within  these  (or  between  each  two)  are  three  others,  each 
characterised  by  common  attributes  (of  all  the  three  principal 
seasons). 

They  are  the  ante-rainy  (between  summer  and  the  rainy'; 
autumn  (between  the  rainy  and  winter);  and  spring  (between 
winter  and  summer). 


*  “  Indriya-sthana”  follows  “  Qarira-sthana”  which  (comes  immediately 
after  the  present  division  called  “  Vimanasthana.”  In  the  section  called 
“Arishta-lakshmanani”  occur  observations  on  various  symptoms  that  prognosti¬ 
cate  death  even  at  the  distance  of  a  year  or  more.  The  “  Jati-sutriya”  section 
occurs  in  “  Qarirdsthana.”  In  that  section,  instructions  have  been  laid 
down  regarding  the  measure  of  the  period  of  life  as  ascertainable  from  an  obser¬ 
vation  of  the  general  conditions  of  lineage,  birth,  health,  food,  &rc., — T. 

f  The  year,  when  divided  into  two  portions,  would  consist  of  two  periods, 
each  of  which  is  measured  by  six  months.  The  time  taken  by  the  sun  in 
travelling  from  the  vernal ,  to  the  autumnal  equinox,  and  that  taken  by  him  in 
travelling  from  the  autumnal  back  to  the  vernal  equinox,  are  the  two  periods 
referred  to.  They  are  known  among  Hindus  by  the  name  of  Ayanas, — the 
Uttara  or  northern  Ayana  and  the  Dakshina  or  southern  Ayana.  The  former 
is  regarded  as  a  sacred  period. 

When  divided  into  three  portions,  each  would  consist  of  4  months,  res¬ 
pectively  called  winter,  summer  and  the  rainy  season. — T. 


charaka-samhita. 


6 


That  which  is  called  the  ante-rainy  (Prabrish)  is  the  precur¬ 
sor  of  the  rainy  season.  It  has  the  rainy  season  for  its  sequel. 

Even  thus  is  the  year  distributed  into  six  seasons,  with  special 
reference  to  the  administration  of  correctives.  *  145 

Amongst  these,  the  administration  of  emetics  and  the  rest,  is 
ordained  for  those  seasons  that  have  the  common  attribute  of  all 
the  seasons.  These  medicines  should  not  be  administered  in  the 
other  seasons. 

The  reason  for  this  is,  that  those  seasons  which  bear  common 
attributes  are,  in  consequence  of  the  odd,  heat,  and  the  rains  being 
mild,  exceedingly  pleasant;  and  in  them  both  the  human  frame  and 
thfe  medicines  (intended  for  it)  remain  in  their  normal  state  (z.  e., 
are  not  affected  for  the  worse,  or  have  not  their  nature  altered). 

The  other  seasons,  on  the  other  hand,  in  consequence  of 
their  excessive  cold  or  heat  or  rains,  are  exceedingly  unpleasant. 
They  are  also  such  that  during  their  continuance,  both  the  human 
frame  and  the  medicines  (intended  for  it)  do  not  remain  in  their 
normal  state.  f14S 

*  In  Lesson  VI.,  called  “  Tasya  fitiya,”  of  "Sutra-sthilna,”  the  practices 
(with  regard  to  food,  drink,  dress,  sleep,  exercise,  &c.),  that  are  suitable  to  each 
season,  have  been  laid  down.  The  seasons,  in  that  Lesson,  have  been  treated 
of,  with  special  reference  to  “  charyya”  or  practices.  Here,  however,  the  seasons 
will  be  spoken  of  with  special  reference  to  the  administration  of  the  medicines 
called  correctives.— T. 

t  What  is  stated  in  this  aphorism  is  this  :  there  are  six  seasons  j  in  three 
of  them,  which  are,  of  course,  the  principal,  the  characteristics  of  cold,  or  heat, 
or  rains,  are  very  marked.  These  are  winter,  summer,  and  the  rainy  season. 
Intermediate  between  each  two  are  three  other  seasons  j  these,  called  ante- 
rainy,  autumn,  and  spring,  are  characterised  by  the  common  attributes  of 
the  principal  seasons  ;  that  is,  in  each  of  them,  cold,  heat,  and  rains  appear 
in  a  mild  form  or  state.  It  is  during  the  latter  three  seasons  that  the  medi¬ 
cines  called  correctives,  should  be  administered.  The  human  body  and  the 
medicines  also,  during  these  seasons,  remain  in  their  normal  condition.  In 
the  three  principal  seasons,  however,  in  consequence  of  the  cold,  or  the  heat, 
or  the  rains  being  very  marked,  neither  the  human  body  nor  the  medicines 
intended  for  it,  remains  or  remain  in  that  condition  which  may  be  regarded 
as  normal.  The  subsequent  aphorisms  establish  this  point  more  clearly. — T 


6l2 


charaKa-samhitA. 


In  this  connection  it  should  be  said  that  in  winter,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  its  being  afflicted  by  excessive  cold,  the  body  becomes 
indisposed.  It  becomes  filled  with  air  that  is  excessively  cold  ; 
it  becomes  exceedingly  stiff  (in  consequence  of  excessive  dryness 
and  harshness)  ;  and,  lastly,  the  (three)  faults  (viz.,  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm)  become  obstructed  (as  regards  their  free  movements). 
The  medicines,  again,  intended  as  correctives,  endued  as  they  are 
with  heating  attributes,  undergo,  in  consequence  of  their  being 
afflicted  by  excessive  cold,  a  degeneration  of  energy. 

Hence,  in  consequence  of  both  the  body  and  the  medicine, 
thus  agreeing  (in  swerving  from  their  normal  condition),  the  coirect- 
ive  medicines,  if  administered  (in  winter),  produce  the  result 
called  Ayoga.  The  body  also  becomes  subject  to  the  distempered 
play  of  the  wind.  *147 

Then,  again,  in  summer,  in  consequece  of  its  being  afflicted 
by  excessive  heat,  the  body  becomes  indisposed. 

It  also  becomes  filled  with  hot  wind  and  heat.  It  becomes 
exceedingly  relaxed.  The  faults,  too,  shrink  into  a  rarified  state. 

The  medicines  also,  intended  as  correctives,  endued  as  they 
are  with  heating  attributes,  catch,  in  consequence  of  their  concur¬ 
rence  with  heat,  keener  virtues. 

Hence,  in  consequence  of  both  body  and  the  medicines  thus 
agreeing  dn  swerving  from  their  normal  condition),  the  corrective 
medicines,  if  administered,  produce  the  result  called  Atiyoga. 

The  body  also  becomes  subject'  to  the  distempered  play  of 
thirst,  f143 

*  "  Tayoh  samyoge”  implies  “  in  their  agreement,”  “  their”  having  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  body  and  the  medicines.  The  agreement  consists  in  both  swer¬ 
ving  from  their  normal  condition.  The  body,  as  stated  in  the  first  part  of  the 
aphorism,  becomes  indisposed  ;  in  the  second  part  it  is  said  that  the  medicines 
themselves  degenerate  in  point  of  energy.  Hence,  because  both  agree  in  falling 
away  from  their  normal  condition,  such  medicines  should  not  be  adminis¬ 
tered  in  such  a  season.  'Ayoga’  is  absence  of  (judicious)  correlation.  Vide 
p.  88  of  SutrSsthana,  ante., — T. 

f  ‘  Atiyoga’  is  excess  of  correlation.  Vide  p.  88  of  Sutra-sthana,  ante. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  613 

During  the  rainy  season,  the  firmament  being  covered  by  masses 
of  clouds,  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  stars  remaining  hidden, 
torrents  of  rain  continually  falling,  and  the  earth  being  inundated 
with  muddy  waters,  the  bodies  of  living  creatures  swerve 
from  their  normal  condition,  and  all  medicinal  plants  become 
affected  by  contact  witli  an  atmosphere  surcharged  with  water. 
At  such  a  time,  emetics  and  the  rest  become  incapable  of  producing 
their  effects  easily,  and  the  bodies  (of  living  creatures)  exhibit 
the  attribute  of  heaviness  in  a  marked  degree. 

Hence,  emetics  and  the  rest  should  not  be  administered  (during 
the  season  of  rains).148 

In  the  seasons  ending  with  the  rains,  correctives  should  not 
be  administered,  unless  the  disease  happens  to  be  such  as  threat¬ 
ens  to  bring  about  death.  * 

In  diseases  threatening  death,  when  the’  administration  of 
correctives  becomes  necessary,  the  physician,  bringing  about  the 
desirable  season  by  combination  of  artificial  means,  should,  with 
great  care  and  attention,  administer  medicines  (correctives) 
possessed  of  virtues  contrary  to  those  of  the  true  season,  after 
having  determined  their  combination,  the  methods  of  correction, 
and  quantity,  and  after  having  adjusted  quantity  with  potency.!160 

*  ‘  VarshUnteshu  ritushu’,  ‘Varsh&bhaganteshu  ritushu’  are  the  alterna¬ 
tive  readings.  The  meaning  is  the  same,  viz.,  Winter,  Summer,  and  Rains. — T. 

‘Atyayika’  disease  is  one  that  is  critical,  or,  in  which  death  is  expected 
if  it  is  not  properly  and  efficiently  treated. — T. 

f  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  correctives  are  not  to  be  administered  in  win¬ 
ter  (meaning,  when  the  cold  is  severe).  A  serious  disease  confronts  the 
physician,  which,  if  not  properly  treated,  is  sure  to  bring  about  death.  The 
administration  of  correctives  seems  to  him  to  be  the  proper  remedy.  He 
must  place  the  patient  within  a  properly  closed  building,  heating  its  atmosphere 
by  means  of  more  than  one  blazing  fire,  so  that  the  cold  may  disappear  and  a 
mild  summer  or  spring  may  result  within  the  building.  He  should  then 
administer  correctives,  having  first  determined  their  ‘Samyoga,’  ‘  Samskara,  ’ 
and  their ‘Pramana’.  By  the  first  is  meant  Ithe  articles  that  should  compose 
them  ;  by  the  second,  the  manner  in  which  those  articles  are  to  be  prepared, 
that  is,  when  they  are  to  be  culled,  Jat  whatlstage,  and  how  dried,  or  heated,  or 
boiled,  &c.;  and  by  the  third  is  meant  quantity.  The  next  consideration  of  the 
physician  should  be  the  adjustment  of  quantity  with  the  potency  of  the 
drugs. — T. 


78 


6 14  CHARAKA.SAMHITA. 

As  regards  the  condition  of  the  patient  also,  there  are  these 
two  terms,  viz.,  timeliness  and  untimeliness  of  what  should  be 
done  and  what  should  not  be  done.* 

For  example:  in  this  condition  (of  the  patient  or  disease),  the 
time  has  come  for  the  administration  of  this  medicine,  or  the 
time  has  not  come  for,  on  the  other  hand,  the  administration  of 
this  (other)  medicine. 

In  consequence  of  particular  conditions  (of  the  patient  or  of 
the  disease)  even  this  {viz,,  the  timeliness  or  untimeliness  of 
particular  medicines  or  courses  of  treatment)  is  what  happens. 

Hence,  such  terms  as  timeliness  and  untimeliness,  with  respect 
to  the  condition  of  the  patient. 

The  ascertainment  of  the  timeliness  or  untimeliness  (of  parti¬ 
cular  medicines  or  courses  of  treatment)  consists  in  the  frequent 
observation  of  the  particular  symptoms  exhibited  by  the  patient. 
Such  observation  is  needed  for  the  correct  administration  of 
medicines. 

Medicines  adminstered  when  their  time  has  passed  away,  or 
when  their  time  has  not  come,  never  become  suitable. 

It  is  time  that  brings  about  the  exact  suitability  of  medi- 
cines.f151. 

The  commencement  of  treatment  (or  remedy)  is  called 
Pravntti. 


*  In  the  foregoing  aphorisms  the  Rishi  explained  the  suitability  of  the 
several  seasons  to  particular  courses  of  treatment.  In  this,  he  refers  to  the 
question  of  suitability  or  timeliness  of  what  should  be  done  or  what  not  done 
in  view  of  the  condition  of  the  patient  as  dependent  on  the  disease  or  its 
progress  and  not  on  the  season, — T.  , 

t  There  is  an  absence  of  terseness  in  this  aphorism  which  raises  the 
suspicion  of  its  having  been  tampered  with  by  later  writers  or  comment¬ 
ators.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA  615 

Its  characteristic  is  a  union  of  the  action  of  physician,  of  the 
patient,  of  medicine,  and  of  the  attendant  or  nurse.*  1W 

The  well-fittedness  and  adaptation  of  physician  and  the  rest,  is 
called  updya  (means). 

Its  characteristic  consists  in  the  administration  of  medicine 
duly  furnished  with  such  causes  of  success  as  (propriety  of) 
place,  time,  measure,  assimilability,  and  operation  or  virtue,  as 
also  the  wealth  of  those  attributes,  which  have  been  already 
indicated,  of  physician  and  the  rest.f 

In  this  way,  the  ten  distinct  particulars  that  require  examina¬ 
tion,  should  be  examined  one  after  another. 

The  need  for  examination  is  a  knowledge  of  the  means  of 
cure.188. 

That  is  called  Pratipatti  (means  of  cure)  which  consists  in  the 
adoption  of  such  expedients  as  alleviate  disease,  in  the  manner 
in  which  they  are  best  calculated  to  bring  about  alleviation. 154 

The  cases  where  emetics  and  the  rest  should  be  administered, 
and  those  where  they  should  not  be  administered,  will  be  laid 
down  in  detail  in  that  division  of  the  work  which  is  called 
Siddhi-sthana.J 


*  The  ‘‘Kriya’’  or  action  of  the  patient  is  not  a  happy  expression;  what 
is  meant  is  that  treatment  is  said  to  commence  when  the  physician,  the  patient, 
medicines,  and  attendants  or  nurses,  are  all  brought  together.  The  word 
'  pravitti  ’,  implying  the  commencement  of  treatment,  is  a  technical  term. — T. 

f  This  is  as  literal  a  version  as  possible  of  the  original.  What  is  stated 
here  is  this  :  the  chief  characteristic  of  that  which  is  called  '  upaya’  or  means, 
as  regards  treatment,  consists  in  the  administration  of  such  medicine  as  is 
possessed  of  the  capacity  for  achieving  success.  That  capacity  is  dependant 
on  place,  time,  measure,  assimilability,  and  the  natural  virtues  of  the  drug, 
as  also  upon  the  physician  and  the  rest,  viz.,  physician,  patient,  and  attend¬ 
ants,  possessing  all  those  attributes  which  have  been  spoken  of  in  the  Lesson 
called  “  KhuddUka-chatuspada."  (Lesson  IX,  Sutra-sthana,  ante). — T. 

J  The  last  division  of  the  work  is  called  Siddhi-sth&na  (Practice  of 
Medicine). — T. 


6 1 6 


charaka-samhitA. 


When  cases  happen  in  which  the  symptoms  exist  in  such  a 
state  of  union  that  while  some  point  to  the  propriety  of  adminis¬ 
tering  purgatives  and  the  rest,  and  others  point  to  the  propriety  of 
abstaining  from  them,  the  physician  should  judge  of  the  gravity 
or  lightness  of  both  classes  of  symptoms,  and  then  regulate  his 
treatment  for  allaying  those  that  are  grave.* 

Diseases  are  manifold.  In  medical  treatises,  courses  of  treat¬ 
ment  are  laid  down  for  their  alleviation,  by  rejection  and  pre¬ 
ference^ 

Hence,  ascertaining  the  gravity  or  lightness  (of  symptoms  of 
opposite  characters),  the  physician,  it  is  said,  should  exert 
himself. 

Those  articles  that  are  fit  to  be  used  as  drugs  for  bringing 
about  vomiting  and  the  rest,  shall  now  be  laid  down. 

They  are  Phala  (a),  Jimuta  (£),  Ikshaku  ( c ),  DhamSrgava 
(d),  Kutaja  ( e ),  Kandikari  (f),  and  Kritabedliana  (g).  The  fruits 
of  these  should  be  taken. 

*  The  original  being  exceedingly  terse,  I  am  constrained  to  give  a  some¬ 
what  free  rendering. — T. 

t  The  methods  of  rejection  and  preference  are  thus  explained.  The 
patient  is  suffering  under  a  disease  that  presents  symptoms  opposed  in  cha¬ 
racter  ;  some  of  these  may  indicate  purgatives  as  the  best  remedy,  while  others 
indicate  that  purgatives  should  be  abstained  from.  What  should  the  physician 
do  ?  The  gravity  or  lightness  of  the  symptoms  shouldbe  first  carefullyascertained. 
Those  that  are  grave  should  then  be  attended  to,  to  the  exclusion  of  those  that 
are  light.  Here,  the  principle  of  selection  and  rejection  has  its  play,  for  some 
symptoms  are  selected  for  alleviation  while  others  are  rejected,  or  dismissed 
from  attention  for  the  time  being.  Then,  again,  several  diseases  may  co-exist. 
Some  one  among  them  may  be  most  serious,  the  others  not  so.  The  physician, 
in  such  cases,  should  proceed  by  the  principle  of  selection  and  rejection.  He 
should  select  the  graver  complaint  for  alleviation  first  and  then  proceed  in  due 
order.  In  the  text,  the  word  ‘Utsarga’  implies  rejection,  while  ‘  ApavidS  ’ 
implies  selection. — T. 

a.  Otherwise  called  Madanaphala.  Randia  dumetorum. 

b.  It  is  a  variety  of  Ghosakalta,  as  explained  by  Gangadhara. 

c.  A  variety  of  bitter  gourd. 

d.  A  variety  of  Ghasa-kalta.  It  is  otherwise  called  Pita-ghosaka. 

e.  Holarrhena  antidysenterica,  syn.  Echites  antiysenterica. 

f.  The  betel-nut. 

g.  Luffa  amara,  Roxb. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  617 

The  leaves  and  flowers  of  the  following  are  used,  viz.,  Jimutaka 
( h )  Ikshaku  it),  Kutaja  (/),  and  Kirtabedhana  ( k ). 

Infusions  (or  decoctions)  are  used  of  the  following  : — 

Aragbadha  (/),  Vrikshaka  ( m ),  Madana  («),  Swadukantaka  (0), 
Patha  (/>),  Patali  (7,)  £arngashtha  ( r ),  Murva  Saptaparna  ( t ), 
Naktam&la  («),  Pichumarda  (v),  Patola  (w),  Sushuvi  (x),  Guduchi 
(y),  Somavalka  ( z ),  Chitraka  {a),  £atavari  (3),  Dwipi  (<r),  and  the 
roots  of  Sigru  ( d ). 


h.  Vide  b  in  page  616. 

i.  Ditto  c  in  page  ditto. 

Ditto  e  in  page  ditto. 

k.  Ditto  g  in  page  ditto. 

l.  Called  (in  Bengali)  Sondalu.  Cassia  fistula,  Linn  ;  syn.  Cathartocarpus 
fistula,  Pers. 

m.  This  word  is  used  to  express  the  bark  of  Kutaja,  or  Holarrhena  anti- 
dysenterica,  Wall ;  syn.  Echites  antidysenterica,  Roxb. 

n.  Randia  dumetorum,  Lamk ;  syn.  Prosequeria  dumetorum,  Roxb. 

o.  Gangadhara  takes  it  to  mean  the  Flacourtia  sapida,  Roxb.  Called  in 
Bengali,  Bainch. 

p.  Stephania  hernandifolia,  Walp ;  syn.  Cissampelos  her nandi folia,  Linn. 

q.  Stereospermum  suave-olens,  D.  C. ;  syn.  Bignonia  Suave-olens,  Roxb. 

r.  The  red  variety  of  Gunja  is  implied,  that  is,  Abrus  precatorius,  Linn. 

s.  Sanseviera  zeylanica,  Willd  ;  syn.  Sanseviera  Roxburghiana,  Schult. 

t.  Alstaria  scholaris,  R.  Br. ;  syn.  Echites  scholaris,  Roxb. 

u.  Pongamia  glabra,  Vent ;  syn.  Galedupa  Indica,  Lamk. 

v.  Gangadhara  takes  it  to  mean  Nimba  or  Melia  Azadirachta,  syn. 
Aeadirachta  Indica,  fuss. 

■w,  Trichosanthes  dioica,  Roxb. 

x.  Gangadhara  takes  it  to  mean  a  variety  of  1  Parnasa  ’  or  Tulasi,  that  is, 
Ocimum  sanctum,  Linn.  Others  take  it  as  implying  the  well-known  market 
vegetable  called  ‘  Karala  ’  or  ‘  Uchche',  both  being  of  the  same  genus  and 
species.  It  is  the  Momordica  charantia,  Linn.  By  Sushuvi  is  sometimes 
meant  1  Sha-jira  ’  or  Carum  carni,  Linn, 

y.  Tinospora  cordifolia,  Miers  ;  syn.  Menispermum  cordifolium,  Willd. 

5.  Gangadhara  takes  it  to  mean  a  white  variety  of  Khadira  or  Accacia 
Catechu,  Linn  ;  syn.  Mimosa  Catechu,  Linn. 

a.  Plumbago  zeylanica,  Linn, 

b.  Otherwise  called  Qatamuli,  Asparagus  racemosus,  Willd. 

c.  Otherwise  called  Vyaghri.  A  variety  of  Plumbago  zeylanica. 

d.  Moringa  pterygosperma,  Gaertn  ;  syn.  Hyperanthera  moringa,  Willd. 


CHA  R  A  RA-SA  M  HI  TA . 


As  also  of  the  following : — 

Madhu  ( e ),  Madhuka  (/),  Kovidiira  (g)  KarvudSra  (A\  Nipa  ( t ), 
Nichula  (/),  Vimbi  ( k ),  £anapushpi  (/),  SadSpushpi  ( m ),  and 
Pratyakpushpi  ( n ). 

As  also  of  the  following  : — 

El5  (o),  Harenu  (/>),  Priyangu  ( q ),  Prithwika  (r\  Kustumvuru 
(s),  Tagara  (t),  Nalada  ( u ),  Hrivera  ( v ),  Tali9a  (w),  and  Ufira  ( x). 


f.  Liquorice. 

g.  Otherwise  called  KSnchana.  The  white  variety  is  used.  Bauhinia 
acuminata,  Linn. 

h.  Otherwise  called  Raktakanchana.  The  red  variety  of  the  above. 

*.  Otherwise  called  Kadamva.  Nauclea  cadamha,  Roxb. 

j.  Otherwise  called  Hijjala.  Barriningtonia  acutangula,  Gaertn ;  syn. 
Eugenia  acutangula,  Linn. 

k.  Coccinea  Indica,  W.  A. ;  syn.  Momordica  monodelpha,  Roxb, 

l.  Crotalaria  Verrucosa,  Linn. 

m.  GangSdhara  takes  it  to  mean  the  Raktarka,  or  the  red  variety  of  Arka. 
Calatropis  gigantea  or  procera,  R.  Br. ;  syn.  Asclepias  gigantea,  Willd. 

n.  Gangadhara  takes  it  to  mean  Apamarga.  Achyranthes  aspera,  Linn. 

o.  Ellettaria  cardamomum,  of  the  larger  variety. 

p.  Otherwise  called  Renuka ;  probably,  Piper  aurantiacum,  Wall. 

q.  Aglaia  Roxburghiana,  W.  A. 

r.  Elettaria  cardamomum  of  the  smaller  variety, 
j.  Coriandrum  sativum,  Linn. 

t.  Tabernamontana  Coronaria,  Linn. 

u.  Otherwise  called  Jatamansi;  Nardostachys  Jatamansi,  D.  C. 

v.  Pavonia  odorata,  Willd. 
tv.  Pinus  Webbiana,  Lindl. 

x.  Andropogon  muricatum,  Retz.  The  root  only  is  called  U?ira. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


619 


As  also  of  the  following: — 

Iksbu  (a),  Kandekshu  (6),  Ikshuvalika  (c),  Darbha(d(),  Potagala 
( e ),  and  Kalankata  (/). 

As  also  of  the  following: — 

Sumanas  ( g ),  Saumanasayini  (h),  HaridrS  (z),  Daruharidrii  (/), 
Vrischira  (k),  Punarnava  (/),  Mahasaha  ( m ),  and  Kshudrasaha  ( n ). 


a.  Saccharum  officinarum,  Linn. 

b.  Otherwise  called  Kasa.  Saccharum spontaneum,  Linn. 

c.  Called  in  Bengali,  Khankra.  A  variety  of  the  above. 

d.  Otherwise  called  Ulu.  The  roots  only  are  taken.  Saccharum  cylindri- 

e.  Gangadhara  has  PotSgala  in  the  text,  but  Patola  in  the  notes.  Chakra- 
p£ni  takes  it  to  mean  Hogala  (the  common  reed  called  Hogla  in  Bengali).  The 
“Ayurvedartha  Chandika”  explains  it  as  a  variety  of  reed,  identical  with  Khankra. 
It  is  a  variety  of  Saccharum. 

f.  Gangadhara’s  text  is  evidently  incorrect.  He  has  ‘  Tagara '  as  the  last 
plant  but  one  in  this  group,  while  he  reads ‘Kalankata’  as  ‘Kalakrita’,  taking ‘kala’ 

as  the  equivalent  of  ‘krishna  Aguru’,  and  ‘krita’  as  forming  a  part  of  the  succeed¬ 
ing  word  ‘kashaya’.  This  is  evidently  incorrect.  We  have  the  authority  of 
Chakrapani  for  it.  The  latter  reads  ‘  Kalankata  ’  and  takes  it  as  the  name  of 
a  well-known  plant,  known  as  '  Kalkasunde  ’  in  Bengal.  “Ayurvedartha 
Chandrika  ”  explains  Kalankata  as  the  same  as  Kasamarda  or  KalkSsunde, 
viz.,  Cassia  Sephora,  Linn. 

g.  Otherwise  called  Maiatipushpa,  as  explained  by  Gangadhara.  Echites 
caryophyllata,  Roxb. 

h.  The  correct  reading  is  ‘  Saumanasayini '  and  not  ‘  Saumanasyslyini  ’. 
“  Ayurvedartha  Chandrika  ”  explains  that  the  former  stands  for  the  Jati  flower, 

i.  e.,  Jasminum  grandiflorum,  Linn.  The  Hindi  name  of  this  flower  is 
Chameli. 

i.  Circuma  longa,  Roxb. 

j.  Berberis  Asiatica,  D.  C. 

k.  The  white  variety  of  Bcerhavia  diffusa,  Linn. 

l.  Bcerhavia  diffusa,  Linn,  (The  red  variety  is  so  called). 

m.  Otherwise  called  Mashaparni.  Teramus  labialis,  Spreng ;  syn. 
Glycine  debilis,  Roxb. 

n.  Otherwise  called  Mudgaparni.  Phaseolus  trilobus,  Ait. 


6ao 


CHAR  A  KA  •  SA  M  HIT A. 


As  also  of  the  following 

£alamali  (a),  ^Slmalaka  (5),  Bhadraparni  (c),  ElSparni  (cf), 
Upodika  ( e ),  Uddalaka  ( /),  Dhanwana  (g),  Rajadani  (h),  Upachitr& 
(t),  Gopi  {/),  and  £ringatika  ( k ). 

Infusions  of 

Pippali  ( / ),  Pippalimula  (m),  Chavya  (»),  Chitraka  (o),  £ringa- 
vera  ( p ),  Sarshapa  (y),  Phanita  (r),  Kshira  (j),  Ksh3ra  (^),  and 
Lavana  (»). 

a.  Bombax  Malabaricum,  D.  C.  The  root  is  used  . 

b.  Another  name  for  Mocharasa,  i.  e.,  the  gum  of  Bombax  Malabaricum . 
This  is  how  Gangadhara  explains  the  word.  Chakrapani,  a  more  reliable 
authority,  takes  it  to  mean  Rohitaka,  t.  e.,  Amoora  Rohituka,  W  and  A. ;  syn. 
Andersonia  Rohituka,  Roxb. 

c.  Otherwise  called  GambhUri.  Gmelina  arborea,  Linn. 

d.  Chakrapani  explains  it  as  Rasna,  i.  e.  ;  Vanda  Roxburghii,  R.  Br.;  syn. 
Cymbidium  tessaloides,  Roxb.  “  Ayurvedartha  Chandrika  ”  explains  Elaparni 
as  the  plant  called  in  Bengali  ‘  Kanta  Amrul.’  Gangadhara  takes  it  as 
another  name  of  Hastiparni,  or  the  plant  called  Kankura  in  Bengal. 

e.  Otherwise  called  Putika,  i.  e.,  Basella  rubra,  Linn.  Gangadhara  takes 
it  as  the  equivalent  of  Kalambi,  i.  e.,  Ipomcea  reptans,  Poir.  This  is  incor¬ 
rect,  for  Upodika  is  always  used  for  Putika. 

f.  Chakrapani  takes  it  as  Bahuvara,  i.  e.,  Cordia  Myxa,  Linn.  Ganga¬ 
dhara  explains  it  as  Kanchana,  e„  Bauhinia  acuminata,  Linn. 

g.  Otherwise  called  Dharmani,  i.  e..  Greviia  elastica,  Roxb. 

h.  Mimusops  Indica,  D.  C. ;  syn.  Mimusops  hexandra,  Roxb. 

i.  Gangadhara  takes  it  as  meaning  Bhandi’  e.  i.,  the  plant  called 
Bhant  or  Bhent  in  Bengal. 

j.  Otherwise  called  ‘  Sariva  ',  'Qariva  '  or  ‘Qyamalata’ ,  i.  e.,  Ichnocarpus 
frutescens,  R.  Br.  ;  syn.  Echites  frutescens,  Roxb. 

k  Trapa  bispinosa,  Roxb. 

l.  Piper  longum,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Chavica  Roxburghii ;  Miq. 

m.  The  roots  of  the  above. 

n.  Piper  Chaba,  Hunter  \  syn.  Chavica  offlcinarum,  Miq, 

o.  Plumbago  zeylanica,  Linn. 

p.  Zingiber  officinale,  Roxb. 

q.  Mustard  seeds. 

r.  Inspissated  juice  of  the  sugarcane. 

s.  Milk. 

t.  Alkaline  ashes. 

u.  Salt. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  r _ ^621 

Obtaining  as  many  of  these  as  possible,  and  correcting  them 
in  such  a  manner  as  may  be  desirable, 'and  making  them  up  into 
sticks,  or  powders,  or  extracts,*  or  oils,  or  decoctions,  or 
broths,  or  gruels,  or  soups,  or  infusions.’or'milk,  or  errhines, 
or  boluses,  or  into  diverse  other ’preparations,  the  physician  should 
duly  administer,  in  the  measure  that  is  desirable,  unto  the  person 
that  is  fit  for  taking  emetics. 

This  is  an  abstract  of  the  forms’  in  which  emetics  may  be 
used. 

All  the  forms,  however,  in  which  emetics  are  to  be  used,  will 
be  laid  down  in  detail  hereafter.t185 

As  regards  purgatives,  they  are  as  follow 

£y5ma-Trivrit  (a),  Chaturangala  (6),  Tillwaka  (cj,  MahSvriksha 


*  1  Avaleha  ’  which  I  render  as  ‘  extract  ’  is  thus  explained  by  Mr.  U.  C. 

Dutt  in  his  Materia  Medica  of  the  Hindus.  "  To  prepare  it,  decoctions,  after 
being  strained,  are  again  boiled  down  to  the  consistence  of  a  thick  extract. 
This  extract,  when  properly  made,  does  not  readily  dissolve  in  water,  can  be 
drawn  out  into  wires,  and  will  receive  impressions  of  coins  on  its  surface. 
Extracts  are  administered  with  the  addition  of  sugar,  decoctions,  or  powders." 

The  etymology  of  the  word  shows  that  it  is  something  to  be  licked  with  the 
tongue.  1  Ava  ’  being  a  prefix,  and  '  liha  '  (to  lick)  being  the  root. — T. 

t  Fuller  instructions  on  the  subject  are  given  in  that  division  of  the  treatise 
which  is  called  ‘  Kalpasthana’.  It  comes  after  ‘  Chikitsa  '. — T. 

a.  Convolvulus  Turpethum,  Linn.;  syn.  Ipomcea  Turpethum,  R.  Br. 
(There  are  two  varieties,  viz.,  the  white  and  the  black.  By  QyamB-Trivrit  the 
b  lack  variety  is  intended. 

b.  Otherwise  called  Aragbadha.  Cassia  fistula,  Linn.;  syn.  Cathar- 
tocarpus fistula,  Pers. 

e.  Otherwise  called  Lodhra.  Symplocos  racemosa ,  Roxb. 


79 


622 


c  haraka-samhitA. 


(d),  SaptalS  (e),  (Qankhini  (f),  Danti  (g),  and  Dravanti  (h). 

The  milk,  roots,  bark,  leaves  flowers,  and  fruits  of  these 
are  taken. 

These  may  be  administered  severally,  or  jointly,  according 
as  the  combination  may  be  desirable,  with  the  infusion  of  Ajagan- 
dha  (t),  A^wagandliS  (j ),  Aj^ringi  (&),  Kshirini  (l),  Nilini 
(m),  and  Klitaka  («)  ; 

Or,  with  the  infusions  of— 

Prakirya  (a),  Udakirya  (b),  Masura-Vidal5  ( c ),  Kampillaka  (d) 

d.  Otherwise  called  Snuhi  or  ManasS.  Euphorbia  neriifolia.,  Linn. 

e.  This  is  explained  by  Gang&dhara  as  a  variety  of  Qankhini.  The  name 
Saptala  stands  for  many  plants. 

f.  Gang&dhara  takes  Qankhini  as  equivalent  to  Qankhapushpi,  Cans- 

cora  decussata ;  syn.  Pladera  decussaia,  Roxb. 

g.  Baliospermum  Montanum.,  syn.  Croton  Polyandrum,  Roxb.  (Ganga¬ 
dhara  takes  it  as  equivalent  to  NSgadanti. 

h.  GangSdhara  explains  it  as  a  variety  of  the  above.  Dravanti,  according 
to  the  Ayunvedartha  ChandrikS,  is  Mushikaparni  or  Salvinia  cucullata,  Roxb. 

i.  Otherwise  called  Yamani.  Ptychotes  Ajovian,  D  C. ;  syn.  Ligusticum 
Ajovoan,  Fbm. 

j.  Withania  somnifera  ;  syn.  Physalis  flexuosa,  Roxb. 

k.  Otherwise  called  Meshaijringi.  Gymnema  sylvestre,  R.  Br.  ;  syn. 
Asclepias  geminata,  Roxb. 

l.  Chakrapani  explains  it  as  Dugdhika.  Oxystelma  esculentum,  R.  Br.  ; 
syn.  Asclepias  rosea,  Rcxb. 

m.  Gangadhara  takes  it  as  implying  the  plant  called  Nilabuhna  in  Bengali. 
(Is  it  a  variety  of  wild  Indigo  ?  ) 

n.  Chakrapani  explains  it  as  another  name  of  Yashthi-madhu  or  Liquo- 

a.  Otherwise  called  Nata-Karanja.  Guilandina  Bondticella,  Linn;  syn. 
Ccesalpinia  Bonducella,  Flcm. 

b.  Otherwise  called  Karanja,  or  Dahar-Karanja.  Pongamia  glabra, 
Vent ;  syn.  Galedupa  Indica,  Lamk. 

c.  Gangadhara  explains  it  as  “  Qyamamula-Trivrit.”  Chakrapani  takes 
it  as  "  Qyamalata.”  Iporficea  Turpethum,  it.  Br. ;  syn.  Convolvulus  Turpe- 
thum,  Linn.  If  Chakrapani  be  taken  as  our  guide,  the  plant  named  would  be 
Ichnocarpus frutescens,  R.  Br.  ;  syn.  Echites frutescens,  Roxb. 

d.  Mallotus  Philippensis  ;  syn.  Rattlera  tinctoria,  Roxb. 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA 


623 


Vidangaka  ( e ),  and  GavSkshi  (f). 

Or  with  the  infusion  of — 

Pilu  ( g ),  PiySla  (h),  MridvikS  (1),  Kasmaryya  (/),  Parusha  (k\ 
Vadara  (/),  Dadima  (/a),  Amlaka  (n),  Haritaki  (0),  Vibhitaka  (p) 
Vrishcliira  (q),  Punarnava  (r),  and  Vidari-gandhS  (j). 

The  above  should  be  corrected  by  the  following,  viz  : — 

£idhu  (a),  Sura  (6),  Sauviraka  (c),  Tushodaka  (d),  Maireya 

e.  The  same  as  Vidanga.  Embelia  ribes,  Burm ;  syn.  Embelia  glanduli- 
fera,  Wight. 

f.  The  Ayurvedatha  Chandrika  takes  it  as  Godumba,  i.  the  Bengali 
Gomuk.  Cucumis  Mela,  Linn. ;  syn.  Cucumis  madraspatanus,  Roxb. 

g.  Salvadora  Persica,  Linn. ;  Salvadora  Indica,  Wight. 

h.  Buchanania  latifolia,  Roxb.  The  nuts  are  called  Cheraunji  (in  Hindi). 

i.  Uvce  Passes.  Called  Kismiss  in  Bengali  and  Hindi. 

f,  Called  also  Kasmari  or  Gambhari.  Gmelina  arborea,  Linn. 

k.  Greviia  Asiatica,  Linn. 

l.  Zizyphus  Jnjuba,  Lamk. 

m.  Punica  granatum,  Linn,  pomegranate  tree. 

n.  Phyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn. ;  syn.  Emblica  officinalis,  Gaert. 

o.  Terminalia  Chebula ;  Chebulic  myrobalan. 

p.  Terminalia  Bellerica,  Roxb. 

q.  Boerhavia  diffusa,  Linn.  The  white  variety  is  implied. 

v.  Boerhavia  diffusa,  Linn.  The  red  variety  is  indicated. 

s.  Otherwise  called  Salaparni.  Desmodium  Gangeticum,  Burm ;  syn. 
Hedysarum  Gangeticum,  Linn. 

a.  The  qualities  of  the  diverse  kinds  of  wines  have  been  explained  in 

Lesson  XXVII  of  Sutrasthana.  (vide  pp.  362  to  365).  “  Ayurvedartha 

Chandrika'’  explains  that  by  Qidhu  is  meant  that  wine  which  is  manufactured 
from  the  boiled  juice  of  the  Sugarcane. 

b.  The  wine  manufactured  from  the  paddy  called  Cali  and  Shashtika,  &c. 

c.  The  wine  manufactured  from  wheat  and  barley. 

d.  Otherwise  called  Kanjika.  Infusion  of  rice  in  cold  water,  properly 
fermented. 


624  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

(e),  Medaka  (/)  ,  MadirS  (g),  Madhu  ( h ),  Madhuraka  (*'.y  DhanySmla 
( j  i,  Kuvala  (£),  Vadara  (/),  Kharjjura  (;«),  and  Karkandhu  («). 

Or,  by  the  following,  viz., — 

Dadhi  ( o ,)  Dadliimanda  (/),  and  Udafwit  ( q ). 

Or,  by  the  following,  viz., — 

the  milk  or  urine  of  the  cow,  the  buffalo,  the  goat,  and  the  sheep. 
The  infusions  should  be  corrected  by  any  of  these  articles 
that  may  be  obtainable,  and  to  the  extent  that  may  be  desirable. 


e.  Manufactured  from  certain  roots  and  fruits  and  sugar. 

f.  Otherwise  called  Jagala.  Manufactured  from  certain  powders  that 
go  by  the  name  of  “  Muda  "  in  the  Indian  markets. 

g.  The  commentators  do  not  explain  how  this  variety  of  wine  is  manufac¬ 
tured.  Its  synonyms  seem  to  indicate  that  it  is  a  general  name  for  all  kinds 
of  vinous  liquors. 

h.  This  is  the  name  of  the  wine  manufactured  from  the  blossoms  of  the 
Bassia  latifolia. 

i.  Manufactured  from  an  aquatic  plant  of  long  leaves  called  “  Jala-mahuH  ” 
in  the  vernacular. 

/.  Manufactured  from  broken  rice-grains.  "  AyurvedSrtha  Chandrika  ” 
quotes  "  Atreya-samhita  ”  for  explaining  the  process  by  which  this  wine  used 
to  be  manufactured.  "  One  prastha  of  the  shashtika  paddy  is  to  be  drenched 
in  2  prasthasof  water.  The  mouth  of  the  jug  or  jar  should  then  be  hermeti¬ 
cally  closed  and  it  is  to  be  interred  in  the  earth.  It  should  be  taken  up  at  the  end 
of  a  fortnight.  The  liquid  should  then  be  strained  through  a  piece  of  cloth." 

k.  This  is  manufactured  from  a  variety  of  plums. 

l.  This  also  is  manufactured  from  a  variety  of  ditto. 

m.  This  is  from  the  juice  of  the  date-palm. 

n.  This  is  manufactured  from  the  fruits  of  Zizyphus  cenoplict. 

p.  The  watery  portion  that  escapes  from  curds  when  stale. 

q.  Whey  mixed  half  and  half  with  water. 


CHA  RA  KA  -  SaMHItA. 


625 


Thus  corrected  these  should  be  administered  as  sticks  (suppo¬ 
sitories),  or  powders,  or  extracts  (for  licking),  or. oils, "or  infusions 
(for  drink),  or  meat-soup®,  or  meat-juices,  or  heated  gruels,  or  cold 
gruels,  or  boluses,  or  other  edible  forms. 

In  fact,  the  medicine  may  be  given,  in  any  edible  or  drinkable 
form,  to  the  person  that  deserves  to  be  purged. 

Thus  ends  the  examination,  in  brief,  of  the  methods  of  ad¬ 
ministering  purgatives.  Hereafter  these  methods  will  be  treated 
of  more  fully  in  that  division  of  the  work  which  is  called  Kalpa- 
sth3na.*  157 

As  regards  enemata,  there  are  numerous  methods  of  preparing 
(and  administering)  them. 

If  all  the  articles  capable  of  use  as  enemata  have  to  be  laid 
down  fully,  the  list  is  sure  to  be  an  interminable  one  owing  to 
their  great  number. 

In  a  treatise  like  this,  it  is  desirable  to  lay  down  instructions 
neither  very  elaborately  nor  very  briefly. 

What  is  desirable  is  knowledge  (in  the  student  of  Medical 
Science). 

Hence,  instructions  are  being  laid  down  (as  regards  the  articles 
to  be  used  as  enemata)  by  a  reference  to  tastes.168 

The  extent  of  the  variety  of  combination  of  the  Tastes,  with 
reference  to  the  articles  capable  of  use  as  enemata,  is  unlimited. 
This  is  so  because  of  the  unlimited  combinations,  dependant  upon 
the  varied  measures  that  may  be  taken,  in  which  the  Tastes  may 
be  united. 


*The  aphorism  being  very  long  and  composed  of  one  sentence,  I  have,  for 
purposes  of  perspicuity,  been  obliged  to  break  it  up,  in  the  latter  part,  into 
five  or  six  independent  sentences.  The  fact  is,  the  first  portion  of  the  apho¬ 
rism  mentions  the  “  Kashayas  "  or  Infusions.  Then  comes  the  portion  about 
“  SamskSra.  "  By  "  Samskara  ”  is  meant  the  addition  of  some  substance  which 
adds  to  the  virtues  of  the  drug.  I  have  rendered  "Samskara”  by  the  word 
“correction.”  It  should  be  taken  as  a  technical  word.  The  methods  of 
correction  should  be  by  the  wines  indicated  ;  by  curds,  &c ;  and,  lastly,  by  the 
milk  or  urine  of  the  animals  named. — T. 


626  CHARaKA-SAAIHITA. 

Hence,  for  the  sake  of  illustration,  taking  only  one  kind  of 
objects  and  classifying  them  according  to  Tastes,  or  rather  accord¬ 
ing  to  one  particular  taste,  six  groups  of  enemata  will  be  laid 
down,  mrntioning  each  grant  by  indication  of  names  above. 

The  assertion  which  physicians  are  heard  to  make,  viz.,  that 
the  six  kinds  of  enemata  are  each  of  one  taste,  is  incorrect  (for 
no  group  of  enemata  can  be  found  that  is  entirely  of  one  taste). 

This  is  so  because  of  all  things  being  of  diverse  tastes  com¬ 
bined  together. 

Hence,  articles  that  are  sweet,  and  those  that  are  nearly  sweet, 
and  those  which  are  sweet  as  regards  their  potency,  and  those 
which  are  nearly  sweet  as  regards  their  potency,  are  all  laid  down 
below  as  sweet. 

The  same  rule  (about  enumeration)  will  be  observed  in  the  case 
of  articles  of  other  tastes.* 

They  are  as  follows : — 

Jivaka  ( a ),  Rishabhaka  ( b ),  Jivanti  (c),  Vira  (d],  Tamalaki  (e), 


*  The  rule  that  will  be  followed  in  enumerating  articles  that  are  sweet,  will 
be  followed  in  enumerating  articles  that  are  bitter,  or  pungent,  or  sour,  &c.  ; 
that  is,  things  in  which  the  bitter  taste  predominates,  will  all  be  mentioned  as 
bitter,  irrespective  of  the  measure  in  which  bitterness  occurs  in  them. — T. 

a.  This  plant  has  not  been  identified.  Nor  is  it  obtainable.  Hindu 
physicians  now  substitute  for  it  Guduchi ;  i.e.,  Tinospora  cordifolia ;  syn. 
Menispermum  Cordifolium,  Willd. 

b.  Not  obtainable,  and  not  identified.  Physicians  Sse  instead  Vansalo- 
chana,  i.e.,  the  siliceous  concretion  found  in  the  joints  of  the  female  bamboo. 

c.  Coelogyne  ovalis. 

d.  Gangadhara  takes  Vira  as  signifying  Kshirak&koli  or  Karkatacringi. 
The  former  is  the  bulb  of  the  onion  tube  brought  from  the  Himalaya.  The 
latter  is  Rhus  succedanea,  Linn,  syn.  Rhus  acuminata. 

e.  Called  also  Bhumycimalaki.  Phyllanthus  Niruri,  Linn. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA  627 

Kakoli  '(f),  Kshira-kakoli  (g),  Mudgaparni  (ft),  Mashaparni  (i), 
^Slaparni  (f),  Prishniparni  (k),  (^anaparni  (/),  Med3  ( m ),  MahamedS 
(n),  Karkataijringi  ( 0 ),  (^ring5tik5  (fi),  Cchinna  (^).  Cchatra  (r), 
Aticchatr&  (5),  <£r5vani  ( t ),  Mahafrlvani  ( u ),  Alanivusha  (»), 


f.  A  root  said  to  be  brought  from  Nepal  or  Morung. 

g.  A  bulb  of  the  onion  tribe  brought  from  the  Himalaya. 

h.  Phlaseolus  trilobus. 

i.  Glycine  debilis,  Roxb.;  syn.  Teramnus  labialis,  Spreng. 

j.  Hedysarum  Gangeticum,  Linn  ;  syn.  Desmodium  Gangeticum,  Burm. 

k.  Doodia  lagopodioides.  Roxb.;  syn.  Uraria  lagopodiodes.  D.  C. 

l.  Called  also  A9anaparni.  Spelled  also  as  Sanaparni  and  Asanaparnf. 
“  Ayurvedartha  Chandrika”  gives  Marata  as  its  other  name. 

m.  Not  obtainable  and  not  identified.  Physicians  use  Afwagandha  as 
its  substitute,  i.e.  Physalis  flexuosa,  of  Roxburgh  or  Withania  somnifera,  Don. 

n.  Not  obtainable  and  not  identified.  Physicians  use  Sariva  as  its  subs¬ 
titute,  i.e.,  Ichnocarpus  frulescens,  R.  By.;  syn.  Echites  frutescens,  Roxb. 

0.  Rhus  Snccedanea,  Linn. 

p.  Otherwise  called  Paniphal.  Trapa  bispinosa,  Roxb. 

q.  "Ayurvedartha  Chandrika  ”  explains  that  Cchinna  is  another  name 
for  Guduchi,  i.e.  Tinospora  Cordifolia. 

r.  Cchatra  is  another  name  for  Madhurika  (Mauri).  Foeniculam  Vulgare. 
(Fennel  seeds). 

s.  Aticchatra  is  a  larger  variety  of  the  above.  Gangadhara  explains  that 
“  Cchatra'  and  Aticchatra  are  well-known.  They  are  otherwise  called  Catahbha 
and  Madhurika.”  The  name  Aticchatra  is  given  to  mushrooms  as  well.  But 
here,  the  word  implies  Fennel  seeds  of  the  larger  variety. 

t.  Gangadhara  explains  that  it  is  used  as  an  equivalent  of  Cweta-munderi 
which,  probably,  is  tlie  same  plant  as  Mandukaparni,  i.e.,  the  Hydroctyle 
Asiatica,  Linn. 

u.  Gangadhara  takes  it  as  the  equivalent  of  Rakta-munderi,  i.e.,  the  red 
variety  of  the  above. 

v.  Alamvusha  does  not  occur  in  all  the  texts.  "  Ayurvedartha  Chandrika  ” 
,says  that  the  name  is  applied  to  the  well-known  little  plant  called  Kuksima 

in  Bengali. 


628 


'HARAKA-SAMHITA. 


SahadevS  (w).  VigwadevS  (x),  <J!ukl3  (y),  Kshira-fuklS  (z),  Ral3  («', 
Atibali  (i\  VidSri  (c),  Kshira-vidSri  (d),  MahSsaha  (rV,  Kshndra- 
sah3  (f),  Riddhi  (g)}  RishyagandhS  (3),  AfwagandhS  ( i ),  Payasy3 


■w.  Otherwise  called  DandotpalS  (as  explained  by  GangSdhara)  of  the 
yellow  variety.  Probably,  Sida  rhomboidea  of  Roxburgh. 

x.  Otherwise  called  DandotpalS  (as  explained  by  Gangadhara)  of  the 
red  variety. 

y.  Chakrap3nidatta  explains  that  Cukla  means  candied  sugar. 

x.  ChakrapSnidatta  explains  that  by  Kshiracukla  is  meant  Trivrit,  i.e., 
Convolvulus  Turpethum,  Linn;  syn.  Ipomcea  Turpethum.  Gangadhara, 
on  what  authority  it  does  not  appear,  takes  it  as  the  equivalent  of  that 
variety  of  VidSri  whose  milky  juice  is  scanty.  VidSri,  of  course,  is  the 
well-known  plant  called  Convolvulus  paniculatus. 

a.  Sida  cordifolia,  Linn. 

b.  Sida  rhombifolia,  Linn. 

c.  Convolvulus  paniculatus,  Linn.  It  seems  that  GangSdhara’s  explana¬ 
tion  of  the  term  Kshira-cuklS  ( vide  s  above  )  is  not  wholly  incorrect.  Kshira¬ 
cukla  may  be  taken  for  a  variety  of  VidSri.  The  word  Vidari,  as  it  occurs 
here,  means  that  variety  which  has  no  juice. 

d.  That  variety  of  the  above  which  has  abundant  milky  juice. 

e.  GangSdhara  explains  that  MahasahS  is  another  name  of  Kuruvaka 
of  the  white  variety.  Wilson  takes  it  as  applying  to  the  purple  variety. 

f.  GangSdhara  takes  it  as  another  name  of  Kuruvaka  of  the  purple  variety. 
Both  varieties  go  by  the  name  of  Jhinti,  i.e,  Barleria  cristata,  Linn. 

ChakrapSnidatta  explains  that  by  KshudrasahS  is  meant  the  plant  called 
KumSri.  KumSri,  however,  is  a  name  that  is  applied  to  various  plants,  such 
as  the  Clitoria  Ternatea,  Aloes  perfoliata.  &c. 

g.  Riddhi  is  no  longer  obtainable,  whatever  it  was.  For  it  modern  physi¬ 
cians  substitute  Bali  ( vide  a  above.) 

h.  GangSdhara  takes  it  as  another  name  of  Vriddha-daraka  or  Devat&da, 

i.e.,  Andropogan  saccharatus,  Roxb. ;  syn.  Andropogon  serratus,  Retx. 

i.  Physalis  flexuosa,  Roxb. ;  syn.  Withania  somnifera,  Don. 


CHAU  A  KA -SAM HIT  A. 


629  ' 

O’),  Vrigchira  (k),  Punarnava  (/),  Vrihati  (m),  Kantakarika  (n), 
Eranda  ( o ),  Morata  (/),  £wadangshtra  (q),  Samharsha  (r),  £attvari 
( s ),  £atapushpa  ( t ),  Madhukapushpi  ( u ),  Yashtimadhu  (v),  Madhu- 
lika  ( w ),  Mridvika  ( x ),  Kharjjura  (y),  Parushaka  ( z ),  A'tmagupta 
(a),  Pushkaravija  ( b ),  Kasheruka  (c),  Rajakaslieruka  ( d ),  Rajadani 


j.  Gangadhara  takes  it  as  another  name  of  Arkapushpi,  i.e.,  Gynandrop- 
sis  pentaphylla,  D.  R. ;  syn.  Cleome  pentaphylla,  Linn. 

k.  The  white  variety  of  Punarnava,  i.e.,  Boerhavia  diffusa,  Linn. ;  syn. 
Boerhavia  procumbens  and  erecta. 

l.  The  read  variety  of  the  above. 

m.  Solanum  Indicum,  Linn. 

n.  Solanum  jacquinii,  Wild. ;  syn.  Solanum  xanthocarpum,  Schrad. 

0.  Ricimus  communis,  Linn. 

p.  Chakrapanidatta  takes  it  as  another  name  of  Murva,  i.e.,  Sanseviera, 
Zeylanica,  Willd.;  syn.  Sanseviera  Roxburghiana. 

q.  Otherwise  called  Gokhura.  Tribulus  trrestris,  Linn ;  syn.  Tribulus 
lanuginosus,  Linn. 

r.  Chakrapanidatta  says  that  this  plant  is  otherwise  called  Vandaka. 
Gangadhara  is  content  with  quoting  Chakrapanidatta.  Vandaka  is  a  common 
name  for  a  parasitical  plant,  of  what  particular  variety  it  is  not  known.  Wilson 
supposes  it  to  be  the  Epidandrum  tessellatum. 

s.  Called  also  Qatamuli.  Asparagus  racemosus,  Willd. 

t.  Called  also  Misreya.  Pucedanum  Sewa. 

u.  A  variety  of  liquorice. 

v.  Otherwise  called  Madhuka.  Liquorice. 

w.  Chakrapanidatta  states  that  it  is  otherwise  called  Markata-hastatrina. 
Gangadhara  is  content  to  quote  Chakrapani  without  adding  anything  of  his 

Ayurvedartha  Chandrika  takes  it  as  another  name  of  Rajika,  that  is,  the 
larger  variety  of  mustard  seeds  called  Rye-sharshapa  in  India. 

x.  Uvae  passse.  Dried  grapes. 

y.  Phoenix  Sylvestris  ;  Roxb.  The  wild  date  palm. 

z.  Greviia  Asiatica,  Linn. 

a.  Mucana  pruriens,  D.  C. 

b.  Lotus-seeds. 

c.  Scirpus  Kysoor,  Roxb.  Chakrapani  says  that  by  Kaseruka  is  meant 
Chinchodaka.  This  is  the  marshy  plant  called  Chenchko.  This  is  a  variety  of 
Scirpus  kysoor. 

d.  Other  wise  called  Bhadramusta  ;  a  variety  of  the  above. 

80 


63° 


CHA  RA  KA -SAMH IT  A. 


( e ),  Kalankalaka  {/),  Kataka  (g),  Kasmarrj’ya  {h),  £itapaki  (i),  Odana- 
paki(y),  Talamastaka  ( k ),  Kharjjuramastaka  (/),  Ikshu  ( m ),  Ikshuvalika 
(«),  Darblia  {o),  Kuya  ( p ),  Kaya  {q).  Cali  (r),  Gundra  (s),  Itkataka  (f), 


e.  Mimusops  Indica,  D  C. ;  syn.  Mimusops  hexandra.,  Roxb.  Gangadhara 
wrongly  takes  Rajadani  as  another  name  for  Piyala.  Chakrapani  takes  it  as 
another  name  of  the  bulbous  root  called  Genchu  in  Bengal. 

f.  Called  in  Bengali  Kalkasunde  ;  Cassia  sophora,  Linn-,  syn.  Senna sophora, 
Roxb. 

g.  It  has  another  name,  viz,  Ambuprasada.  In  Bengal  it  is  called  Nirmala 
or  Nirmali.  The  seeds  are  used  for  clearing  muddy  water.  Susruta  mentions 
this  use  of  the  seeds  in  his  chapter  on  water.  Strychnos  Potaterum,' Linn.  fil. 

h.  Called  also  Gambhari,  Gmelina  arborea,  Linn. 

i.  Gangadhara  explains  that  this  is  a  variety  of  Kakali,  which,  as  explain¬ 
ed  above,  is  a  root  brought  from  Nepal  or  Morung.  Chakrapani  explains  it 
as  SitalS  which,  Ayurvedartha  Chandrika  explains,  is  Sitali-lata.  The 
fact  is,  Sitala,  or  SitalS,  is  a  name  applied  to  more  than  one  plant  or  tree.  It 
may  mean,  as  Wilson  says,  Marsilea  quadrifolia\  or  Cordia  myxa\  or  the 
marshy  plant  called  Phrynium  dichotinum,  from  the  split  stems  of  which  a  fine 
cool  mat  is  made,  called  Sital-pati  in  Bengal. 

j.  Called  in  Bengali,  Niljhinti.  A  variety  of  Barleria  cristata,  Linn. 

k.  The  head  of  the  palm  called  Borassus  flabeliformis,  Linn.  The  head 
of  this  palm,  besides  being  used  medicinally,  is  taken  as  food  by  the  lower 
classes  of  the  Indian  people. 

l.  The  head  of  the  wild  date  palm.  Besides  being  used  medicinally,  this 
also  is  taken  as  food. 

to.  Saccharum  officinarum,  Linn.  The  sugarcane. 

n.  Called  also  Ikshabika.  Saccharum  spontaneum,  Linn. 

o.  Called  Ulu  in  Bengali.  Saccharum  cylindricum,  Lamk. 

p.  Poa  cynosuroides,  Linn. 

q.  A  variety  of  Saccharum  spontaneum,  Linn. 

r.  The  common  paddy  of  Bengal. 

s.  Panicum  uliginosum,  Roxb.  Gangadhara  takes  it.  as  implying 
Guduchi,  i.e.,  Tinospora  cordifolia. 

t.  Some  texts  have  Itkata  or  Itkataka  which  is  the  same  as  the  plant 
called  Okra  in  Bengal;  which  others  read  Utkata  or  Utkataka,  which, 
Ayurvedartha  Chandrika  explains,  is  Daruchini  or  Tejapatra.  If 
the  latter  reading  and  the  explanation  given  by  Ayurvedartha  Chandrika 
be  preferred,  it  would  seem  that  the  plant  indicated  is  Cinnamomum  Zeylani- 


CHA  RA  KA  -SA  MHITA. 


631 


Caramula  ( u ),  Rajakshavaka  (v),  RishyaproktS  ( w ),  Darada  (x), 
Bharadwaji  (jy),  Vana-trapushi  (z),  Abhirapatri  (a),  Hansapadi  ( b ), 
Kakanasha  ( c ),  Kulingakshi  (d),  Kshiravalli  (e),  Kapotavalli  (/), 
Gopavalli  (g),  Madhuvalli  (Ji),  and  Soinavalli  (*). 

Of  these  {i.e.,  those  enumerated  above ),  as  also  of  others 
of  this  kind,  that  are  numbered  in  the  group,  called  Sweet,  of 
articles  used  as  drugs,  the  physician  should  cut  into  small  pieces 
those  articles  which  should  be  so  cut,  and  pulverise  those  which 


u.  The  roots  of  Saccharum  Sara,  Roxb. 

v.  A  name  applied  to  a  variety  of  mustard  seeds. 

■w.  Both  Chakrapani  and  Gangadhara  take  it  as  implying  a  variety  of 
Bala  or  Sida  cordifolia,  Linn. 

x.  Both  the  commentators  take  Darada  as  implying  the  well-known 
potherb  called  in  Bengal,  Pillama-saka,  i.e.,  a  variety  of  Beta  Bengalensis. 

y.  Chakrapani  says  that  this  is  another  name  of  Bana-karpasi  or  wild 
cotton.  A  variety  of  Gossypium  herbaceum,  Linn. 

e.  A  wild  variety  of  Cucumis  sativus,  Linn. 

a.  Chakrapani  explains  that  this  is  a  variety  of  Qatavari  or  Asparagus 
racemosus,  Willd. 

b.  Called  in  Bengali,  Thulkuri.  Hydrocotyle  Asiatica,  Linn.  It  has 
another  Sanskrit  name,  viz.,  Mandukaparni, 

c.  Called  also  Kakatundi.  Asclepias  currassavica,  Linn. 

d.  Both  the  commentators  take  it  as  implying  the  plant  called  Petika 
(  Petari  in  Bengali ).  Probably  a  variety  of  Typpa  angustifolia,  Linn. ;  syn. 
Typpa  elephantina,  Roxb. 

e.  Both  the  commentators  are  content  with  saying  that  it  is  another  name 
of  Khira-lata.  ( valli,  of  course,  means  a  lata  or  creeper.)  A  variety  of 
Convolvulus  paniculatus,  Linn. 

f.  Chakrapani  takes  it  as  implying  Sukshma-Ela,  i.e.,  Elettaria  carda- 
momum. 

g.  Chakrapani  takes  it  as  implying  the  plant  called  Anantamula,  i.  e., 
Asclepias  pseudosarsa,  Roxb. 

h.  Chakrapani  explains  that  this  implies  a  variety  of  Liquorice. 

i.  Otherwise  called  Somalata.  Asclepias  acida,  Roxb, ;  syn.  Sarcostemna 
brevistigma,  W,  A. 


charaka-samhitA. 


63:2 

should  be  reduced  to  powders.  Having  cut  and  pulverised 
them,  they  should  then  be  thoroughly  washed  and  then  put  into 
a  well-washed  vessel,* 

Then  taking  a  quantity  of  milk  and  mixing  with  it  an  equal 
measure  of  water,  they  should  be  boiled,  stirring  them  the 
while  with  a  ladle.  The  measure  should  be  sufficient  of  the 
liquid  in  which  they  are  to  be  boiled. 

When  the  juice  of  the  drugs  has  come  out  (and  mingled 
•with  the  liquid),  and  before  the  milk  gets  itself  burnt,  the  vessel 
should  be  taken  down  (from  the  fire). 

The  milk  should  then  be  thoroughly  strained,  and  while 
still  agreeably  warm,  it  should  be  mixed  with  clarified  butter, 
or  oil,  or  fat  or  marrow,  or  salt,  or  the  inspissated  juice  of  the 
sugarcane. 

The  physician,  well-versed  in  the  healing  art,  should  then 
duly  apply  it  as  enemata  to  the  patient  suffering  under  affections 
due  to  vitiated  wind. 

To  a  patient,  however,  that  is  suffering  under  vitiated  bile, 
the  above  should  be  administered  when  cooled  and  correcting 
it  by  honey  and  clarified  butter. 

Thus  ends  the  Group  of  Sweets.*15* 


*  A  ‘sthali’  is  any  kind  of  vessel,  of  earth  or  of  any  metal.  In  Bengal 
the  word  is  used  for  indicating  a  circular  dish  or  platter.  In  other  parts  of 
India,  jars  and  jugs,  in  fact,  any  vessel  large  or  small,  is  still  called  a  ‘sthali.’ 
It  is  derived  from  the  root  ‘  sth5,’  to  put  or  place.  Hence,  anything  within 
or  upon  which  any  other  thing  may  be  put  or  placed.  Generally,  Hindu 
physicians  use  earthen  vessels  for  manufacturing  medicines. — T. 

*  Having  first  enumerated  the  plants,  &c.,  that  make  up  the  Group  of 
Sweets,  the  Rishi  explains  the  method  of  preparation.  Some  are  to  be  cut, 
some  to  be  reduced  to  powder,  &c.  The  articles  are  then  to  be  boiled, 
strained,  &c.  The  preparation  is  then  to  be  corrected  by  the  addition  of  some 
articles.  While  still  warm,  the  enemata  is  to  be  applied  to  patients  whose 
wind  has  been  vitiated ;  but  with  regard  to  patients  suffering  from  vitiated 
bile,  the  medicine  should  be  administered  when  cooled. 

It  will  be  seen  that  many  of  the  plants  named  are  unidentifiable.  Some 
of  the  names  stand  for  more  than  one  plant.  The  commentators  differ.  I 
have  done  my  best  to  present  the  different  opinions. — T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHItA. 


633 


5.mra  ( a ),  Amrataka  ( b ),  Lakucha  (c),  Karamardda  ( d ),  Vriksham- 
la  ( e ),  Amlavetasa  (/),  Kuvala  (g),  Vadara  ( h ),  Dadima  ( i ), 
MStulunga  (/ ),  Kandira  (£),  Amalaka  (7),  Nanditaka  (»z),  ^itaka 
(«),  Dantafatha  (0),  Airavataka  (/>),  Koshamra  (q\  and 
Dhanwana.  ( r ). 

The  fruits  of  these  are  to  be  taken. 


a.  Mangifera  Indica,  Linn. 

b.  Spondias  mangifera ,  Pers.  The  hog  plum. 

c.  Artocarpus  Lakoocha,  Roxb. 

d.  Carissa  Carandas,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Carissa  congesta,  Wight. 

e.  Otherwise  called  Tintiri.  Tamarindus  Indica ,  Linn.  The  Tamarind  tree. 

f.  Otherwise  called  Chukra.  Rumex  Vesicarius,  Linn.  The  country 

g.  A  variety  of  Kola.  Zieyphus  fujuba,  Lamk. 

h.  Xizyphus  Jujuba,  Lamk. 

i.  Punica  Granatum,  Linn.  The  Pomegranate  tree. 

j.  Citrus  medica,  Linn. 

k.  Gang&dhara  reads  Karira,  which  is  Capparis  aphylla,  Roth. ;  syn. 
Capparis  Sodada,  R.  Br.  As  regards  the  reading  Kandira,  it  should  be  stated 
that  neither  Wilson  nor  Ayurvedartha  Chandrika  mentions  the  word. 

l.  Phyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn. ;  syn.  Emblica  officinalis,  Gaert. 

nt.  Chakrapani  says  that  it  is  identical  with  Karpar-Nandi.  Not  identi¬ 
fied. 

n.  Chakrapani  says  it  has  another  name,  viz.,  Amvulothaka.  Gangi- 
dhara  takes  it  as  equivalent  to  Chalitra.  Dillenia  Indica,  Linn. ;  syn.  Dillenia 
speciosa,  Thumb. 

o.  Gangadhara  takes  it  as  Jamvira,  a  variety  of  citrus.  AyurvedSrtha 
Chandrika  explains  it  as  Kamaranga,  i.e.,  Averrhoa  Carambola,  Z.j«».‘Some 
authorities  take  it  as  another  name  of  Kapitthwa,  i.e.,  Feronia  Elephantum, 
or  the  wood-apple  tree. 

p.  Otherwise  called  Nagaranga,  i.e.,  Citrus  Aurantium,  Linn.  The 
same  variety  is  used. 

q.  Mangifera  sylvatica,  Roxb. 

r.  Otherwise-called  Dharmana.  Grewia  elastica,  Royle. 


634 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SA  ill  HI  TA. 


The  leaves  should  be  taken  of  the  following  :  — 

Afmantaka  (a),  Changed  (b),  the  four  varieties  of  Amlikas  (c), 
the  two  varieties  of  Kola,  viz.,  raw  and  dry  ( d ),  and  two  varieties 
of  dried  Amlika,  viz.,  cultivated  and  wild  (e). 

Of  intoxicants,  the  following  should  be  taken  : — 

Sura,  Sauvira,  Tushodaka,  Maireya,  Medaka,  Madira, 
Madhu,  Sidhu,  £ukta,  Dadhi,  Dadhimanda,  Uda?wit,  Dhanyamla, 
and  others  of  a  similar  kind.  * 

Of  these,  as  also  of  others  of  this  kind,  that  are  numbered 
in  the  Group,  called  Sour,  of  articles  used  as  drugs,  the  physician 
should  cut  into  small  pieces  •  those  articles  which  should  be  so 
cut,  and  pulverise  those  which  should  be  reduced  to  powder. 

Dipping  the  solids  into  the  liquid  substances  named,  they 
should  be  cooked. 


a.  Otherwise  called  Amlakucha.  A  variety  of  Oxalis,  probably  Oxalis 
monodelpha. 

b.  Called  Amrul  in  Bengali.  Oxalis  coriniculata,  Linn. 

e.  Wilson  takes  it  as  identical  with  Tintire,  i.e.,  Tamarindus  Indica,  Linn. 
This  is  not  correct.  Chakrapani  takes  Amlika  to  mean  a  plant  whose  bulbous 
root  is  used  as  something  very  sour.  He  further  says  that  it  is  well-known,- 
by  this  name,  in  Kamrup,  and  that  there  are  four  varieties  of  the  plant. 

d.  Z_ieyphus  Jujuba,  Linn.  There  are  two  varieties,  viz.,  large  and  small. 

e.  This,  probably,  is  Tamarindus  Indica,  Linn.  I  do  not  know  what 
the  two  varieties  are  of  this  tree.  In  Bengal  only  one  kind  of  Tamarind  is  known. 

*  Paddy,  fruits,  roots,  pith,  flowers,  stalks,  leaves,  and  barks  are,  in  brief, 
the  eight  sources  of  wines.  The  ninth  is  sugar.  From  these,  by  permutations 
and  combinations  infinite  varieties  of  wine  are  capable  of  being  produced. 
Amongst  these,  four  and  eighty  varieties  are  regarded  beneficial.  Surd, 
Sauvira,  Tushodaka,  Maireya,  Medaka,  and  Dhanyamla  are  from  paddy 
(vide  pp.  290-291,  of  Sutrasthana,  ante.  Also  pp.  362-365,  bearing  on  “  Group 
of  Wines,”  of  same,  ante.)  Madhu  and  Sidhu  were  probably  manufactured 
from  honey.  At  least,  honey  must  have  entered  largely  into  their  composition. 
Dadhi,  Dadhimanda,  and  Uda9wit  appear  to  have  been  made  from  milk.  It  is 
difficult  to  say  what  particular  wine  was  called  Madira.  Madira  was  a  common 
name  for  all  intoxicating  drinks  produced  by  permutation. — T. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA  635 

They  should  next  be  duly  corrected,  by  adding  oil,  fat,  honey, 
marrow,  salt,  and  inspissated  juice  of  the  sugar  cane. 

While  still  agreeably  warm,  the  enemata  should  be  duly 
administered  to  the  patient  suffering  from  vitiated  wind. 

Thus  ends  the  Group  of  Sours.160 

Saindhava  (a),  Sauvarchala  ( b ),  Kala  (c),  Vit  ( d ),  Pakya  ( e ), 


a.  The  following  extract  from  U.  C.  Duttaes  Materia  Medica  of  the 
Hindus,  p.  84,  on  Saindhava  lavana  may  b.e  read  with  interest. 

"  Saindhava  literally  means  produced  in  Sinde,  or  the  country  along  the 
Indus.  The  term  is  applied  to  rock  salt  which  is  regarded  as  the  best  of  salts. 
Three  varieties  of  rock  salt  are  recognised,  vie.,  white,  red  and  crystalline. 
The  pure  white  crystalline  salt  is  preferred  for  medicinal  use.  For  alimentary 
purposes  also,  rock  salt  is  considered  superior  to  the  other  varieties.  It  is 
regarded  as  digestive,  appetizing,  sweet  and  agreeable,  and  is  much  used  in 
dyspepsia  and  other  abdominal  diseases.” 

The  true  etymology  of  Saindhava  is  "  derived  from  Sindhu,  meaning 
the  sea.  The  name  Sindhu,  however,  occurs  in  the  MahabhSrata  as  that  of 
the  country  or  region  lying  about  the  lower  course  of  the  Indus,  vie.,  the 
country  that  is  now  known  as  Sinde  or  Sindh,  having  Kurrachi  for  its  chief 
seaport.  Its  ruler,  Jayadratha,  played  an  important  part  in  the  great  war 
of  the  Mahabharata.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  rock  salt  comes  from  the  Panjab, 
and  not  from  Sind  alone,  as  the  lower  portion  of  the  Panjab  is  called.  Ortho¬ 
dox  Hindus  use,  for  alimentary  purposes,  only  this  kind  of  salt. — T. 

h.  Vide  note  in  page  382  of  Sutrasthana,  ante. 

The  physicians  of  the  North  West  Provinces  take  Sauvarchala  as 
identical  with  Kala  or  Kala  salt. 

.  c.  The  separate  mention,  however,  of  Kala  here  indicates  that  it  is  a  variety 
of  salt  distinct  from  the  others  mentioned. 

d.  Vide  note  in  page  382  of  Sutrasthana,  ante. 

e.  Wilson  takes  it  as  another  name  of  Vit  salt.  Ayurvedartha  Chandrika 
explains  that  Pakkya  is  another  name  of  Vit,  as  also  of  Sauvarchala,  and 
also  of  Panga  or  Pancuja.  Both  of  them  have  erred.  The  separate  mention 
of  Pakya  here  shows  that  it  represents  a  variety  distinct  from  the  others.  The 
etymology  would  seem  to  indicate  that  the  name  was  applied  to  some  salt 
arrived  at  by  a  process  of  cooking  or  boiling. 


636 


CH  A  R  A  KA  -  SA  MH1TA. 


Anupa  ( f ),  Kupya  (g),  Valuka  ( h ),  Elamulaka  (z">,  Samudra  (j) 
Raumaka  (k),  Audbhida  (l),  Aushara  (in),  Patiya  (n),  Syateyaka 
(0),  Pancuja  (p),  and  others  of  this  kind  which  are  numbered 
in  the  Group  of  Salts,  should  be  combined  with  articles  that  are 
sour,  or  boiled  in  hot  water,  and  then  mixed  with  substances 
that  are  oily  (such  as  clarified  butter,  oils,  &c.) 

f.  It  is  difficult  to  identify  what  sort  of  salt  had  this  name  applied  to  it. 
The  etymology  would  seem  to  indicate  that  it  came  from  marshy  lands. 
Ayurvedartha  ChandrikS.  quotes  the  description  given  in  Bhavaprakaca 
of  the  tract  of  land  that  is  called  5.nupa — “  A  tract  that  abounds  with 
rivers,  and  lakes  and  hills  ;  that  is  adorned  with  full-blown  lotuses  ;  inhabi¬ 
ted  by  ducks  and  cranes  and  Karandavas  (Vallisveria)  and  Chakravdkas 
(Anas  casarca)  ;  that  is  the  home  of  the  deer,  the  boar,  the  buffalo,  the 
Ruru,  and  the  Rohi  ;  that  is  enriched  by  plentiful  trees  and  flowers  ;  endued 
with  indigo  plants,  corn  of  diverse  kinds,  and  fruits  of  various  sorts ;  and 
that  is  embellished  with  many  fields  for  the  cultivation  of  paddy,  and  myri¬ 
ads  of  plantain  plants ;  &c.”  According  to  this  description,  Lower  Bengal 
would  be  an  Anupa  region. 

g.  Derived  from  wells,  as  the  etymology  implies.  The  process  of 
manufacture  is  not  known. 

h.  The  commentators  content  themselves  with  the  remark  that  all  these 
names  are  derived  from  the  localities  whence  the  salts  were  procured.  This 
particular  variety  {viz.,  Valuka)  is  not  identifiable  now  ;  probably,  it  was 
some  kind  of  salt  with  an  admixture  of  sand. 

i.  Not  identifiable  ;  probably,  a  salt  with  an  admixture  of  the  ashes  of  some 
vegetable  root. 

j.  Vide  note  in  page  383,  Sutrasthana,  ante. 

k.  “  Romaka  (or  Raumaka),  also  called  Qakambhari,  is  the  salt  produced 
from  the  Sambar  Lake  near  Ajmere.  The  name  Romaka  is  said  to  be 
derived  from  a  river  called  Ruma.  It  is  obtained  by  the  evaporation  of 
salt  water  in  the  shape  of  clear  rhomboidal  crystals.  It  has  a  pungent  taste, 
and  is  considered  laxative  and  diuretic,  in  addition  to  possessing  the  other 
properties  of  salts.  It  is  said  to  be  the  best  and  purest  of  evaporated  salts.” 
U.  C.  Dutta’s  Materia  Mediea  of  the  Hindus. 

l.  Vide  note  in  page  382,  Sutrasthana,  ante. 

m.  The  etymology  would  seem  to  indicate  that  it  was  a  variety  of  salt 
derived  from  barren  fields,  that  is,  soil  abounding  with  saline  matter. 

n.  Not  identifiable. 

o.  Not  identifiable. 

j>.  Vide  note  in  page  383,  Sutrasthana,  ante. 


Exofessox  33.  IB.  Cowell,  Cambridge : — A  careful  translation  of  this 
ancient  work  will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may 
succeed  in  translating  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

E.  C3-.  Eccles,  Esq.  I  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York  : — The  matter  is  certainly 

IS.  IE3.  IDavis,  Esq..,  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences, 
Philadelphia  : — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 


studied 


IE71,  Castle,  Esq. — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with 
its  importance.  1  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

Dl.  EC.  C.  ■wood,  Philadelphia  : — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and 
sincerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  1  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  quite  a  long  notice  Of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  semi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Ex.  Edlittra,,  Chief  Medical  Officer  of  Cashmere  : — No  medical  I 
should  be  without  Charaka  ;  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he 
this  great  work  of  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Ex.  Oscar  Old-sTserg-.  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North- 
Western  University  ;  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition  : — I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I, shall  take  occasion  to  speak 
of  it  in  the  Apothecary . 

Frofessoi  O.  33  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A..-. — 
Be  assured  [  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking.  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

-i&.'fo'bot  EC  Buck.  Esq..,  19  East38th  Street,  New  York  : — Wish  you  a 

EvEoxxs.  O’.  O-s'b'ba.rd-,  Dersel'hofbir  Traise,  Darmstadt  : — The  difficulties  you 
speak  of  in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with,— a  German  proverb  says 

I Dr  ±3.U3^T.,’Wria«ip,ley-,’  Elh.  30,  Gk  Usdl  30,  E.  E.  IMI.  S.  Saint 

Louis,  V.  S.  A.  Editor  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist  : — I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  it  in 
our  columns  and  advising  eur  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the 
entire  English  writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at 
their  disposal.  The  work  is  certainly  highly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  general  interest. 

JSA lorvs:  El.  Le  Soudoi,  Lihrarie  Strangers  174,  Boulevaise,  Saint  Germain  : — 
Beg  to  Send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  dow»  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

C kL axles  Eice,  Esq..,  New  York  Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense 
you  for  your  laborious  undertaking.  1  will  eveatually  send  you  a  copy  of  s 
will  write. 


.  review  which  I 


"Vty.O.Eon.Xl.exjee,  Esq..  6.  Park  Street,  Cvlcutta  My  dear  Pundit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya, — 1  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
vthem  1  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you  [about 
drawing  their  attention  to]  vour  excellent  work.  Writing  again  sometime  after, — An 
Ayurvedic  physician  of  note*  *  *  considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts  to 
diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Eiaxtlxolcixa,  3bv£.  E.  Philadelphia  ■— I  have  been  exceedingly  struck 
with  the  profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  1 
have  ever  met  before  in  Medical  literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon's 


El.  -£s-.  3D.  Eli-illips,  Esq.,  O.  S.  Magistrate  ond  Collector,  Maimensing  : — 
The  translation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  io  a  layman. 

3E.  C.  Emtt,  Esq..  C.  S.  O.  I.  E.  Magistrate  and  Collector  : — Your  patriotic 
labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  ***  You  deserve 
the  especial  acknowledgements- of  the  medical  profession. 

C3-. -A-.  G-xiexsoxv  Esq..,  C.  £3.  Gya  ■. — It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall 
be  obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 


Ex.  G-xifffLtib.  Evans,  lidL.  E.,  Brynkynall,  Bangor  North  Wales. — The 
boon  is  exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  traeing  the  origin, 
growth  and  development  of  medical  science,  also  illustrates  some  ancient  social  customs 
of  India. 


GEO.  H  GLAUS.,  Iff.  A.,  Iff.  D.,  Philadelphia  AS 
I  go  over  each  fasciculus  I  always  arrive  at  cue  con¬ 
clusion  and  that  is  this  if  the  physicians  of  the 
present  day  would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopia  all 
the  modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their 
patients  according  tc  the  method  of  Charaka,  there 
would  he  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and  fewer 
chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  Z  look  forward  with 
pleasure  to  the  completion  of  the  work,  for  I  am 
anxious  tc  have  it  all. 

F.H.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.C.S.:— X  have  read  Charaka- 
Samhita  with  interest.  It  is  marvellously  like 
Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is 
wonderful  to  note  the  comparatively  advanced  views 
held  hy  the  sages  of  your  country  and  hew  complete¬ 
ly  they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we 
moderns  hatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the  enlighten¬ 
ment  of  this  age. 


4  7'35? 


#1? 


GKARAKA-SAMHITA 


(TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH). 


PUBLISHED 

BY 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita 
(in  original)  with  Commentaries  ;  Bengali  and 
Hindi  Translator  of  Charaka-Samhita 
and  of  Susruta-Samhita  ;  Editor  of 
Chikitsa-Sammilani  (Medical  Journal 

in  Bengali) ;  PRACTITIONER  OF  THE 

Hindu  System  of  Medicine, 

&c.,  &c.,  &c.,  &c., 

CALCUTTA  = 


SANIEL  &  SONS, 

66,  South  Road,  Entally. 


( The  Right  of  Translation  is  Reserved). 


OPINIONS  OF  EMINENT  MEN.- 


PROFESSOR  E.  B.  COWELL,  Cambridge  A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient 
work  will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  .succeed  in 
translating  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.-  ECCLES,  esq,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York  :... The  matter  is  certainly  of 
great  interest-  to  me. 

E.  P.  DAVIS,  esq,.  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences, 

Philadelphia  :... Thank  you  for  this  -  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature.  : 

F.  A.  CASTLE,  esq. ..Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

Dr.  H.  C.  WOOD,  Philadelphia,:... I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and 
sincerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  ' 
the  happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  quite  a  long  notice  of 
it  which  I  expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  semi-official 
orgari  of  the  greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  MITTRA,  Chief  Medical  Officer  of  ,  Cashmere  :... No  medical  man’s  library 
should  be  .without  Charaka  ;  for  his  education  cannot  be,  completed  unless  he  has  studied 
this  great  work  of  practical  and  philosophical  medicine./ 

Dr.  OSCAR  OLUSBERG.  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North- 
Western  University:  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition  - 
I  afn  already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  fake  occasion  , 
to  speak  of  it  in  ,  the  Apothecary. 

PROFESSOR  L.  E.  SAYER,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  :... 
Be  assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  Way  possible  iu  your  noble  undertaking.  I 
regard  it  as  very  important.  - 

ABBOT  H.  BUCK,  esq.,  19  East  38th  Street,  New  York  :... Wish  you  a-  success 
in  your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

MONS.  T.  GEBBARD ,  Derselhofber  Traise  Dramstadt  :...The  difficulties  you  speak;' 
.  of  in '  getting  out  the  translation  !  fully  sympathise  with,... a  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time,  comes  out  well, 

Dr  H.  N.  WHELPLEY,  Phd.,  G.  M  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A.  Editor 
Meyer  Brothers^  Druggist  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  it  in  our  columns  and 

advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  ,  English  ' 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  Work,  is  certainly,  highly  scientific  and  as  Well. as  of  general  interest; 

MONS  H.  LE  SOUDOR.  Librarie  Etrangere  174.  Boulevaise.  Saint  Germain  Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of'  Charaka. 

CHARLES  RICE,  esQ.,  New  .York  :... Wish  you-every  success  that  can  recompense 
you  for  your  laborious  undertaking.  L will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  bf  a  review  which 
I  will  write.  . 

W.  C.  BONNERJEE,  esq.  6.  Park  street,  Calcutta  :... My  dear  Pundit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya,...I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen 
of  whom  I  spoke;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to 
you  [about  drawing  their  attention  to]  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again  sometime 
after,. ..An  Ayurvedic  physician^  of  note*  *  Considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your 
efforts  to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of— the'  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

FAUL  BURTHOLOM,  jVI.  D.  Philadelphia  :... I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with 
the  profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I 
have  ever  met  before  in  Medical  literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s 
reflections.  - 

H.  A.  D.  PHILLIPS,  esq.  C.  S.  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Maimensing  :...The 
translation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  DUTT,  esq.  C.;  S.  C.  I.  E.  Magistrate  and  Collector  ;... Your  patriotic  labours 
deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun.  *  *  *  You  deserve  the 
especial  acknowledgements  of  the  medical  profession. 

G.  A.  GRIERSON,  esq.,  C.  S.  Gya  :..  It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by-  your  getting  my.  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  Work. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS  OF  PART  XXI. 


The  several  groups  of  drugs  used  as  Enemata  of  both  kinds, 
and  those  used  as  Errhines,  are  concluded  in  the  last  Lesson  of 
the  Division  called  Vimana. 

The  Division  called  Qarira  then  begins.  The  first  Lesson  of 
this  Division  is  called  “  Katidhapurushiyam,”  meaning  “  How  many 
kinds  of  Persons  are  there.” 

Agnivega  asks  a  number  of  questions  about  Purusha  and  Prakriti. 
The  Sankhya  system  of  Philosophy  is  set  forth  in  brief  in  the 
answers  of  Punarvasu. 

The  aphorisms  which  find  a  place  in  this  Lesson  are  highly 
abstruse.  Copious  notes  have  been  added  for  bringing  out  their 
sense  and  connection. 

To  the  general  reader  desirous  of  obtaining  an  insight  into  the 
nature  of  the  speculations  indulged  by  the  Hindu  philosophers  of 
old  upon  such  questions  as  the  nature  of  the  Soul  or  Self  and  its 
connection  with  what  is  called  the  external  universe,  the  contents 
of  this  Lesson  will  prove  highly  interesting. 

The  topics  discussed  have  very  little  connection  with  Medicine 
or  Medical  Science.  As  Charaka’s  treatise,  however,  professes  to 
be  a  compilation  on  the  Science  of  Life,  the  Origin  of  Life  is, 
therefore,  taken  up  for  discussions  as  also  the  bearings  of  what 
is  called  Life  to  the  Eternal  principle,  viz.,  the  Soul  or  Self  in¬ 
vested  with  body. 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


63? 


While  still  agreeably  warm,  the  preparation  should  be  duly 
administered  by  the  physician  conversant  with  his  science,  as 
gnemata  to  a  patient  suffering  under  vitiated  wind. 

Even  this  is  the  group  of  Salts. 

Pippali  (a),  Pippalimula  (b),  Hasti-pippaii(y),  Chavya  (d),  Chitraka  (s'), 
Cringavera  (/),  Maficha  (g),  Ajamoda  (/z),  Vidanga  (z'),  Tumvuru  (j),  Pilti 
(k),  Tejaswini  (/),  Ela  (in),  Kushtha  («),  Bhallatakasthi  (6),  Hingu  (p), 
Kilima  (q),  Mulaka  (r),  Sarshapa  (s),  I^tina  (f),  Karanja  (u),  Cigru  (v), 
Madhiira-Cigru  (w),  Kharapushpa  (x),  Bhustfiria  (jy),  Sumukha  (s), 


а.  Piper  longum,  ZiM  j  sym  Chdvica  Roxhirghi  ;  Miq. 

б.  The  roots  of  the  above. 

c.  Otherwise  called  Gaja  pippali.  A  large  variety  of  the  ab  ove.  j 

d.  Piper  Chaba ,  Hunter  ;  syn.  Chavica  ojfficinaruni,  Miq. 

e.  Plumbago  Zeylahica,  Linn. 

f.  Zingiber  officinale,  Roxb.  Dry  ginger; 

g.  Piper  nigrum ,  Linn  :  Black  pepper. 

h.  Pimpihella  involucrala  ;  syn.  Apiurn  involucratum,  Roxb. 

i.  Embelia  Ribes,  Burm.j  syn.  Zanthoxylum  hostile ,  Wall. 

j.  Zanthoxylum  dldtuni.  Rdxb.  j  syn.  Embelia  gldndulifera,  Wight. 

k.  S&lvadora  Indicd,  Wight. 

l.  Otherwise  called  Tejavati.  Tejval  in  Bengali.  The  well-known  wood 
brought  from  Nepal. 

m.  Elettaria  cardamomum, 

n.  Saussured  auriculata\  syn  Ap  Id  taxis  duriculaia,  D.  C. 

o.  The  seeds  of  Sehiecarpus  Anacardium ,  Linn. 

p.  Ferula  Assafcelida,  Linn. 

q.  Another  name  of  Devadaru.  Cedrus  Deodard,  LoUd ;  syn.  Pinus  Deodard, 
Roxb. 

r.  Gangadhard  explains  that  it  is  a  variety  of  Sarshapa  of  mustard  seeds. 

s.  Mustard  seed's. 

i.  Allium  sativum ,  Liiui.  Garlic. 

u.  Pdngdmia  glabra,  Vent.;  syn.  Galedupa  Indicd,  Ldink. 

v.  Moringa  pterygosperma,  Gdertn.j  syn  FTyperahtherd  nioringa,  Willd. 

w.  A  variety  of  the  above. 

x.  Otherwise  called  Varvara.  ("Babui  Tulsi  in  Bangali)  ;  Ocimum  Basilicttniy 
Limi.;  syn.  Ocimum  pilosuni,  Willd. 

y.  Otherwise  called  Gandhatrina.  Andropogon  Schoeiianthus,  Linn. 

z.  A  variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum,  Linn. 

St 


-6tf 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Surasa  (a)  Kutheraka  (b),  Kundara  (c),  Kalamalaka  (</),  Parnasa  (e), 
Keshavaka  (_/),  Phanijjhaka  (g),  Kshara  (/«),  Mutra  (7),  and  Pitta  (/). 

Of  these,  and  of  others  of  this  kind,  which  are  numbered 
in  the  Group  called  Astringents,  of  articles  used  as  drugs, 
‘the  physician  should  cut  into  small  pieces  those  which  should 
cbe  so  cut,  and  pulverise  those  which  should  be  reduced  to  powder. 

They  should  then  be  cooked  in  cow’s  urine  and  duly 
corrected,  and  mixed  with  honey,  oils,  and  salts. 

While  still  agreeably  warm,  the  preparation  should  be 
duly  administered,  by  the  physician  well  versed  in  his  science, 

-  as  enemata  to  a  patient  suffering  under  vitiated  phlegm. 

Thus  ends  the  Group  of  Astringents. 162 

Chandana  (&),  Nalada  (/),  Kritamala  (m),  Naktamala  («),  Nimva 
(o),  Tumvuru  (p),  Kutaja  (q),  Haridra  (r),  Daru-haridra  (r),'  Musta  ( t), 


a.  A  variety  of  the  Ocimum  sanctum ,  Linn. 

~b.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

c.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

d.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

e.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

.  f.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

g.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

h.  Saline  ashes  of  vegetables. 

i.  The  urine  of  different  animals,  vis.,  those  which  are  mentioned  in 
Lesson  i  of  Sutrasthana,  ante. 

j.  The  bile  of  different  animals.  (These  are  mentioned  in  a  subsequent 
-portion  of  the  treatise). 

k.  The  red  variety  only  is  used.  Pterocarpus  santalinus,  Linn. 

l.  Otherwise  called  Ushira,  (in  Bengali,  Benamul).  Andropogon  muricatum. 
Rets.  The  roots  only  are  used. 

m.  Otherwise  cabled  Aragbadha.  (In  Bengali,  Sondhalia  or  Sondalu.)  Cassia 
fistula ,  Linn.;  syn.  Cathartocarpus  fistula,  Pers. 

n.  Otherwise  called  Karanja.  Pangamia  glabra,  Vent.  ;  syn.  Galedufia. 
Indi(a.,  Lamk. 

o.  Melia  Azadirachta,  Linn.,  syn.  Azadirachta  Indica,Juss. 

p.  Zanthoxylum  alalum.  Roxb syn.  Zanthoxylum  hostile.  Wall. 

q.  Holarrhena  antidysenterica.  Wall.  (Called  Kurchi  in  Bengali.) 

r.  Circutna  longa.  Roxb. 

s.  Berberis  Asiatica,  D.  C. 

t.  Cyperus  rotundus,  Linn. 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A, 


633? 

Murva  (a),  Ki'ratatiktaka  (6),  Katurohini  (c),  Trayamana.  (A),  Karira  or 
Karavira  (e),  Kevuka  (/),  Katillaka  (g),  Vrisha  (h),  Mandukaparni 
(z^Karkotaka-Q),  Vartaku  rIi),  Karkaga  (/1,  Kak-amachi  (: m ),  Karavalli  (zz), 
Kakodunrvarika  (o)pSushavi  Ativisha(^),  P&tola  (r),  Kunaka  (s\  Pa- 
tlia  (t),  Gu.du.chi  (u.),  Vetxagra  (p)/Vetasa(z£>);Vikankata  (x),  Somavalka  (y), 


a-.  S'ansevierai  Z'eylanica,  Willd..;  syii;  S'anseviera  Roxburghiana,  Schult. 

b.  Otherwise  called  Bhunimba;  (or  Chireta).  Agathotes  cherayla. 

c.  Otherwise  called  Katuka.  Picrorhiza  Kurroa.  Roxb.. 

d. .  Ficus '  heterophyllous  Linn.  fill 

e.  Otherwise  called  Karavi.  Nerium-  odor  urn,  So  land.'  Some  texts  read' 
Karira  before  Karavira;  The  former  is  Capparis  aphylla ,  Roth. 

f  Otherwise  called  Kemuka.,  Castus  speciosus,  Linn 

g.  Otherwise  called  Kara vella.  (In; Bengali,  Karala.)  Momordica  charantia;. 
Linn.  ;  syn.  M'omor&ica  muricata;  Willd:. 

h.  Otherwise  called  Vasaka  (as  explained  by.  “Ayurvedartha-Chandrilca”) 
Justicia  Adhatoda,  Roxb.;  syn.  Adhatodd  Vasica ,  Nees. 

ii  Called  in  Bengali,  Thulkuri.  Hydrocotyle  Asiatica.  Linm 

j.  Momordica  mixta ,  Roxb.  ;  syn.  Capparis.  sodada.  R.  Br. 

k.  Solanum  Melongena,  Linn. 

l.  Chakrapani  explains  it  to-be  a  variety  of  Patola,.  i.e.-,  Trichosanthes  dioica 
Roxb.  Gangadhara.  takes  it  as  implying-  K'ampillaka,  i.e.,  Mai  lotus  Philipensis,.. 
Mull.  Arg.;  syn.  Rottlera  tinctoria,  Roxb , 

m. .  Solanum  nigrum ,  Linn.. 

n.  Gangadhara  thinks  that  the  larger  variety  is  intended  of  Momordica  cha-. 
rantia,  Linn.;  syn,  Momordica  muricata ,  Willd. 

o:  Gangadhara  takes  it  to  imply  ICothodumvara  ;  a  variety  "of  Udumvara,. 
£e,  Ficus  glomerata,  Willd.;  syn.  Cove  Ilia- glomerata,  Miq. 

p.  A  wild  variety  of  Karavella-,  or  Momordica  chcuantia ,  Linn-.. 

q.  Axonitum  heterophyllum,  Wall.. 

r.  Trichosanthes  dioica-,  Roxb.  (The-  longer  or  larger  variety  is  implied.) 
j.]  The  smaller-variety  of  the  above,  as  explained  by  Gangadhara. 

t:  Stephania  hernandifolia,  Linn. 

u.  Tinospora  cordifolia ,  Miers.  ;  syn.  Menispermum  cordifolium,  Willd. 

v.  The  ends  or  heads  of  Calamus  Rotang,  Linn.;  syn.  Calamus  Roxburghii,. 
Griff. 

w.  Ditto.;(other  parts  than  the  head  are  implied). 

x.  Flacourtia  Ramontchi,  L’HerL;  syn.  Flacourtia  sapida,  Roxb . 

y.  The  white  variety  of  Khadira  or  Acacia  catechu,  Linn.  ; 


640 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Saptaparna  (a),  Sumanas.  (b\  Arka  (c),  Avalguj'a  (d),  Vara  (e), 
Tagara  (/),  Aguru  (g),  Hrivera  (h\  Ushira  'i). 

Of  these  and  of  others  of  this  kind,  which  are  numbered  in 
the  Group  of  Bitters  among  drugs,  those  should  be  cut  into 
pieces  which  deserve  to  be  so  cut,  and  those  should  bo  pulverised 
which  deserve'to  be  reduced  to  that  state. 

They  should  next  be  washed  in  water  and  soaked  therein,  and 
then  cooked  and  corrected,  and  then  mixed  with  honey,  oils,  and 
salts. 

While  still  agreeably  warm,  the  physician  well  versed  in  his 
science  should  administer  it  as.  enemata  to  a  patient  afflicted  by 
vitiated  phlegm. 

Unto  a  patient  afflicted  by  vitiated  bile,  the  physician  versed 
in  his  science  should  duly  administer  the  same  when  it  has  cooled, 

Thus  ends  the  Group  of  Bitters.168 

Priyangu  (/),  Ananta(£),  Amra  (/),  Amvashthaki 'm),  Katwanga  (n\ 


a.  Alstonia  scholaris,  R.  Br, ;  syn.  Echites  scholar  is,  Roxb. 

b.  Otherwise  called  Malati.  Aganosma  caryophyllata,  G.  Don.  j  syn.  Echites 
caryophyllata ,  Roxb. 

c.  Calatropis  gigantea  or  procerct ,  R.  Br.  j  syn.  Ascleptas  gigantea,  Willd, 

d.  Otherwise  called  Somraji.  Vernonia  anthelmintica ,  Willd.j  syn,  Serratula 
anthelmintica ,  Roxb.  (The  seeds  are  used) 

e.  A  name  of  Triphala  or  the  tripple  fruits,  viz,  Chebulic  myrobalans.  Ter-, 
minalia  Bellerica ,  and  Phyllanthus  Emblica. 

f.  Taber ncemontana  coronaria,  Linn , 

g.  Aquilaria  Agallocha ,  Roxb. 

h.  Pavonia  odorata ,  Willd. 

i.  Andropogan  muricatum ,  Retz ,  It  will  be  noticed  that  Nalada,  which 
occurs  as  the  second  in  this  list,  is  explained  by  the  Commentators  as  equivalent 
to  Ushira.  The  mention  of  both  seems  to  indicate  either  that  two  varieties 
of  the  plant  are  intended,  or  that  Nalada  is  not  exactly  what  is  known  as  Ushira, 

j.  Aglaia  Roxburghiana,  W.  A. 

k.  Hemidesmus  Indicus,  R.  Br  j  syn.  Asclepias  Pseudosarsa ,  Roxb. 

l.  Mangifera  Indica,  Linn.  (The  seeds,  as  explained  by  Gangadhara, 
are  intended). 

m.  Otherwise  called  Patha  as  explained  by  Gangadhara.  Stephania 
•  hernandifolia,  Walp.  ;  syn.  Cissampelos  hernandifolia ,  Linn. 

n.  Otherwise  called  Cyonaka,  Coloscmthes  Indica ,  Bl.  ;  syn.  Bignonia 
Indica ,  Linn, 


CHARAK  SAMHITA. 


641 


Lodhra  (a),  Mocharasa  (b),  Samanga  (c),  Dhatakipushpa  (d),  Padma 
(e),  Padmakegara  (f).  Jambira  (g),  Amra  (k),  Plaksha  (z'),Vata  (/),  Kapi-. 
tana  ( k ),  Udumvara  (l),  Agwattha  (m),  Bhallatakasthi  («),  Agwantaka  (<?), 
Qirisha  (ft),  Qinggapa  (q),  Somavalka  (r),  Tindnka  (j),  Piyala  (/),  Vadara, 
(u)  Khadira  (v),  Saptaparna  (w),  Agvvakarna  (x  ,  Syandana  (y),  Arjuna  (z), 


a.  Symftlacos  racemosa,  Roxb. 

b.  The  gum  of  Rombax  Malabaricum. 

c.  This  name  is  applied  to  many  plants.  Perhaps,  Lojj  alu  is  indicated, 
i,  e.,  Mimosa  ftudica ,  Linn.  The  sensitive  plant. 

d.  Woodfordia  floribunda ,  Salisb  ;  syn.  Grislea  Tomentosa ,  Roxb. 

0.  Otherwise  called  Padmacharini,  or  Sthalapadma,.  Hibiscus  muta- 

bilis,  Linn.. 

f.  The  filaments  of  the  lotus,  i.  e.,  Nelumbium  sfteciosum,  Linn. 

g.  Eugenia  Jambolana ,  Lamk.  ;  s.yn  Syzygium  Jambolana,  W.  a,nd  A, 

1 h.  Mangifera  Indica,  Linn,  (The  seeds  are  used). 

i.  Otherwise  called  Parkati.  Ficus  infectoria ,  Willd. 

j.  Ficus  Bengalensis,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Ficus  Indica,  Roxb. 

k.  A  variety  of  Acwattha,  i.  e.  Ficus  religiosa ,  Linn. 

l.  Ficus  glomei-ata,  Willd.  :  syn.  Cavellia  glomerata,  Miq, 
vi.  Ficus  religiosa,  Linn, 

n.  The  seeds  of  Semecarftus  Anacardium ,  Linn , 

o.  Probably  another  name  for  Pashanabhedi,  i.  e.,  Coleus  Amboinicus,  Linn,\ 
gyn.  Coleus  aromalicus,  Benth, 

ft.  Albizzia  Lebbek,  Bentli.  ;  syn.  Mimosa  Sirisa,  Roxb , 

q.  Dalbergia  sissoo,  Roxb. 

r.  Otherwise  called  Khadira.  Acacia  Catechu,  Linn.  ,  Mimosa  Catechu, 
Linn.  (The  bark,  probably,  is  intended). 

.s'.  Diosftyros  Embryoftteris ,  Pers.  ;  syn.  Diosftyros  Glutinosa,  Koenig, 

t.  Bhuchanania  latifolia,  Roxb. 

u.  Zizyftlius  Jujuba ,  Lamk, 

v.  Acacia  Catechu ,  Linn.  :  Mimosa  Catechu,  Linn.  (The  exudation  is, 
probably,  intended), 

w.  Alstonia  scholaris,  R.  Br,  ;  E chiles  scho laris,  Roxb. 

x.  Shorea  robusta,  Gaertn. 

y.  Otherwise  called  Tinisa.  Ougenia  dalbergioides,  Benth,  ;  Dalbergia 
oojeinensis,  Roxb. 

3.  Terminalia  Arjuna ,  Bedd  ;  syn.  Pentafttera  Arjuna,  Roxb. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


642 

Asana  (a),  Arimeda  (b\  Elavaluka  (c),  Paripelava  (d),  Kadamba 
(4  Qallaki  (/),  Jingini  (g\  Kaga  (h),  Kageruka  (z),  Rajakageruka  (/)„ 
Katphala  (le),  Vanga  (/),  Padmaka  («z),  Agoka  (zz),  Qala  (o'),  Dhava  (/>), 
Swarja  (q),  Bhurjja  (r),  Asana  (s),  Kharapushpa  (7).  Qauri  (u), 


a.  Otherwise  called  Pitasala,  Terminals  tomentosa ,  W.  and  A.  ;  syn.. 
Pentaptera  tomentosa,  Roxb. 

b.  Called  in  Bengali  G'ooa-babl'a.  Acacia  Farnesiana ,  Willd.  ;  syn-.  Mimosa- 
Farnesiana,  Roxb .  Gangadhara  takes  it  as  another  name  of  Vit-khadira,  a. 
variety  of  Acacia  Catechu ,  Linn. 

c.  A  red  powder  sold  under-  this  name.  The  seed  of  some  plant  not 
generally  known.  Gangadhara  takes  it  as  implying  Tejava-la,  a-  kind  of 
wood  apparently  dry  but  juicy  within.  It  is  brought  from  Nepal. 

d.  Otherwise  called  Kaiva>rta.-mustaka.  A  variety  of  Cyperus  rotundics,. 
Linn. 

e.  Nauclea  kadamba-,  Roxb-.  syn,  Anthocephalus .  Kadamba ,  Benthi 

and  Hook. 

f.  Boswellia  serrata,  Colebr. 

g.  Called  in  Bengali  Jiol.  Odina  Wodier,  Roxb'.  Gangadhara  takes  it: 
as  another  name  of  Manjishta-,  i.  e.  Rubra-  Cor  difolia,  Linn.. ;  s.yn.  Rubra ; 
Manjista,  Roxb.. 

h.  Saccharum  spontaneum.,  Linn.. 

%.  Scirpus  kysoor,  Roxb. 

j.  A  variety  of  the  above.  (It  is  larger  in  size-)’.. 

k.  Myrica  Sapida,  Will. 

l.  Bambusa  arundinacea-,  Rets. 

m.  Otherwise  called  Padmakashta,  as  explained  by-the  Commentators;, 
“  It  is  a  fragrant  wood  resembling  toon  brought  from  Malwa.  or  Southern 

India  ”  U.  C.  Duffs .  Materia  Me  diem. 

n.  Saraca  Indica ,  Linn.  ;  Jonesia  Asoka,  Roxb . 

o.  Shorea  robusta,  Gaertn. 

p.  Anogeissus  la-tifolia,  Wall.  ;  syn.  Canocarpus  latifolia-,  Roxb.. 

q.  The  exudation  of  Shorea  robusta. 

r.  Betula  Bhojapatra,  Wall. 

s.  By  this,  Krishna-sala  is  implied.  A  variety  of  Terminalia  tonientosa,. 
W.  and  A. 

t.  Otherwise  called  Kharamanjari  or  Apamarga.  Achyranthes  aspera. t 
Linn. 

u.  Acacia  Slima,  Ham.  ;  syn.  Mimosa  Suma,  Roxb. 


charaka  samh/tA. 


Hi 

Mathi  (a),  Kovaraka  (b),  Tunga  (c),  Ajakarna  (d),  Agwakarna  (e), 
Sphurjaka  (f),  Vibhitaka  (g),  Kumbhika  (/z),  Pushkaravija  (z),  Visa 
(;■),  Mrinala  (k),  Tala  (/),  Kharjjura  (in),  and  Taruni  (n). 

Of  these,  as  also  of  others  of  this  kind  that  are  numbered  in 
the  Group  of  Astringents  among  articles  used  as  drugs,  those 
should  be  cut  into  small  pieces  that  deserve  to  be  so  cut,  and 
those  should  be  pulverised  that  deserve  to  be  reduced  to  powder  ; 
they  should  then  be  washed  with  water,  and  soaked  in  it,  and 
cooked,  and  corrected  and  duly  mixed  with  honey,  oils, 
and  salts. 

While  still  agreeably  warm,  the  physician  versed  in  his  science, 
should  then  duly  administer  it  as  enemata  to  a  patient  afflicted 
by  vitiated  phlegm. 

When  cool,  it  should,  after  being  mixed  with  honey  and 
Ghee,  be  administered  to  a  patient  afflicted  by  vitiated  bile. 

Thus  ends  the  Group  of  Astringents.  164 


a.  Another  name  for  Devadaru.  Cedrus  deodara,  Loud.  ;  syn.  Pinu  s 
deodara,  Roxb. 

b.  A  variety  of  paddy. 

c.  Otherwise  called  Punnaga.  Calophyllum  inophylluin ,  Linn. 

d.  A  variety  of  Sala  or  Asana  as  explained  by  the  Commentators. 

e.  The  largest  variety  of  Shorea  robusta,  Gaertn. 

f.  Another  name  of  Tinduka,  i.  e.,  Diospyros  Embry op terii,  Pers.  ;  syn. 
Diospyros  glutinosa,  Kcenig. 

g.  Terminalia  Bellerica,  Roxb. 

h.  Another  name  of  Katphala  or  Myrica  sapida,  Wall. 

i.  The  seeds  of  Nelumbium  speciosum,  Linn. 

j.  The  stalk  of  the  above. 

k.  The  roots  of  the  above  (as  explained  in  “Ayurvedartha  Chandrika”). 

l.  Borassus  flabelliformis ,  Linn. 

m.  Phoenix  sylvestris,  Roxb ,  (Wild  date  palm). 

n.  Another  name  for  Ghritakumari,  as  explained  by  both  the  Comment¬ 
ators.  Aloe  Lndica,  Royle.j  syn.  Alee  perfoliata ,  Roxb.  It  should  be  noted 
that  Chakrapani  reads  ‘tarunam,’  meaning  ‘of  the  trees,’  viz.,  of  Tala  and 
Kharjjura. 


644  CHAR  AKA  SAMH/tJ. 

Here  are  some  verses  : — 

These  six  groups  that  Mve,  with  a  view  to  the  determinatiort 
of  enemata,  been  enumerated  according  to  (difference  of)  taste, 
should  be  regarded  as  capable  of  curing  all  diseases  (that  are 
curable  by  enemata^,1 

As  regards  those  diseases  in  which  enemata  are  beneficial, 

it  may  be  said  that  applied  in  diverse  combinations  by  a  physician 

of  knowledge  and  wisdom,  the  drugs  included  in  the  six  groups 
mentioned  above  are  capable  of  curing  them  all.  2 

Applied  to  those  diseases  for  Whose  alleviation  they  have  not 

been  declared  (as  proper  remedies),  these  groups  of  drugs  are 

to  be  regarded  even  as  exciting  agents.  3  * 

Thus  have  been  explained  the  six  groups  of  Enemata  classi¬ 
fied  according  to  (the  principle  of)  Taste,  165 ' 

(In  actually  applying  these  drugs)  the  physician  endued  With 
intelligence  should  exclude  that  one,  though  enumerated  in  the 
list,  which  he  regards  as  Unsuitable,  f 

Similarly,  he  should  include  those  particular  ones  which  he  may 
regard  as  suitable,  though  unmentioned  in  the  list. 

He  may  combine  one  part  with  another,  that  is,  orie  drUg  of  one 
group  with  one  of  another,  or  more  than  one  of  one  group  with 
more  than  one  of  another,  taking  reason  as  his  guide. 

Like  the  round  (for  eleemosynary  charity)  of  the  religious 
mendicant,  and  seeds  in  the  hands  of  a  cultivator,  an  aphorism, 
however  brief,  in  the  case  of  persons  gifted  with  intelligence,  becomes 
productive  of  great  knowledge.  \  166 


*  The  original  is  very  roundabout.  The  sense  is  this  !  some  of  the  drugs 
enumerated  as  Enemata  have  been  declared  as  alleviatives  of  diseases  caused 
by  excited  bile  ;  some  as  alleviatives  of  diseases  caused  by  excited  wind  ;  and 
some  as  alleviatives  of  diseases  caused  by  excited  phlegm.  If  those  mentioned 
as  alleviatives  of  one  class  of  diseases  be  applied  to  another  class,  instead 
of  producing  any  beneficial  effect,  they  would  rather  excite  or  increase  the 
diseases  to  which  they  are  misapplied. — T. 

t  The  unsuitability  spoken  of  is  not  explained.  It  may  refer  to  the  unfitnesses  of 
being  combined  with  the  others,  or  the  Unfitness  of  being  administered  to 
a  particular  patient.— T. 

+  The  word  ‘Bhikshuka’  here  implies  a  ‘Bikshu,’  that  is  a  person  who,  having 
given  up  the  world,  depends  on  eleemosynary  charity  for  his  sustenance. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


645 


Hence  as  regards  those  that  are  gifted  with  intelligence,  there  is 
range  for  selection,  rejection,  and  reasoning.  While  as  regards  those 
'that  are  not  blessed  with  intelligence,  it  is  well  for  them  that  they 
should  follow  what  has  been  expressly  laid  down.* 

By  following  the  prescribed  way,  a  physician  may  or  may  not 
succeed  in  accomplishing  his  object,  because  the  examples  laid 
<down  have  neither  been  very  elaborate  nor  very  brief.f 

After  this,  the  drugs  used  for  Anuvasana  (oily  enemata)  are  being 
explained.  Anuvasana  is  oily  enemata.  This  is  of  two  kinds,  viz., 
that  having  immobile  objects  for  its  source,  and  that  having  mobile 
objects  for  its  source.  The  first  may  either  be  oil  or  not  oil  (z.  e. 
liquid  or  not  so). 

Reckoning  both  of  them  as  oils,  in  consequence  of  the  oily  essence 
predominating  in  both,-  instructions  are  being  laid  down. 

As  regards  Anuvasana  of  that  kind  which  has  mobile  objects 
for  its  source,  it  is  such  as  fat,  marrow,  ghee,  and  so  forth. 


The  Scriptures  lay  down  that  such  a  person  should  not,  in  course  of  his  round, 
visit  more  than  three  houses.  If  he  obtains  alms  at  the  first  house  he  visits,  he 
■should  not  visit  a  second  ;  if  failing  at  the  first,  he  succeeds  at  the  second, 
he  should  not  visit  another.  If  he  fails  at  the  third,  he  should  give  up  further 
attempt  t»"  find  food.  He  should,  again,  visit  a  house  when  the  smoke  has 
Ceased  Joccurl  upwards  from  the  cook-room;  when  the  sound  of  the  husking 
rod  has  ceased  ;  when  plates,  etc.,  are  not  seen  to  be  passing  and  repassing  ; 
when  the  very  fire  in  the  cook-room  has  been  extinguished.  ( Vide  Manu, 
Chap.  VI,  verses  54 —  58).  The  little  the  Bhikshu  gets  proves  sufficient  for  him. 
Hence,  the  simile  is  a  happy  one. — T. 

*  The  words,  ‘uha,’  ‘apoha’  and  ‘vitarka,’  are  dialectical  technicalities.  The 
first  implies  the  laying  down  of  a  proposition  that  arises  by  implication  or 
flows  from  what  has  been  said.  The  second  signifies  the  rejection  of  what 
is  defective.  The  third  means  inferences  arrived  at  in  course  of  reasoning. — T. 

+  The  sense  is  this  :  Physicians  gifted  with  intelligence  can  always  select, 
reject,  and  reason,  guided  by  what  has  been  actually  laid  down  in  the  treatises 
they  study.  If  not  blessed  with  intelligence,  they  cannot  do  so,  but  must 
follow  slavishly  what  has  been  laid  down.  By  doing  this,  success  may  or  may 
not  be  achieved.  Of  course,  if  examples  could  be  laid  down  elaborately, 
even  those  that  are  dull,  might  successfully  treat  disease  by  following  the  treatises. 


646 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Amongst  oils,  fat,  marrow,  and  ghee,  the  preceding  one  is  better 
than  the  succeeding  one  in  all  disorders  due  to  vitiation  of  wind 
and  phlegm,  and  in  which  oily  enemata  are  applicable. 

In  disorders  brought  about  by  vitiated  bile,  the  succeeding  one  is 
better  than  the  preceding  one, 

In  disorders  brought  about  by  vitiation  of  all  the  faults  (in 
whatever  combination  they  may  occur),  all  the  drugs  {viz.,  oils,  fat, 
marrow,  and  ghee)  are  applicable  in  consequence  of  the  diverse 
methods  of  correction  (to  which  they  may  be  subjected.)168* 

Next,  as  to  cerebal  purgatives  (or  errhines),  the  following  may  be 
used. 

Apamarga  ( a ),  Pippali  {b),  Maricha  (c),  Vidanga  (d),  Qigru  {e), 


*  There  are  two  kinds  of  enemata,  viz.,  dry  and  oily.  The  former  is  called 
Asthapana,  the  latter,  Anuvasana.  Anuvasana  is  Sneha,  that  is,  oil.  It  is  of 
two  kinds,  viz.,  that  derivable  from  immobile  (or  inanimate)  objects,  and  that 
derivable  from  mobile  (or  animate)  objects.  Of  the  first  kind  are  mustard  and 
other  oils  ;  of  the  second  are  fat,  marrow,  and  ghee  manufactured  from  milk. 
Anuvasana  of  the  first  kind,  that  is,  oils  derived  from  inanimate  objects,  may 
either  be  oils  or  not-oils.  Chakrapani  makes  a  confusion  in  explaining  this. 
He  quotes  a  passage  from  one  of  the  Puranas  which  says  that  mustard  oil  is 
not,  properly,  oil.  The  word  ‘taila’  is  .derived  from  ‘tila’  or  : sesame  seeds. 
Hence,  in  applying  the  name  ‘taila’  to  mustard  oil,  there  is  a  verbal  absurdity. 
The  true  meaning,  however,  has  been  missed  by  Chakrapani.  What  is  meant 
by  oils  and  not-oils  is  this  :  Anuvasana  consists  of  oils  or  of  the  solid  seeds 
which  yeild  those  oils.  The  latter  are  spoken  of  as  ‘not-oils.’ 

In  all  the  Bengal  editions,  there  is  a  blunder  in  reading,  in  consequence  of 
which  the  sense  is  missed.  There  is  a  full  stop  after  ‘Creshtham.’  This  is 
erroneous.  The  sense  is  that  in  disorders  due  to  excitement  of  wind  and 
phlegm,  ‘  Yatha-purvam  Creshtham’ ;  in  disorders  due  to  excitement  of  bile, 
‘Yathottaram  Creshtham  while  in  all  disorders,  ‘Sarve  eva  Yogamayanti.’  The 
blunder  in  punctuation  makes  nonsense  of  the  passage.— T. 

a.  Achyranthes  aspera ,  Linn;  syn.  Achyranthes  bidentata ,  Bl. 

b.  Piper  longum,  Linn  ;  syn.  Chavica  Roxburghii,  Miq. 

c.  Piper  nigrum,  Linn.  Black  pepper. 

d.  Embelia  Ribes,  Burnt ;  syn.  Embelia  glandulifera,  Wight. 

e.  Moringa  pterygosperma,  Gaertn  ;  syn.  Hyperanthera  moringa ,  Wit/d. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


647 


Qirisha  (a),  Kustumvuru  ( b),  Vilwa  (c),  Ajamoda  (d),  Vartaki  ( e) 
Prithwika  (f),  Ela  (g),  and  Harenuka  ( h ),  The  fruits  of  these  are 
taken. 

Sumukha  (*),  Surasa  (/),  Kutheraka  (k),  Gandiraka"  (/), 
Kalamalaka  (m),  Parnasa  («),  Kshavaka  ( 0 ),  Phanijjhaka  (p),  Haridra  (q) 
Qringavera  (r),  Mulaka  (j),  Laguna  (#),  Tarkari  («),  and  Sarshapa  (v). 
The  leaves  of  these  are  taken. 

Arka  (w ,  Alarka  (x),  Kushtha  (y),  Nagadanti  (z),  Vacha  (a), 


a.  Mimosa  sirissa,  Roxb.,  syn.  Albizzia  Lebbeck.y  Benth. 

b.  Zantlioxylum  alatum ,  Bentham  ;  syn.  Zanthoxylum  hostile ,  Wall. 

c.  ZEgle  marmelos ,  Corr. 

d.  Pimpinella  involucrata ,  W.  and  A.  ;  syn.  Apium  involucratum,  Roxb. 

e.  Called  also  Vartaku.  Solanum  Melongena,  Linn. 

f.  Elettaria  cardamomwn  of  the  larger  variety. 

g.  Ditto  of  the  smaller  variety.  Also  called  Amomum  subulatum,  Roxb. 

h.  Also  called  Renuka,  Probably  Piper  aurantiacum,  Wall. 

i.  Ocimutn  sanctum ,  Linn, 
y.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

k.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

/.  A  kind  of  potherb  growing  in  marshy  regions. 

m.  A  black  variety  of  Ocimutn  sanctum. 

n.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

o.  A  variety  of  mustard. 

p.  A  variety  of  Ocimutn  sanctum. 

q.  Cricuma  longa ,  Roxb. 

r.  Zingiber  officinale  Roxb. 

s.  Raphanus  saliva,  Linn.  Garden  radish. 

t.  Allium  sativum,  Linn.  Garlics. 

u.  Otherwise  called  Jayanti.  ZEscliynomene  sesban,  Roxb  ;  syn.  Sesbania 
aculeata,  Pers. 

V.  The  mustard  seed  plant. 

w.  Calatropis  gigantea  or  procera ,  R:  Br.  ;  syn.  Asclepias  gigantea ,  Willd. 

x.  A  variety  of  ditto,  having  white  flowers. 

y.  Sanssurea  auriculata  ;  syn.  Aplotaxis  auriculata ,  Dc. 

z.  Nagadanti,  otherwise  called  Hastidanti,  is  not  Nagadamanl  or  Nagdona. 
It  is  called  (in  Bengal)  Cherapata-Danti,  i.  e.,  Danti  with  indented  leaves.  Danti 
is  Baliospermum  montanum  ;  syn.  Crotan  polyandrum,  Roxb.  (Nagadanti,  in 
common  parlance,  indicates  garden  radish.  In  Medical  scriptures,  it  never 
means  so). 

a.  Acorus  Calamus,  Linn. 


648 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Bhargi-  (a),  Qvveta  (b),  Jyotishrnati  (c),  Gavakshi  (d),  Gandira  (*r), 
Avakpushpa  (/),  Vrisghikali  (g),  Vayastha  (E),  and  Ativissa  (i).  The 
of  these  roots  are  to  be  taken. 

Haridra  (J),  Qringavera  {k),  Mulaka  (/),  and  Laguna  {in).  The  bulbous 
roots  of  these  are  to  be  taken. 

Lodhra  («),  Madana  {o),  Saptaparna  p),  Nimba  {q),  and  Arka  (r). 
The  flowers  of  these  are.  taken. 

Devadaru  (s),  Aguru  (if),  Sarala  (»),  Qallaki  (v),  Jingini  (w),  Asana 
( x ),  and  Hingu  ( y).  The  exudation  of  these  is  to  be  taken. 


a.  Called  also  Bamunhati.  Clrodendron  siphonanthus,  R.  Br.  ;  Siphonanthus 
Indica,  Lamk. 

b.  The  name  Cweta  is  applied  to  about  a  dozen  plants.  It  is  difficult  to  say 
which  of  them  is  intended. 

c.  Cardiospermum  Halicacabum,  Linn. 

d.  Applied  to  various  plants.  Here  the  Godumba  is  intended,  i.  e.,  Cucumis 
melo,  Linn,  j  syn.  Cucumis  maderaspatanus. 

e.  A  kind  of  pot-herb  growing  in  marshy  regions. 

f.  The  name  is  applied  to  various  plants.  Difficult  to  say  which  of  them  is 
intended. 

Called  in  Bengali,  Bichuti.  Tragia  invol'ucrata ,  Jacq. 

h.  The  name  is  applied  to  various  plants  and  trees.  Probably  Amalaka  is 
intended,  i.  e.  Phyllanthus  Emblica ,  Linn.  Chakrapani  takes  it  as  indicating 
Brahmi,  as  kind  of  pot-herb. 

i.  Aconitum  heterophyllum ,  Wall. 

j.  Circuma  longa.  Roxb. 

k.  Zingiber  officinale ,  Roxb. 

l.  Raphanus  sativus ,  Linn.  Garden  -radish. 

m.  Allium  sativum,  Linn.  Garlic. 

n.  Symplocos  racemosa,  Roxb. 

o.  Randia  dumetorum,  Lamk.  ;  syn.  Posoqueria  dumetorum ,  Roxb. 

p.  Alstonia  scholaris,  R.  Br.  ;  syn.  Echites  jcho laris, [Roxb. 

q.  Melia  Azadirachta,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Azadirachta  Indica,  Juss. 

r.  Calatropis  gigantea  or  procera,  R.  Br.  ;  syn.  Asclepias  gigantea,  Willd. 

s.  Cedrus  deodara,  Loud. ;  syn.  Asclepias  gigantea,  Willd. 

t.  Aquilaria  Agallocha,  Roxb. 

u.  Pinus  lOngifolia,  Roxb. 

v.  Boswel/ia  serrala,  Colebr. 

w.  -  Oderia  wodier,  Roxb. 

x.  Tenninalia  tomentosa,  W  and  A.  j  syn.  Pentaptera  tomentosa,  Roxb. 

y.  Ferula  Assafoelida,  Linn. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA  649 

Tejovati  (  a),  Varanga  (  b),  Ingudi  (e),  Sobhanjana  (d),  Vrihatx  ( e  ), 
and  Kantakarika  (/).  The  bark  of  these  are  to  be  taken. 

Thus,  cerebral  purgatives  are  of  seven  kinds,  in  consequence  of 
the  substances  of  which  they  are  made,  viz,  fruits,  leaves,  roots,  bulbous 
roots,  flowers,  exudations,  and  barks, iro. 

Besides  the  above,  all  articles  that  are  of  saline,  or  pungent,  or 
bitter,  or  astringent  taste,  and  that  are  agreeable  to  the  senses,  as 
also  other  articles  not  mentioned  here,  applied  in  due  combination, 
are  indicated  for  use  as  errhines  1?1. 

(  Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary ). 

The  attributes  to  be  observed  for  examination  of  treatise,  of 
preceptors,  and  of  disciple,  the  method  of  studying  and  teaching, 
the  method  of  discussion,  the  fifty  less  six  incidents  of  controversy, 
the  ten  elements  of  action  beginning  with  cause,  &c.,  with  their 
details,  the  methods  of  questioning,  and  the  nine  questions  in  the 
matter  of  examination,  as  applied  to  purgatives  and  the  rest, 
have  been  expounded  in  this  Lesson,  called  “  Bhishakjitiya,  ”  of 
the  Division  called  Vimana.* 


.  a.  Otherwise  called  Jyotishmati.  Cardiospermum  Halicacabum,  Linn. 

b.  Chakrapani  explains  that  by  Varanga  is  meant  Gudatwak.  This  is  called 
in  Bengali  Dalchini  ;  Citiamomum  Zeylanicutn ,  Breyn. 

c.  Balanites  Roxburghii ,  Planchore  ;  syn.  Ximenia  AZgyptiaca ,  Roxb. 

d.  Moringa  pterygosperma,.  Gaertn.  syn.  Hyperanthera  moringa ,  Willd. 

e.  Solanum  Indicum ,  Linn. 

f.  Solanum  Xanthocarpum ,  Schrad  syn.  Solanum  Jacquinii,  Willd. 

*  The  word  “  Lakshana,”  occuring  in  the  first  verse,  means  the  “  scriptures.’’ 
The  first  portion  of  the  Lesson  lays  down  the  considerations  which  should  guide 
the  student  in  selecting  the  treatise  he  should  study,  {vide  aphorism  2).  The 
attributes  of  the  preceptor  are  set  forth  in  aphorism  3.  The  attributes  of  the 
disciple  are  set  forth  in  aphorism  6.  The  method  of  study  is  set  forth  in  aphorism 
5  ;  that  of  teaching  in  aphorisms  7  to  13.  The  rules  to  be  observed  in  discussion 
are  laid  down  in  aphorisms  14  to  25.  The  fifty  less  six,  that  is,  four  and  forty 
incidents  relating  to  controversy,  are  then  laid  down  in  aphorisms  26  to  78. 
The  ten  elements  of  action,  beginning  with  cause,  etc.,  are  set  forth  in  aphorisms 
79  to  91.  Te  nine  questions,  in  the  matter  of  examination,  as  applied  to  pur¬ 
gatives  and  the  rest,  are  laid  down  in  aphorisms  92 — 172. — T. 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


650 

These  topics  of  various  kinds  that  have  been  laid  down,  have 
been  expounded  in  diverse  kinds  of  charming  expressions  and  are 
delightful  and  interesting  in  respect  of  sense  or  meaning. 

They  are,  again,  characterised  by  diverse  kinds  of  well-chosen 
or  agreeable  words  and  euphoneous  combinations. 

They  are  also  capable  of  assisting  one  in  demolishing  the  state¬ 
ments  of  others -  in  course  of  controversy*1751 

The  physician  who  acquires  this  sort  of  proficiency,  that  Is 
founded  upon  various  reasons  and  that  is  capable  of  demolishing 
the  controversial  disputations  of  others,  never  comes  forward  to 
crush  the  opinions  of  others  ;  nor  is  he  capable  of  being  him¬ 
self  crushed  by  the  disputations  of  others. f 178 

In  this  Division,  the  measures,  under  proper  heads,  of  all  the 
elements  beginning  with  the  faults  (viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm), 
have,  with  reasons,  been  set  forth.174 

Thus  ends  the  eighth  Lesson,  called  Bhishagjitiya,  in  the  Division 
called  Vimana,  of  the  treatise  of  Agniveja  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


*  Some  Bengal  texts  read  ‘  artha-jatam  ’  at  the  end  of  the  first  sentence. 
The  correct  reading,  however,  is  ‘  arthakantam.’  This  is  the  reading  adopted 
by  Chakrapani.  Gangadharajalso  adopts  it  in  his  gloss,  though  he  retains  it  in 
his  text  through  simple  carelessness.— T. 

t  ‘  Imam  matim  '  is  explained  by  the  Commentators  as  the  ‘  maii,’  i.  e.,  under¬ 
standing  (in  the  sense  of  proficiency)  which  arises  from  a  study  of  this  Lesson. 
The  true  sense  of  the  verb  1  niliyate  ’  here  is  ‘  does  not  come  forward  1  or  ‘  shows 
an  unwillingness  for,’— T. 


qArira-sthAnam. 


LESSON  I. 

We  shall,  after  this,  expound  the  Lesson,  in  this  Division  that 
treats  of  the  body,  and  that  is  called  “Katidhapurushiyam”  (how 
many  kinds  of  persons  are  there). 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.’  * * * § 

Agnivega  said, — O  thou  that  art  gifted  with  intelligence,  into 
how  many  kinds  may  Purusha  (man)  be  distributed  according  to 
difference  in  the  constituent  elements  (of  the  body)  ?  f 

Why  is  Purusha  regarded  as  cause  ? 

Who  is  the  originator  of  Purusha  ? 

Is  he  possessed  or  bereft  of  knowledge? 

Is  he  regarded  as  eternal  or  not  eternal  ? 

What  is  Prakriti  ?  | 

What  are  Vikaras  (modifications  of  Prakriti)  ?  § 


*  The  scope  of  this  Lesson  will  abundantly  appear  as  it  proceeds.  The  object 
of  the  Rishi  is  to  specify  different  kinds  of  men  according  to  differences  in  consti¬ 
tution  and  other  particulars. — T. 

t  The  word  ‘  Purusha,’  in  its  common  acceptation,  may  be  rendered  ‘  man  ’ 
or  ‘  person.’  Literally,  it  means  ‘  one  that  lies  or  resides  in  a  fiura  or  frame.’ 
Hence,  in  philosophical  works,  it  implies  the  Being  that  is  encased  in  a  body 
or  corporeal  frame.  Purusha  is  not  the  sum  total  of  physical  limbs  or  parts  ;  but 
it  is,  or  he  is,  that  to  which  or  whom  these  belong.  It  is  the  owner  of  this 

corporeal  frame  that  is  called  Purusha.  In  the  questions  of  Agniveca,  the  word 

Purusha  is  sometimes  used  in  its  common  acceptation  and  sometimes  in  its  true 
philosophical  sense.  Hence,  it  is  expedient  to  retain  the  word  without  translating 
it.— T. 

t  By  ‘Prakriti’  is  meant,  in  the  Sankhya  system  of  philosophy,  the  prime¬ 
val  physical  principle  by  whose  evolution  all  things  material  and  mental  have  come 
into  existence.— T. 

§  ‘  Vikara  ’  implies  modification  or  mutation.  Every  thinp  in  the  universe 

that  we  see  is  the  result  of  Prakriti  modified  (through  Purusha.)  Vide  the 

answers  to  these  questious  where  fuller  explanations  have  been  given. — T. 


CHAR  AKA  SAMHITA. 


What  are  the  indications  of  Purusha  ? 

Those  that  are  conversant  with  the  Atman  (self)  say  that  it 
is  inactive,  self-dependent,  self-controlled,  pervading  everything,  puis* 
sant,  as  also  knower  of  matter,  and  the  witness  (of  everything). 

O  illustrious  one,  if  inactive,  how  is  it  that  it  seems  to  act  ? 

If  self-dependent,  how  is  it  that  is  takes  birth  in  womb  which 
it  cannot  possibly  desire  ? 

If  self-controlled  (i.  e.,  owning  the  control  of  nothing  else  in  the 
universe),  why  is  it  seen  to  be  forcibly  assailed  by  painful 
conditions  ? 

If  pervading  everything,  why  does  it  not  feel  all  the  pains 
to  which  the  body  is  subject  ? 

If  endued  with  unlimited  puissance,  why  can  it  not  see  what 
is  on  the  other  side  of  hills  and  walls  ? 

Which  is  prior,  the  knower  of  matter  or  matter?  Here  is  a  doubt. 

Without  the  prior  existence  of  matter  which  is  to  be  known, 
it  is  not  reasonable  that  there  should  be  a  knower  of  matter. 

If,  again,  matter  be  prior,  the  knower  of  matter  cannot  be  re¬ 
garded  as  eternal. 

Whose  witness  can  it  be  when  there  is  no  other  doer  ? 

If  immutable,  how  can  it  have  a  difference  of  condition  brought 
about  by  pain  ?  2-17. 

O  illustrious  one,  among  the  three  kinds  of  pain,  which,  viz.,  the 
past,  the  present,  or  the  future,  should  the  physician  treat  ?  18 

Of  future  pain,  the  arrival  has  not  yet  occurred.  Of  that  pain 
which  is  past,  there  will  be  no  return.  As  regards  present  pain 
also,  it  has  no  existence.  Hence  the  doubt. 19 

What  is  the  cause  of  all  pains  ?  What  Js_  regarded  as  their 
substratum  ? 

Where  also  do  all  pains  meet  with  complete  extinction  ?  20 

Possessed  of  omniscience,  aloof  from  all  things,  freed  from  connec¬ 
tion  with  every  thing,  existing  above,  tranquil,  and  the  soul  of  every 
being,  what  are  those  indications  by  which  it  can  be  known  ? 21 

Hearing  these  words  of  Agnive$a,  Punarvasu,  that  foremost  of 
intelligent  persons,  of  tranquil  soul,  answered  all  the  questions  duly.  22 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


Some  regard  that  Purusha  is  made  up  of  six  ingredients,  viz,  those 
begining  with  ether,  and  consciousness.  * 

Others  regard  that  only  one  of  the  ingredients,  viz.,  conscious¬ 
ness  is  called  Purusha.. 28 

Then,  again,  regarded  from  the  point  of  view  of  ingredients, 
Purusha  is  said  to  be  a  compound  of  four  and  twenty. 

These  are  mind,  the  ten  organs  (of  knowledge  and  action),  the 
five  objects  of  the  five  organs  of  knowledge,  and  the  eight  modi¬ 
fications  of  Prakriti.  t 24 

The  attributes  by  which  one  may  define  mind  are  the  presence  and 
absence  of  knowledge,  since,  though  the  soul,  the  senses,  and  their 
objects  exist  in  a  state  of  juxta-position,  yet  when  there  is  no 
attention  (on  the  part  of  the  mind),  there  can  be  no  knowledge 
in  the  mind  ;  it  is  only  in  consequence  of  the  mind  being  present 
that  knowledge  arises.J 


*  The  five  primal  elements  an  here  referred  to.  They  are  earth,  water,  fire, 
air,  and  ether  (or  space). 

+  This  enumeration  is  according  to  the  Sankhya  system  of  philosophy.  The 
four  and  twenty  Tatiwas  are  thus  specified  :  x.  Mind  (understanding  it  in  the  sense 
in  which  it  is  used  in  Hindu  philosophy)  ;  2.  the  five  organs  of  sense,  viz., 
eye,  ear,  nose,  tounge,  and  the  entire  skin,  which  gives  the  sensation  of  touch; 
and  the  five  organs  of  action,  viz.,  the  organ  of  speech,  the  two  arms,  the  two  legs 
the  organ  of  generation,  and  the  anal  canal  ;  3.  the  eight  modifications  of 

Prakriti  are  original  Pralcriti  or  primordial  matter,  Mahat,  consciousness  or  egoism, 
and  the  five  tanmatras  or  subtile  forms  of  the  five  gross  elements  already  ennumerated. 
In  the  Sankhya  exposition,  the  last  eight  occur  in  this  way  : 

Mulaprakritili  avikritili  and  Prakritivikrityah  sapta. 

Meaning  that  Prakriti,  or  the  primordial  principle  is  unproduced  ;  and  the 
seven  principles  of  Mahat  and  the  rest  are  both  produced  and  productive  ;  that 
is,  the  preceding  one  produces  the  succeeding  one. — T. 

{  By  ‘  lakshana  ’  is  meant  such  an  attribute  or  indication  as  may  be  referred 
to  for  defining  the  object  to  which  it  belongs.  In  defining  mind,  two  such 
‘  lakshanas  *  are  used,  viz.,  knowledge  and  absence  of  knowledge.  The  cir¬ 
cumstances  under  which  knowledge  arises  are  then  explained.  The  soul,  the 
senses,  and  the  objects  of  the  senses,  exist  together.  The  connection  between 
them  is  not  ‘  samyoga  ’  or  union.  It  is  only  ‘  sannikarsha  ’  implying  an  existence 
or  presence  together.  Now,  these  three  may  and  do  exist  together,  yet  if  the 
mind  be  absent,  there  can  be.  no  knowledge.  Knowledge  arises  only  when 
mind  is  present  as  an  additional  factor  or  ingredient  of  the  ‘  sannikarsha  ’  or  exist- 

S3 


4 


CHAR  A'KA  SAM  hit  A, 


Subtility  and  oneness  have  been  regarded  as  the  two  attributes 
of  the  mind.*25-86 


ence  together  of  the  soul,  the  senses,  and  their  objects.  When,  for  example, 
the  soul,  the  eye,  an  object  of  vision,  and  the  mind  are  present  together, 
knowledge  of  the  visual  object  arises  in  the  mind.  At  that  time,  however,  all 
■other  kinds  of  knowledge,  such  as  those  relating  to  the  other  senses,  must 
necessarily  be  absent.  Yet  when  the  mind  ceases  to  act  with  the  eye  and 
begins  to  act  with  the  organ  of  hearing,  knowledge  arises  of  audible  things, 
such  as  sound  or  speech.  The  presence  in  the  mind  of  one  particular  kind  of 
knowlege  implies  the  absence  therefrom  of  other  kinds  of  knowledge  at  the 
same  unit  of  time.  Hence,  in  defining  mind,  the  attributes  to  be  particularly 
referred  to  are  both  the  presence  and  the  absence  of  knowledge.  If  the  exis¬ 
tence  or  presence  only  of  knowledge  be  regarded  as  an  indication  of  the  mind, 
the  mind  would  be  non-existent  as  regards  other  kinds  of  knowledge.  It  would, 
indeed,  be  a  bold  assertion  to  make  that  while  the  mind  exists  as  regards 
visual  knowledge,  it  does  not  exist  as  regards  other  kinds  of  knowledge.  The 
capacity  of  the  mind  to  seize  those  other  kinds  of  knowledge  cannot  be  denied. 
Hence,  mind  is  known  by  the  existence  and  non-existence  of  knowledge. — T. 

*  It  should  be  noted  that  the  word  ‘  Manas,’  as  used  in  Hindu  philosophy, 
has  not  for  its  equivalent  1  Mind,’  for  1  Manas  ’  excludes  '  Buddhi.’  Vi  ith 
‘  Buddhi,’  1  Manas  ’  is  ‘  Mind.’  Adopting  the  Kantian  distribution  of  mental 
phenomena,  ‘  Manas,’  it  would  appear,  would  include  all  the  cognitive'  faculties 
except  ‘  Reason  ’  or  the  faculty  of  Comparison  ;  in  other  words,  only  the  faculties 
of  Acquisition,  Conservation,  Reproduction,  and  Representation.  Besides  these, 

‘  Manas  ’  includes  the  feelings  of  Pleasure  and  Pain,  as  also  Desire  and  Will. 

‘  Manas  ’  is  ‘  Anu  1  or  subtile,  that  is,  not  gross.  If  it  were  gross,  it  would  then 
(as  Hindu  philosophers  argue)  have  contact  with  all  the  senses  at  the  same 
instant  of  time,  the  result  of  which  would  be  a  simultaneous  perception  of  all 
sensual  objects  at  all  times.  Such  simultaneous  perception,  however,  existing 
again  for  all  time,  does  not  happen  ;  when  ‘  Manas  ’  operates  with  the  organ 
of  scent,  it  does  not  operate  with  that  of  hearing  or  sight.  Smelling  and  hearing 
may  sometimes  seem  to  be  simultaneous.  In  point  of  fact,  however,  as  argued 
by  Gautama,  there  is  no  actual  simultaniety  but  succession  so  rapid  that  one 
can  hardly  be  conscious  of  it  The  illustration  is  given  of  a  continuous  circle  of 
light  produced  by  the  rapid  whirling  of  a  burning  brand.  Some  thinkers  maintain 
the  opposite  and  cite  an  illustration  from  the  act  of  eating.'  a  large  piece  of 
cake.  They  maintain  that  in  such  a  case  there  is  a  simultaniety  of  perceptions, 
such  as  the  tactual,  due  to  the  holding  of  the  cake  in  the  hand  ;  the  visual,  due 
to  seeing  it  ;  the  auricular  due  to  hearing  the  noise  made  by  the  teeth  and 
tongue  in  mounching  ;  while  those  appertaining  to  scent  and  taste  are  equally 
apparent.  In  answer  to  this,  the  other  side  quote  the  case  of  piercing  a  century 
of  lotus  petals  by  the  sudden  stroke  of  a  needle.  There  is  succession,  though 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


5 


That  which  is  remembered,  that  upon  which  reason  (or  com¬ 
parison)  works,  that  upon  which  ratiocination  is  employed,  that  which 
after  reproduction  is  held  fast  in  consciousness,  that  which  is  re¬ 
solved  upon,  and  that  which  is  known,  form  what  is  called  the 
objects  of  the  mind.®7 

Seizure  of  objects  by  means  of  the  senses,  subjecting  them  to 
control,  comparison,  and  ratiocination,  are  the  functions  of  the  mind. 

After  this  the  understanding  begins  to  work.*2® 

By  the  organs  of  sense,  with  the  mind  working  with  them,  are 
all  sensuous  objects  apprehended. 

The  mind'  then  works  upon  those  objects,  rightly  or  wrongly.25 

The  Intellect  then,  having  certitude  for  its  essence,  becomes 
manifested  in  connection  thereto.  Aided  (thus)  by  the  Intellect, 
one  then  sets  about  to  speak  or  act.f  25' 


it  is  not  perceptible.  As  regards  the  oneness  of  the  mind,  what  is  held  by  the 
orthodox  philosophers  (by  which  I  mean  those  who  were  opposed  to  the  Buddhistic 
doctrines)  is  that  it  is  the  same  mind  which  sees  and  hears  and  smells  and 
touches  and  tastes.  With  respect,  again,  to  the  operations  of  the  same  senses  in 
successive  moments  of  time,  it  is  the  same  mind  that  acts  in  conjunction  with  it. 
The  mind  that  sees  at  one  moment  of  time  is  identical  with  the  mind  that 
sees  at  successive  moments. 

*  The  principal  functions  of  the  mind  are  i.  the  seizure  of  objects  through 
the  senses  (meaning  apprehension),  2.  subjecting  them  to  control  (probably  im¬ 
plying  working  upon  the  objects  seized  for  its  own  purposes,  such  as  conserving 
or  retaining  them,  reproducing  them,  when  needed,  and  representing  or  holding 
them  before  it  for  the  higher  purposes  of  Buddhi  or  the  Intellect),  3.  comparison, 
and  4  ;  Ratiocination.  The  last  two  functions  properly  appertain  to  Buddhi.  It  is, 
therefore,  the  preliminary  arrangements  of  these  two  processes  and  not  the  actual 
processes  that  are  implied. 

+  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  the  organs  of  sense,  when  dissociated  from  the 
mind,  cannot  do  anything.  It  is  only  when  they  are  associated  with  it  that  they 
succeed  in  bearing  knowledge  or  ideas  to  the  mind.  The  mind,  after  the  appre¬ 
hension  of  sensuous  objects,  begins  to  act  upon  them.  Certitude  of  knowledge, 
however,  is  not  its  function.  The  mind  doubts,  saying, — “  Is  this  so,  or,  Is  this 
not  so  ?  ”  Then  comes  the  Intellect  which  discriminates  and  says  either  this 
is  so,  or  this  is  not  so.  Hence,  the  Intellect  is  said  to  have  certitude  for  its 
essence.  After  the  Intellect  has,  by  discrimination,  brought  about  certitude  of 
apprehension,  one  begins  to  act,  guided  by  the  Intellect.— T. 


6 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


The  (five)  organs  of  sense,  whose  existence  is  indicated  by  five 
(different)  functions,  are  connected  with  the  (five)  primal  elements 
beginning  with  ether  and  the  rest,  each  succeeding  one  apprehend¬ 
ing  one  more  (of  the  latter)  than  each  preceding  one.*51 

The  arms  and  legs,  the  anus,  the  organ  of  generation,  and  the 
tongue,  are  the  five  organs  of  action. 

The  legs  are  used  for  locomotion. 

The  anus  and  the  genital  organ  are  for  the  discharge  of  se¬ 
cretions.  The  two  arms  are  for  seizing  and  bolding. 

The  tongue  is  the  organ  of  speech.  It  should  be  noted  that 
that  speech  which  is  truthful  is  represented  as  light ;  while  that 
speech  which  is  false  is  represented  as  darkness.52- 5 

The  great  primal  elements  are  ether  (space),  air,  fire  (or  light), 
water,  and  earth.  Their  (respective)  attributes  are  sound,  touch, 
form  (vision),  taste,  and  scent. 

Each  of  the  great  elements  has  one  of  these  attributes  ;  .  while 
each  succeeding  one  has  (in  addition)  the  attribute  or  attributes  of 
the  preceding  one  or  ones.  Thus  ether  has  sound  ;  air  has  touch 
and  sound  ;  fire  (or  light)  has  form  (or  vision)  and  touch  and  sound  ; 
water  has  taste  and  form,  and  touch  and  sound  ;  and  earth  has  scent, 
and  taste,  and  form,  and  touch  and  sound.5*-35 

Roughness,  liquidity,  mobility,  and  heat  are  (respectively)  seen 


*  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  render  such  terse  verses  as  this.  What  is  said  here 
is  this  :  ether  (or  space),  air  light  (or  fire),  water,  and  earth  are  the  five 
elements.  The  organs  of  sense  are  the  ear,  the  skin  (or  touch),  the  eyes,  the 
tongue,  and  the  nose.  The  ear  is  connected  with  ether  (or  space)  ;  the  skin 
(or  touch)  with  ether  and  air  ;  the  eyes  with  ether,  air,  and  light  (or  fire)  ;  the 
tongue  with  ether,  air,  light,  and  water  ;  and  the  nose  with  all  those  forms  and 
earth.  The  connection  arises  in  this  way  ;  the  ear  or  hearing  apprehends  sound ; 
sound  depends  on  ether  or  space  for  its  manifestation  ;  the  skin  apprehends 
all  kinds  of  touch  ;  these  are  dependant  for  their  manifestation  on  air  ;  and  so 
on.  The  usual  order  of  naming  the  primal  elements  is  Kshityaptejomarutvyoma , 
meaning  earth,  water,  light  or  fire,  air,  and  ether  or  space.  In  the  verse,  this 
order  has  been  reversed,  for  space  comes  first.  Each  sense  apprehends  one 
of  these  as  its  own  particular  object  ;  while  each  succeeding  one  (in  the  order  of 
enumeration)  apprehends  the  object  or  objcets  of  that  or  those  before  it. — T. 


CHARAKA  SAM  HIT  A 


7 


to  be  the  properties  of  earth,  water,,  air,  and  fire  ;  while,  of  ether 
the  property  is  non-resistibility.*34’ 

Every  one  .of  these  properties  is  cogmsibl'e  by  the  sense  of  Touch-, 
for  by  the  sense  of  Touch  are  perceptible  not  only  all  kinds  of  touch 
but  also  the  absence  of  touch.f35 

It  has  been  ssid  (in  Lesson  XXVT — Bhadrkapyiya — of  Sutra- 
sthana,  ante)  that  the  attributes  of  the  primal  elements  existing  in 
the  Body  are  (the)  indications  (of  those  primal'  elements)! 

Sound  and  the  rest  should  be  known  as  ‘  Arthas  r  (objects  of  the 
senses) :  they  are  also  called  Gocharas  r  ‘  Visbayas  ’  and  ‘  Gunas.’’  I86 


*  By  ‘  linga,'  which  I  render  ‘  property,’  is  meant  attribute  which  indicates 
the  existence  of  the  thing  which  owns-  it  as  such..  The  words  ‘  attribute  ’  and 
*  property  ’  are  used  in  the  text  as  convertible  terms-.. 

f  It  may  be  readily  understood  that  all  the  senses  may  be  reduced  to  the 
sence  of  Touch.  The  ear  is  touch-,  for  there  can  be  no  hearing  without  what  is  called 
sound  coming  into  actual  contact  with  the  auditorium  or  the  nerves  of  the  auricular 
drum.  The  eye  is  touch,  for  there  can  be  no  vision  without  the  rays  of  light  that 
are  reflected  by  the  object  seen  coming  into  contact  with  the  retina  and  the 
inner  nerves  that  connect  it  with  the  brain.  The  tongue  is  touch,  for  there  can- 
be  no  taste  without  an  object  coming  into- contact  with  the-lingual  nerves.  The 
nose  also  is  touch,  for  there  can  be  no  scent  without  the  effluvia,  emitted  by  an 
object  coming  into  contact  with  the  olfactory  nerves, 

The  Rishis  understood  this  to  some  extent.  Sound,  touch,  form,  taste,  and' 
scent  are  perceivable  by  the  ear,  skin,  eye,  tongue  and  nose.  Ether  (or  space), 
according  to  the  Rishis,  is  perceivable  by  touch,  for  the  property  of  ether  being 
non-resistibility,  the  latter  is  absence  of  touch.  Thus  all  the  primal  elements, 
with  their  attributes,  are  perceivable  by  the  organ  of  touch. — T. 

t  The  first  line  of  this  verse  has  been  misunderstood  by  the  Bengali  translators. 
The  substances  to  which  ‘  Gunas  ’  or  attributes  inhere  are  called  ‘  Gunins  ’ 
(substances).  The  ‘  Gunins  ’  or  substances  are,  of  course,  the  primal  elements, 
viz.,  ether  and  the  rest.  The  body  consists  of  the  five  primal  elements.  The 
attributes  or  properties  of  these  primal  elements  existing  in  the  body  have  been 
mentioned  in  Lesson  XXVI,  ante ,  of  Sutrasthana,  called  Atreya-Bhadrakapyiya. 
There  the  attributes  are  regarded  as  indications  of  the  presence  of  the  primal 
elements  in  the  Body.  It  may  be  further  explained  that  two  sets  of  attributes, 
vis.,  sound  and  the  rest,  and  heavy,  rough,  and  the  rest,  have  been  mentioned 
as  inhering  to  the  primal  elements  as  they  exist  in  the  Body.  As  regards  sound 
and  the  rest,  they  are  both  subjective  and  objective.  In  their  subjective  forms, 
they  are  the  causes  or  sources  from  which  the  senses  have  flowed.  In  their 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


That  knowledge  which  arises  from  a  particular  organ  of  sense 
comes  to  be  called  after  that  particular  organ. 

Similarly,  that  knowledge  which  springs  from  mind  is  called  after 
the  mind.*3' 

The  knowledge  (of  which  we  speak)  arises  from  a  contact  of  Self 
and  mind  with  each  of  the  senses  and  objects. 

In  consequence  of  the  variety  of  actions  and  sensuous  objects,, 
knowledge  has  been  regarded  to  be  of  various  kinds. 38. 

As  the  sound  arising  from  contact  of  the  chords,  the  gourded' 
bamboo,  and  the  nails,  is  seen  to  be  of  various  kinds  according  as; 
it  is  originated  by  the  tips  of  the  thumbs  and  the  other  fingers,  so  is; 
knowledge  seen  (to  be  various)  according  as  it  arises  from  the  con¬ 
tact  of  self  and  mind  with  the  different  senses  and  the  senseous 
objects.ssf 


objective  forms,  however,  they  are  cognisable  by  the  senses.  This  is  explained' 
in  the  second  line :  sound  and  the  rest,  (that  is,  sound  and  the  rest  in  their 
objective  forms),  are  the  ‘  Arthas  ’  of  the  senses,  that  is,  the  objects  or  topics 
perceived  by  them.  They  are  also  called  ‘  Gochara  ’  (lit.  moving  before,  that 
is,  exposed  or  manifested  for  apprehension).  They  are  also  caled  ‘  Vishayas,?' 
implying  ‘  objects  that  bind  or  attract  the  senses.  They  are,  in  addition,  called; 
‘  Gunas,’  i.  e.,  properties  or  qualities. — T. 

*  It  seems  that  the  word  ‘  Buddhi  ’  is  used  here  in  a  very  wide  sense.  I  have 
rendered  it  ‘  knowledge.1  Probably,  ‘  idea  ’  or  ‘  notion,’  in  the  sense  of  *•  concept  r 
is  what  is  implied.  A  particular  concept  arises  through  the  aid  of  the  visual  organ. 
It  is  to  be  called  a  visual  concept.  Another  arises  through  the  aid  of  the  ear. 
It  is  to  be  called  an  audible  concept.  So,  concepts  arise  through  the  mind  also, — 
the  mind,  that  is,  taken  as  a  sixth  sense,  or,  rather,  as  the  chief  that  controls 
the  five  senses  and  imbibes  the  impressions  they  impart.  By  a  mental  concept 
would,  probably,  be  meant  one  that  is  due  to  comparison  or  reasoning.  The. 
knowledge  or  concept  of  greenness,  as  derived  from  the  eye,  is  a  visual  concept. 
So  also  that  of  grass.  The  knowledge,  however,  that  grass  is  green  would  be 
a  mental  concept. — T. 

t  The  illustration  used  by  the  KishI  In  the  39th  couplet  is  an  exceedingly 
beautiful  one.  The  Vina  is  an  instrument  consisting  of  a  bamboo  of  about  a  yard  and 
a  half  in  length,  with  two  hollow  gourds  attached  to  the  two  extremities.  On 
the  bamboo  are  many  wires  ;  cross-wise  are  many  frets.  Different  notes  are 
produced  as  the  different  frets  are  touched  with  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand.  On 
the  fingers  of  the  right  hand  are  3  or  4  plectra.  On  the  one  side  are  self  and 
the  mind.  On  the  other  are  the  senses  and  their  objects.  In .  consequence  of 


CHARARA  SAMHITA. 


9 


Knowledge,  sense,  mind,  and  objects,  are  linked  with  one  another 
in  due  order.*40 

This  aggregate  of  four  and  twenty  is  called  Purusha.  f41 

Purusha  is  linked  with  the  qualities  of  Rajas  and  Tamas  (Passion 
and  Darkness).  This  connection  is  endless.  That  connection  ceases 
when  Purusha  becomes  divested  of  these  two  through  the  influence 
of  Good  Intelligence.^42 

On  this  ‘Purusha’  (Self)  are  established  the  fruits  of  acts.  In 
him  is  established  Knowledge.  In  him  is  Heedlessness.  In  him 
are  pleasure  and  pain  ;  as  also  life  and  death,  and  consciousness 
<of  Identity, 


the  senses  being  various,  and  their  objects  being  infinite,  knowledge  (taking  the 
word  as  indicative  of  a  concept)  necessarily  becomes  various,  or,  rather,  infinite. 
As  already  stated  in  aphorism  37  above,  these  concepts  are  named  after  the 
particular  sense  from  or  through  which  they  are  derived.  Knowlege,  in  reality, 
is  one  or  a  unified  whole,  like  the  sound  produced  by  a  Vina.  In  consequence, 
however,  of  the  senses  and  objects  being  various,  knowledge  assumes  an  apparent 
variety  of  form,  like  the  notes  originated  by  the  touch  of  the  different  fingers 
with  the  different  frets.— T. 

*  The  order  of  enumeration  should  be  knowledge,  mind,  sense,  and  ob¬ 
jects,  or  the  reverse  of  this,  that  is,  objects,  sense,  mind,  and  knowledge.  Objects 
•are  connected  with  the  senses  $  the  latter  with  the  mind  ;  the  latter  with  know¬ 
ledge  or  concepts. — T. 

+  The  reading  which  Gangadhara  adopts  is  slightly  different,  F or  ‘  racih  ’ 
he  reads  ‘  matah,’  making  the  line  ‘  Chaturvingcatiko  hyeshamatah  &c.’  The 
sense  remains  unchanged.  The  four  and  twenty  ate  1.  mind,  2.  the  five  organs 
of  knowledge  and  the  five  organs  of  action,  3.  the  five  gross  objects  of  the  senses, 
viz.,  ether  and  the  rest,  and  4.  the  eight  included  in  Prakriti,  viz.,  original 
Prakriti,  Mahat,  Ahankara  (consciousness  of  Ego),  and  the  five  subtile  forms 
of  ether  and  the  rest.  This  tale  of  four  and  twenty  corresponds  with  that  in  the 
Sankhya  system  of  philosophy. — T. 

t  Hindu  philosophers  distribute  the  inclinations  of  the  mind  (or  the  actions 
prompted  by  them)  into  three  classes,  viz.,  Sattwa,  Rajas  and  Tamas.  These  are 
generally  rendered  ‘  Goodness,’  ‘  Passion,’  and  ‘  Darkness.’  As  long  as  Purusha 
owns  the  influence  of  Rajas  and  Tamas,  there  must  be  birth  or  body  with  all  the 
attendant  pleasures  and  pains.  When  completely  divested  of  these  two  through 
the  influence  of  Sattwa  or  Goodness,  birth  or  body,  with  the  attendant  joys  and 
sorrows,  ceases,  and  Purusha  becomes  Emancipate.  He  is  then  absorbed  into 
Eternal  and  Immutable  Brahma  or  the  Great  Self  from  which  has  emanated  every¬ 
thing. — T. 


CHAR  AKA  SAMHITA. 


10 


He  that  knows  this  truly,  knows  both  Origin  and  Destruction* 

There  would  have  been  no  succession  (of  events,  or  creatures, 
■or  things),  no  treatment,  no  object  to  be  known,  no  light,  no  dark¬ 
ness,  no  truth,  no  untruth,  no  Vedas  (revealed  truths),  on  action 
good  or  bad,  no  actor,  no  knower,  were  there  no  ‘  purusha 

There  would  have  been  no  dependance  (of  one  thing  on  another), 
no  pleasure,  no  disease,  no  motion,  no  rest,  no  speech,  no  science, 
no  treatises,  no  birth,  no  death,  no  bondage,  no  emancipation,  were 
there  no  *  purusha.'’ 

Hence  it  is,  that  .persons  conversant  with  causes  cite  ‘purusha’ 
as  the  cause  :(of  all  things).13-4' 

If  the  soul  (or  self)  were  not  the  cause,  ether  and  the  rest  would 
be  causeless.  No  knowledge  of  these  could  be  ;  nor  any  need  for 

them. 48 

He  who  would  say  that  an  earthen  jar  could  be  made  without 
a  potter  and  with  only  earth,  stick,  and  wheel,  or  that  a  house 
could  be  built  without  an  architrect  and  with  only  earth,  straw, 
and  wood,  even  he,  through  ignorance,  and  giving  up  both  reason 
and  the  scriptures,  would  say  that  this  body  is  capable  of  being 
made  without  a  creator  and  with  only  the  primal  elements  coming 
together  (of  their  own  accord  or  as  the  result  of  a  fortuitous  com¬ 
bination).50 

Purusha  Is  realised  as  the  cause  through  all  those  very  evi¬ 
dences  constituting  the  revealed  and  other  scriptures,  by  which 
things  provable  are  known.*51 


*  Purusha  is  the  universal  Cause.  It  is  from  or  through  Purusha  that  every¬ 
thing  springs.  What  the  Rishi  lays  down  in  this  aphorism  is  that  the  charac¬ 
ter  of  Purusha  as  Cause  is  realisable  from  the  same  evidences  which  help  us 
to  know  or  understand  things  in  general.  By  ‘  pramana  ’  is  meant  that  which 
proves  ;  by  ‘  prameya  ’  is  meant  1  that  which  is  to  be  proved.’  The  latter  in¬ 
cludes  things  in  general.  By  ‘  Agama  ’  is  meant  the  evidence  of  revealed  and 
inspired  scriptures.  Agama  constitutes  one  kind  of  ‘  pramana  ’  or  proof. 

In  other  words,  what  is  intended  is  this  :  the  same  proofs  which  help  us 
to  know  things  in  general,  help  us  to  understand  that  ‘  Purusha  ’  is  the  one 
original  Cause  of  everything.  It  should  be  noted  that  by  ‘  Purusha  ’  here  is  meant 
not  the  ‘  atman  ’  only  as  dissociated  from  the  three  and  twenty  other  incidents, 
but  the  ‘  atman  !  with  those  incidents,  that  is,  the  aggregate  called  ‘  Jiva.’ 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A 


Some  are  of  opinion  that  men  sprung  from  men  in  gradual  suc¬ 
cession  are,  owing  to  sameness  of  form  and  shape,  types  of  their 
progenitors  and,  as  such,  are  different  without  being  identical  with 
those  progenitors  ;  that  the  Being  constituted  by  the  aggregate  (of 
only  the  three  and  twenty  incidents)  is  without  that  which  is  called 
Iga,  and  that  it  is  that  aggregate  which  is  called  Sattwa  (or  Purusha) 
and  that  that  Sattwa  is  neither  doer  nor  enjoyer  (or  endurer).*''2-53 

They  who  deny  the  existence  of  Self  have  this  difficulty  to 
meet  :  viz.,  the  fruits  of  acts  done  by  human  beings  of  a  particular 
kind  are  enjoyed  (or  endured)  by  other  human  beings  that  only 
resemble  the  actors.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  differences  are 
seen  in  respect  of  the  causes  (or  instruments)  of  acts  (but  not  in 
respect  of  the  actor).  Hence,  he  that  is  the  actor  is  also  the  en¬ 
joyer  (or  endurer  of  the  fruits  of  the  acts  done)  ;  for  equipped  with 
instruments  it  is  the  actor  that  is  the  cause  (or  doer)  of  all  acts.f54-56 


*  These  and  the  following  verses  are  exceedingly  abstruse,  and  their  sense 
is  difficult  to  catch.  The  fact  is,  the  aphorisms,  whether  in  prose  or  verse,  are 
very  geherally  in  the  form  of  brief  notes  for  the  use  of  the  preceptor  in  the 
lecture  hall.  They  were,  as  I  have  remarked  before,  intended  to  be  amplified 
by  the  aid  of  verbal  explanations  before  the  pupils  could  be  expected  to  appre¬ 
hend  their  meaning. 

The  Rishi  notices  the  opinions  of  the  Lokayatikas  (probably  the  predecessors  of 
the  Bauddhas,  if  not  a  sect  of  theirs).  According  to  those  philosophers,  the  universe 
consists  of  Beings  sprung  from  other  Beings,  in  gradual  succession  ;  that  Beings  so 
born  are  of  the  same  form  and  shape  as  their  progenitors,  and  therefore  are  only 
the  types  of  those  progenitors  ;  that,  in  reality,  they  are  different  from  them, 
that  is,  are  not  indentifiable  with  them  ;  that  a  Being  that  is  born  is  only 
an  aggregate  of  the  three  and  twenty  incidents,  that  is,  reft  of  the  twenty- 
fourth  which  is  lea  or  the  one  soul  that  propels,  moves,  controls,  guides  every¬ 
thing  else  and  that  is  eternal  and  durable,  connecting  the  new  with  the 
old  Being.  This  theory  is  refuted  by  the  Rishi  in  the  following  verses. — T. 

t  These  two  verses  are  as  abstruse  as  the  two  preceding  ones.  The  fact 
is,  the  arguments  and  the  conclusions  based  upon  them  have  been  set  forth 
very  briefly.  As  stated,  they  are  intelligible  to  only  those  who  are  familiar 
with  such  discussions  in  full.  The  statement  in  the  previous  verse  is  that  the 
aggregate  called  Purusha  is  really  an  aggregate  of  the  three  and:  twenty  inci¬ 
dents,  without  the  lea  (or  Self)  which  is  eternal  and  durable  and  which  con¬ 
nects  the  new  Being  with  the  old  one  whose  mental  and  physical  surroundings 

84 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


The  time  in  which  things  disappear  is  briefer  than  even  the 
twinkling  of  the  eye.  Those,  again,  that  disappear  (or  are  destroyed) 
do  not  come  back.  Hence,  the  act  done  attaches  itself  (as  regards 
its  fruits)  not  to  another  (but  the  doer  alone).*56 

And  since  this  is  the  opinion  of  those  who  are  conversant  with 


have  all  disappeared.  Now,  they  who  maintain  this  theory  believe  still  in  re¬ 
wards  and  punishments  enjoyed  and  endured  in  heaven  and  hell,  or,  at  least, 
in  next  transformations  of  Being.  The  Rishi  points  out  that  the  inevitable  conse¬ 
quence  of  this  theory  is  that  the  fruits  of  acts  done  by  one  man  would  be 
enjoyable  or  endurable  by  another.  For  if  there  be  no  connecting  Self  (that  is, 
the  •  twentyfourth  principle)  between  the  Being  that  is  reborn  and  the  one  that 
existed  before,  why  should  the  reborn  Being  enjoy  or  endure  the  fruits  of  acts 
done  by  the  Being  that  has  disappeared  ?  The  enjoyment  or  endurance  is  not 
denied.  Practically,  therefore,  it  is  one  Being  that  acts  and  another  that  enjoys 
or  endures  the  fruits  of  those  acts.  For  making  this  plainer,  the  Rishi  proceeds 
to  state  that  ‘  anyanyata  ’  or  difference  is  observable  as  regards  the  instrument 
of  action.  Thus  one  sees  with  the  eye,  hears  with  the  ear,  smells  with  the  nose, 
etc.  But  no  difference  is  observable  as  regards  the  actor.  The  actor,  equipped 
with  different  instruments,  is  the  cause  or  doer  of  all  acts.  Hence  it  is  clear 
(according  to  the  Rishi)  that  it  is  the  actjr  that  enjoys  or  endures  the  fruits  of 
his  own  acts  in  heaven  or  hell,  or  in  a  different  state  of  existence  after  the 
disappearance  of  the  mental  and  physical  surroundings  of  that  state  of  existence 
in  which  the  acts  are  done.  T. 

*  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  verses  54  and  55  the  Rishi  has  pointed 
out  the  inconsistency  in  which  they  are  involved  who,  while  denying  the  existence 
of  a  connecting  Self,  believe,  nevertheless,  in  rewards  and  punishments  either 
in  heaven  or  hell  or  in  the  next  phase  of  existence.  If  the  deniers  of  Self  urge 
that  heaven  and  hell  are  mere  fancies  and  that  the  next  phase  of  life  does  not 
exist,— that,  in  fact,  if  acts  attach  themselves,  as  regards  their  consequences,  to  the 
actors, — it  is  in  this  life  that  they  do  so  ;  the  Rishi’s  answer  to  them  is  this  : 
things  or  states  of  existence  are,  according  to  you,  exceedingly  transitory,  more 
so  than  the  twinkling  of  the  eye.  This  is  what  you  say,  for  there  is  no  connect¬ 
ing  Self  between  successive  states  of  being.  (The  reference  here  is  to  the 
theory  of  ‘  Kshanika  Vijnana,’  that  is,  successive  appearance  and  disappearance 
of  ideas  and  of  all  things.)  Nor  do  things  or  states  of  existence,  when  they 
once  go  away  or  disappear,  come  back  or  re-appear.  The  conclusion,  therefore, 
says  the  Rishi,  is  inevitable  that  acts  being  destroyed,  their  fruits  would  not 
attach  to  any  one,  including  the  doer  himself.  The  concession,  therefore,  made 
by  these  philosophers,  does  not  help  them  at  all.  Hence,  the  Rishi’s  conten¬ 
tion  becomes  true,  viz.,  that  acts,  ir.  respect  of  their  fruits,  attach  to  him  who 
does  them. — T. 


CHARAKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


13 


the  truth,  therefore  (it  should  be  accepted  that)  he  who  is  called 
Purusha,  and  who  is  Eternal,  is  the  cause  (of  all  acts)  who  enjoys 
and  endures  the  consequences  of  acts.  The  Cause  (actor)  being 
present  within  the  body,  consciousness,  memory,  acts,  fruits  of  acts, 
and  migration  into  other  bodies,  attach  to  creatures. *57'58 

The  Supreme  Soul,  in  consequence  of  its  Eternity,  has  no  birth. 
But  Purusha,  who  is  called  an  aggregate  (of  the  four  and  twenty 
principles  already  named),  has  birth  in  consequence  of  heedlessness, 
desire  and  hateful  acts."9 

The  Self  is  Knower.  In  consequence  of  his  union  with  organs, 
his  knowledge  springs.  When  those  organs  become  stained  or  are 
not  united  with  him,  knowledge  does  not  arise.60 

Of  one  competent  to  behold,  no  vision  arises  in  a  stained  mirror, 
or  in  turbid  water.  After  the  same  manner,  if  the  mind  happens 
to  be  obstructed  (by  impediments),  no  knowledge  can  arise. f61 


*j£The  opinion  of  those  who  are  conversant  with  the  truth  is  that  he  that 
is  called  Purusha  is  eternal  ;  it  is  he  that  eternally  connects  together  the 
different  conditions  of  existence  ;  all  else  is  transitory.  Hence,  acts  done  attach 
themselves,  as  regards  their  fruits,  to  the  actor  both  in  this  life  and  the  next  phases 
of  existence.  If  an  eternally  connecting  Self  were  not  existent,  acts  would  be 
done  by  one  person  and  their  fruits  enjoyed  and  endured  by  another.  The 
three  and  twenty  principles,  less  the  twentyfourth  which  is  Self,  constantly 
change.  J  If  those  three  and  twenty  only  had  constituted  a  living  creature,  the 
inconsistency  could  not  be  avoided  of  one  aggregate  doing  an  act  and  another 
enjoying  or  enduring  its  consequences.  The  necessity  of  the  Self  being  eternal 
and  standing  as  the  connecting  link,  is  thus  shown. — T. 

t  The  Supreme  Soul  has  existed  from  Eternity  and  will  exist  to  Eternity. 
It  has  no  birth  ,  or  origin.  As  regards  Purusha  (he  that  lies  or  exists  in  a  1  pura  ’ 
or  tenement),  he  has  birth,  that  birth  being  brought  about  by  heedlessness  or 
ignorance,  by  desire,  and  by  hateful  acts.  When  Purusha,  i.  Chit  encased 
in  a  fleshy  tenement,  succeeds  in  dispelling  ignorance  and  attaining  to  true 
knowledge,  in  mastering  desire  and  abstaining  from  acts,  he  succeeds  in  obtain¬ 
ing  Emancipation,  that  is,  in  reverting  to  his  original  nature  which  is  nothing 
else  than  that  of  the  Supreme  Soul.  Forgetfulness  of  its  real  nature,  or  the 
action  of  Avidya  (wrongly  rendered  ‘  Ne-Science  ’  by  Professor  Max  Muller)  brings 
about  the  birth  of  Chit,  that  is,  its  investment  with  the  three  and  twenty  principles. 
Chit  thus  invested,  or  Purusha,  is  thus  an  aggregate  or  conglomeration. 

The  ‘  Karanas  ’  or  organs  are  both  internal  and  external.  The  external  ones 


14 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


The  Karanas  (or  organs  of  action  mental  and  physical)  are 
Mind  and  Intellect  and  the.  organs  of  apprehension  and  action. 
Action  is  the  result  of  these  coming  into  contact  with  the  doer. 
So  also  are  pleasure  and  pain,  and  all  knowledge.*62 

The  aggregate  of  four  and  twenty  principles  that  is  called 
‘Bhutatman’  (or  Purusha,  or  Jiva-Soul,  or  Self),  is  never  able  to  do 
anything  alone  (or  unassisted). 

Neither  can  he  enjoy  or  endure  the  fruits  of  action  alone. 

From  contact  springs  everything. 

In  the  absence  of  contact  nothing  can  be.f63 

No  born  thing  can  be  alone.  Nor  can  it  be  without  an  ori¬ 
ginating  Cause. 

A  born  thing  cannot,  also,  transcend  its  own  nature  of  quick- 
mutation.}64 


are  the  senses  ;  the  internal  ones  are  manas  (mind  as  understood  in  its  limited 
sense)  and  buddhi. 

In  verse  61,  for  ‘  samklipto  ’  some  texts  read  ‘  samklishte.’  The  reading 
‘  Tadvat  ’  is  erroneous.  It  should  be  ‘  Yadvat.’ — T. 

*  ‘  Manas,’  *  buddhi,’  ‘  buddhindriyani,’  and  1  karmendriyani,’  that  is,  Mind, 
Intellect,  the  organs  of  Intellection  (or  sense  or  apprehension),  and  the  organs 
of  action,  {viz.,  arms,  .  feet,  etc.),  are  called  ‘Karanas.’  The  word  ‘  Karana,’ 
literally',  means  that  by  which  anything  may  be  done.  1  Manas  ’  is  mind  as 
understood  in  Hindu  philosophy.  ‘  Buddhi  ’  is  Intellect  or  Understanding,  that 
is,  the  higher  powers  of  mind  as  it  is  understood  in  European  philosophy.  The 
organs  of  ‘  Buddhi  ’  are,  of  course,  the  five  senses.  The  organs  of  ‘  Karma  ’  or 
action  are  the  arms,  the  feet,  the  apparatus  of  speech,  the  anal  canal,  and  the 
organ  of  generation. 

Purusha  is  doer  ;  unless,  however,  he  comes  in  contact  with  the  ‘  Karanas  ’ 
there  can  be  no  action,  no  ‘  vedana,’  i.  e.,  feeling  (of  pleasure  and  pain),  and 
no  ‘  buddhi,’  meaning  knowledge,  i.  e.,  ideas  or  notions. — T. 

t  The  word  ‘  Bhutatman  ’  implies  ‘  Purusha,’  or  ‘  Jivatman,’  or  the  Chit  in- 
invested  with  the  three  and  twenty  principles.  It  is  distinguished  from  ‘  Para- 
matman  ’  or  the  Supreme  Soul.  What  is  stated  here  is  that,  as  everything  flows 
from  a  contact  between  Purusha  and  the  Karanas,  the  former,  if  alone,  cannot 
do  anything  or  enjoy  or  endure  the  fruits  of  any  action.— T. 

J  ‘  Bhava,’  from  the  root  ‘  bhu  ’  which  means  ‘  to  be,’  implies  or  includes 
every  born  thing,  that  is,  everything  which  has  an  origin.  As  such,  it  is  distin- 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


'5 


That  Purusha  who  is  without  birth  (or  beginning)  is  immutable. 
That,  however,  who  is  born  of  a  cause,  is  of  an  opposite  nature 
(i.  e.,  mutable). 

Anything  existent,  which  is  without  cause,  is  immutable  ;  that 
which  springs  from  a  cause  is  otherwise.65 

Verily,  in  consequence  of  its  immutability,  that  (existent  thing) 
is  incapable  of  being  seized  by  the  aid  of  anything  born.  Nor 
can  it  even  be  known  by  the  aid  of  anything  born. 

That  is  unmanifest  and  unthinkable.  All  else  is  manifest.*66 


guished  from  that  which  has  no  origin,  viz.,  the  Supreme  Soul.  What  is  stated 
here  by  the  Rishi  is  that  a  thing  born  can  never  be  alone.  As  it  cannot  be 
1  ahetuka,’  that  is,  without  an  originating  cause,  it  must  be  regarded  as  springing 
from  another.  It  may,  again,  be  itself  the  cause  of  another  thing.  This  other, 
as  an  effect,  should  be  regarded  as  already  dwelling  in  the  cause  ;  for  effect  i§ 
only  another  condition  of  the  cause.  A  thing  born  can  never  exist  without 
being  connected  or  related  with  others.  This  relation  may  be  that  of  union, 
or  juxtaposition,  or  opposition,  etc.  The  Rishi  concludes  with  the  statement  that 
a  thing  born  can  never  transcend  its  own  nature  which  is  mutability.  The 
mutations  happen  quickly,  more  quickly,  in  fact,  than  the  twinkling  of  the 
eye.  Growth  and  decay,  which,  of  course,  imply  mutation,  are  the  law  of 
being.  The  human  body  undergoes  change  at  every  instant  of  time.  The  illus¬ 
tration  is  often  given  of  the  flame  of  a  lamp.  Apparently  steady  and  unchang¬ 
ing,  the  flame  is,  in  reality,  the  result  of  the  combustion,  in  quick  succession, 
of  particles  of  oil  drawn  up  to  a  particular  point  by  capillary  attraction.  It  is 
curious  to  see  how  Gangadhara  errs  in  explaining  the  last  line  of  the  last  verse. 
There  are  three  assertions  independent  of  one  another.  A  thing  born  cannot 
exist  alone  ;  a  thing  born  cannot  be  without  cause  ;  and,  lastly,  a  thing  born 
cannot  transcend  its  own  nature,  which  is  quick  mutability.  Gangadhara  takes 
the  last  statement  as  giving  the  reason  of  the  first.  This  is  erroneous. — T 

*  In  the  first  line  of  verse  65,  the  distinction  conceived  is  between  ‘  Anadi 
Purusha,’  meaning  that  Purusha  who  is  without  birth,  and  ‘  hetuja  Purusha,’ 
meaning  that  Purusha  who  is  born  of  a  cause.  In  other  words,  the  Supreme 
Purusha  is  distinguished  from  ‘  raci-samjnaka  Purusha,’  that  is,  the  Purusha  who 
is  the  result  of  a  combination  of  the  four  and  twenty  principles.  By  ‘  sat  ’  is 
meant  anything  that  is  ever-existent,  as  distinguished  from  1  asat  ’  or  not  un- 
exisient,  that  is,  transient.  Only  the  Supreme  Soul  is  ‘  sat,’  without  cause,  im¬ 
mutable  and  eternal.  All  else  is  otherwise.  ‘  Nitya  ’  primarily  means  immutable  ; 
hence  eternal,  for  immutability  connotes  the  idea  of  eternity,  all  mutable  things 
being  transient.  ‘  Sat,’  otherwise  called  ‘  That,’  being  immutable,  is  unseizable 


i6 


charAka  SAMHITA 


That  Self  who  is  Kriower  of  kshetra  (matter  and  its  manifesta¬ 
tions).^  unmanifest,  eternal,  all-pervading  and  immutable. 

All  else  is  manifest  This  last  is,  again,  of  two  kinds. 

Everything  that  is  capable  of  being  seized  by  the  senses  is 
manifest  and  perceptible. 

All  else  is,  again,  unmanifest,  being  seizable  by  indication'though 
beyond  the  keen  of  the  senses. *67-68 


by  anything  mutable  or  with  the  aid  of  anything  that  is.  All  that  we  can  say 
of  it  is  ‘  That,’  meaning  that  we  cannot  ascribe  to  it  attributes.  It  is  frequently 
spoken  of  as  ‘  Nirguna,’  i.  e.,  without  attributes.  It  is  unmanifest  and  unthink¬ 
able.  All  else  is  manifest  and  thinkable.  By  ‘  unmanifest  ’  is  implied  incapa¬ 
city  of  apprehension  by  the  senses  and  the  mind. — T. 

*  In  verse  66  the  Rishi  has  explained  what  is  1  avyaktam  ’  (unmanifest)  and 
what  ‘  vyaktam  ’  (manifest).  ‘  Avyaktam  ’  (in  66)  is  meant  to  be  applied  to 
the  unborn  Purusha,  that  is,  the  Paramatman  (Supreme  Soul).  Here  (in  verse 
67),  it  is  the  ‘  Kshetrajna-atman,’  or  the  Jiva-Soul,  that  is  called  ‘  avyaktam  ’  (I  take 
the  reading  to  be  1  avyakta-atman,  etc.  Gangadhar,  reads  ‘  avyaktamatma  etc.’ 
This  is  ungrammatical.  To  avoid,  however,  the  ungrammatical  construction,  he 
is  obliged  to  take  the  word  1  avyaktam  ’  as  standing  by  itself  and  signifying  the 
‘  Pradhana  ’  of  the  Sankhya  system.  Even  then,  the  subject  would  be  without 
a  predicate).  The  Rishi  next  (in  the  second  line  of  67)  indicates  what  is  ‘  vyaktam.’ 
According  to  him,  everything  differentiated  from  the  Jiva-Soul  is  ‘  vyaktam.’ 
This,  it  is  again  said,  is  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  all  that  is  cognizable  by  the  senses 
and  all  that  is  beyond  the  ken  of  the  senses  but  capable  of  forming  the  subject 
of  inference.  This  latter  is  also  called  ‘  avyaktam,’  though  included  in  ‘  vyaktam.’ 
Taking  all  the  verses  together  (65  to  68),  the  result  is  this.  The  Universe  consists  of  : 


MANIFEST 

(everything  having  cause  or  birth). 


UNMANIFEST 
(unborn  Purusha  in  ihs 
uninvested  and  vested 
state,  z.  e.,  the  Supreme 
Soul  and  the  Jiva-Soul). 


Cognizable  by  the 
Senses 

(the  five  original  prin¬ 
ciples  of  ether  and  the 
rest  as  also  their  attri¬ 
butes  of  sound  and  the 
rest),  or  Aindriyaka. 


Not  Cognizable  by  the 
Senses. 

(z.  e.,  conceivable  though  not 
perceptible)  or  Atindrivai 
This  includes  five  tanmatras 
(or  finer  principles )  and  the 
whole  range  of  mental 
phenomena. 


The  above,  it  seems,  is  how  the  Rishi  wishes  to  distribute  the  sum  total  of 
things  constituting  the  universe. — T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


[7 


Ether  and  the  rest,  Intellect,  the  Unmanifest  (meaning  Pradhana 
or  Self),  and  Consciousness  (of  self),  forming  the  eighth,  as  also 
modifications  numbering  sixteen,  have  been  laid  down  as  constituting 
the  nature  of  created  beings. 

The.  five  organs  of  knowledge  and  the  five  organs  of  action,  with 
mind,  the  five  objects  of  the  senses, — these  have  been  styled  as  the 
Modifications.  All  these,  with  the  exception  °f  the  Unmanifest, 
have  been  referred  to  as  Kshettra.  The  Rishis  understood  the 
Unmanifest  as  the  Knower  of  this  Kshettra.*69-71 

Intelligence  springs  from  the  Unmanifest ;  from  Intelligence  springs 
Consciousness  (of  self).  Even  this  is  said.  After  this,  Consciousness 
apprehends  ether  aud  the  rest  in  their  order.'* 

Then  is  Purusha  said  to  be  complete, :full-limbed,  born  and  de¬ 
veloped. 

When  dissolution  comes,  he  is  once  more  dissociated  from  these 
entities_whose  union  with  him  is  the  result  of  desire.78 

It  is  from  the  Unmanifest  that  Purusha  attains  to  the  condition 
of  being  Manifest,  and  from  the  condition  of  being  Manifest  he 
once  more  reverts  to  that  of  being  Unmanifest. 

Affected  by  Rajas  (Passion)  and  Tamas  (Darkness),  Purusha 
is  continually  revolving  (in  a  succession  of  birth  sand  deaths)  like 
a  wheel.'4 

Birth  and  dissolution  are  theirs  whose  attachment  is  great  to 


*  ‘  Ether  and  the  rest,’  in  their  gross  forms  enter  into  the  composition  of 
a  born  Being.  Besides  these  five,  there  are  the  other  three,  viz..  Intellect, 
Consciousness,  and  the  Unmanifest,  meaning  the  Self.  These  eight  are  ‘  avikriti,’ 
i.  e.,  they  stand  by  themselves,  without  being  the  modifications  or  products  of 
anything  else.  The  other  sixteen  principles  that  enter  into  the  composition  of 
the  aggregate  called  ‘  Purusha  ’  are  the  ten  organs  of  knowledge  and  action, 
mind,  and  the  five  objects  of  the  senses  or  organs  of  knowledge.  All  these  sixteen 
are  ‘  vikriti,’  i.  e.,  modifications  or  products  of  other  principles.  It  should  be  noted 
that  the  five  objects  of  the  senses  or  organs  of  knowledge,  which  are,  of  course, 
sound  and  the  rest,  are  not  the  objective  forms  of  those  that  go  by  these  names, 
but  their  subjective  forms.  All  knowledge  is  ultimately  reducible  to  the  ideas 
of  sound  and  the  rest,  plus  those  which  have  their  origin  in  mind  and  the 
Intellect.— T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


pairs  of  opposites,  and  who  are  develoted  to  selfishness.  These 
are  not  theirs  who,  however,  are  otherwise.*75 


*  The  gradual  development  of  Purusha  is  explained  in  these  verses,  as  also 
what  truly  constitutes  birth  and  dissolution.  At  first  there  was  the  great  Un¬ 
manifest.  Then  springs  Intellect  (called  Mahattattwa  or  Buddhi).  From  Intellect 
springs  up  the  idea  or  conviction  of  individuality  or  Personal  Identity.  After 
this,  Ether  and  Lhe  rest  follow,  meaning  the  five  Great  Elements  or  principles, 
their  five  adjuncts  of  sound  and  the  rest,  the  five  senses  or  organs  of  knowledge 
with  ‘  mar.as  ’  as  the  sixth,  and  the  five  organs  of  action.  When  all  these  have 
appeared,  the  result  is  Purusha  full-limbed  and  fully  developed.  Even  this 
what  is  known  as  birth.  When  death  comes,  all  that  takes  place  is  a  dissociation 
of  the  united  principles.  These  are  called  ‘  Ishta,’  implying  ‘  desired,’  because 
the  union  resulting  in  (or  constituting)  birth,  is  entirely  due  to  the  action  of 
Desire.  (As  regards  the  creation  of  the  universe,  the  Hindu  scriptures,  following 
the  lead  of  both  the  Sankhya  and  the  Vedanta  system  of  poilosophy,  declare  that 
the  Supreme  Brahma,  originally  all  alone,  desired  to  make  himself  many.  Simi¬ 
larly,  every  Chit-Soul,  under  the  influence  of  Desire  which  itself  is  the  offspring 
of  Avidya  or  Ignorance,  or  matter  or  material  energy,  gathers  to  itself  a 
material  case ). 

The  three  principles  of  ‘  Sattwa,’  1  Rajas,’  and  1  Tamas  ’  have  been  explained 
previously.  Birth  and  death  are  due  to  the  action  of  ‘  Rajas  ’  and  ‘  Tamas.’ 
Emancipation  from  rebirth  is  due  to  Sattwa.  5  Dwandwa  1  means  pairs  or 
couples  (of  opposites),  such  as  heat  and  cold,  weal  and  woe,  desire  and  aversion, 
light  and  darkness,  gain  and  loss,  &c.  To  be  subject  to  these  pairs  of  opposites 
is  the  nature  of  man.  When  he  rises  superior  to  these,  he  reverts  to  his  own 
original  nature  of  Self,  or  becomes  Emancipate.  In  the  1  Bhagavadgita,’  Krishna 
exhorts  Arjuna  to  rise  above  ‘  Dwandwas,’  as  follows  : — 

‘  Traigunyavishaya  vedah  nistraigunyabhavarjuna, 

Nirdwandwo  nityasattwasiho  niryogakhema  atmavan.’ 

The  meaning  is, — ‘  The  topics  of  the  Vedas  involve  the  three  attributes 
{vis..  Sattwa,  Rajas,  and  Tamas).  Be  thou,  O  Arjuna,  above  those  three  attributes  ; 
do  thou  shake  off  the  pairs  of  opposites  ;  do  thou  ever  dwell  in  Sattwa  ;  be 
thou  above  the  desire  of  acquiring  the  unacquired  and  protecting  the  acquired  1  ’ 

By  ‘  udaya  ’  is  meant  ‘  appearance,’  hence,  birth.  By  ‘  pralaya  ’  is  meant 
‘disappearance’  or  ‘dissolution.’  The  Hiudu  idea  of  birth  is  the  appearance  of 
Self  in  a  particular  condition,  vis.,  investment  in  a  material  case  with  certain 
mental  capacities.  Even  this  is  what  is  called  the  manifestation  of  the  Un¬ 
manifest.  The  idea  of  death  is  a  disjunction  of  principles  joined  together,  that 
is,  a  disappearance  or  dissolution.  No  principle  is  actually  destroyed  or  annihilated. 
The  Unmanifest,  which  had  become  Manifest,  reverts  to  its  condition  of  being 
Unmanifest.  So  in  the  ‘  Bhagavadgita,’ 


Dr.  GRIFFITH  EVANS,  M.  D.,  Brynkynall,  Bangor  North  Wales. ...The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fund  of  tracing  the  origin, 
growth  and  development  of  medical  science,  also  illustrates  some  ancient  social  customs 
of  India. 

PROFESSOR  MAX  MULLER  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an 
English  translation  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very 
glad  to  help  you  in  any  way  you  may  wish — Writing  again  in  November1893.be 
says-^*  '•*  *  I  am  surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation 
has  not  attracted  more  attention  *  *  *  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir 
Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested  in  it. 

SIR  MONIER  WILLIAMS,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift' 
of  the  successive  parts  of.  the  Charaka  and  Susrata  Samhitas.  I  regard  them 
as  a  valuable  addition  to  my  library.  No  doubt,  an.  English  translation  would 
be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  REINHOLD.  ROST,  C.  L.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office —  *  * 
*  Your  excellent  translation  *  *  *  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work 

which  will  not  fail  to  make  ancient  Hindu  Medicine  better  understood  and 
appreciated  in  the  West  *  *  *  I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars 
to  your  difficult/,  and  meritorious  work  *  *  *  Many  important  additions  to  our 
Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from  your  translation. 

AUSTIN  FLINT,  ESQ.,  New  York  V.  S.  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much 
pleasure  the  first  fasciculus  of  your-  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall 

be  very  glad  to  receive  the  rest  of  the  work.  It  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great 

■interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will- be  under  great  obligation  to  you. 

A.  H.  EDC.REN,  ESQ.,  Gothenburgh ,  Sweden  : — I  am  deeply  interested  in 
anything  Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain 
■whatever  insight  I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  .translation. 

PROFESSOR  A.  V.  WILLIAM  JACKSON,,  Columbia  College ,  New  York , 

■  U.  S.:_  A.  : — I  must,  congratalate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I 
should  Very  much  like  to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praise¬ 
worthy  work  you  are  doing.  Be  assured.  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appre¬ 

ciation  and  ol  my  deep  interest  in  India  and  antique  lore. 

MONS.  A.  BARTH.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers 
of  ancient  literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars 
..and  to  the  men  of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring 
the  work  to  the  notice  of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an 
interest-  in  these  researches. 

MONS.  B.  ST.  HILAIRE,  Paris  -.— I  -  praise  .  you  on  your  undertaking  and 
wish  you.  all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical 
men  and.  the  commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put 
in  a  notice  in  the  Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy 
to  do  you  justice. 

PROFESSOR  H.  JACOBI,  Bonn  University ,  Germany-. — The  work  you  have 
undertaken  will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men-  who.  care  for  the 
History  of  their  science.  I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent 
physicians  whom  Tknow  personally,  to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

■  HERR.  R,  GARBE,  Prinzenstram  Keningsburg ;  Germany  : — The  English 
translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  is  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of 
view,  the  most  important  work  of  the  medicinal  literature  of  your  country. 

SIR  ALFRED  CROFT,  M.  A.,;  C.  I.  E.  Director  of  Public  Instruction. 
Bengal-. — I  have  been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination 
in  part  IV  of  all  the  things  which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand 
the  “precepts  and.  such  a  guide  to  life  cannot  be  other'  than,  valuable.  - 

JAMES  W.  REESE,  Esq.,  Westminister ,  Maryland, ,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  have 
undertaken  a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  tome,  ddierves 
the  approbation  and  encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of 
the  past  ages  thofight  and  taught  on  a  topic  so'  important  as  the  preservation 
of ,  health  and  the  cure  of  disease. 


WILLIAM  EMETTE  COLEMAN,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California.—*  *  * 
As  each  successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent. 
*  *  *  There  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind, 

occidental  medical  science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science 
has  much  to  learn.  *  *  * 

CHAS.  E.  SAJONS,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  V  S.  A.  You  are  entitled  to  the 
greatest  praise.  Next  May  or  Jute  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial 
management — will  begin  to  review  books,  etc.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken 
up  will  be  yours. 

CHAS  O.  COUKTMAN  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Othio  U.  S.  A.  ' The  work  interests 
me  very  highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night,  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of 
one  of  our  medical  societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively 
curiosity  and  expressions  of  interest.  I  will  send  .selections  from  it  to  a  medical 
journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical  monthly. 

GEO.  H.  CLARK.,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  PHILADELPHIA  As  I  go  over  each 
fasciculus  I  always  arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians, 
ofthe  present  day  would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  modern  Drugs 
and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients  according  to  the  method  of  Charaka, 
there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and  fewer  chronic  invalids  iu 
the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of  the  work,  for  I 
am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

K.  H.  SKRINE,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  : — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest. 
It  is  marverllously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful 
to  note  the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country 
and  how  completely  they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter 
ourselves  are  due  to  the  enlightment  of  this  age. 


i  O  (.) 


PART  XXil. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


(TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH). 


AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita 
(in  original)  WITH  COMMENTARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND 
Hindi  Translator  of  Charaka-Samhita 
and  of  Susruta-Samhita  ;  .Editor  of 
Chikitsa-Sammilani  (Medical  Journal 
in  Bengali)  ;  PRACTITIONER  OF  THE 

Hindu  System  of  Medicine, 

&c.,  &c.,  &c.,  &c., 


CALCUTTA: 

SANIEL  &  SONS, 

66,  South  Road,  Entally. 


{The  Right  of  Translation  is  Reserved), 


OPINIONS  OF  EMINENT  MEN.,. 


PROFESSOR  E.  B.  COWELL,  Cambridge  A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient 
work  will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable,  lean  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in 
translating  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  ECCLES,  esq,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York  The  matter  is  "certainly  of 
great  interest  to  me. 

E  P.  DAVIS,  esq,.  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences, 
Philadelphia  Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Meoical 
literature. 

F.  A.  CASTLE,  esq. ..Even  a  superficial  examination  of  i*  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

Dr.  H.  C.  WOOD,  Philadelphia:...!  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and 
sincerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of 
the  happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  quite  a  long  notice .  of 
it  which  I  expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  semi-official 
organ  of  the  greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  MITTRA,  Chief  Medical  Officer  of  Cashmere :... No  medical  man's  library 
should  be  without  Charaka  ;  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied 
this  great  work  of  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  OSCAR  OLUSBERG.  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North- 
Western  University;  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition:... 

1  am  already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion 
to  speak  of  it  in  the'vApothecary. 

PROFESSOR  L.  E.  SAYER,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  :... 
Be  assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  iu  your  noble  undertaking.  1 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

ABBOT  H.  BUCK,  esq.,  19  East  38th  Street,  New  York  :... Wish  you  a  success 
in  your  praiseworthy  .undertaking. 

MONS.  T.  GEBBARD.,  Derselhofber  'Praise  Dramstadt  :...The  difficulties  you  speak 
of  in  getting  out  the  translation  1  fully  sympathise  with, ...a  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time,  comes  out  well. 

Dr  H.-  N:  WHELPLEY,  Phd.,  G.  M  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A.  Editor 
Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist  :...I  shall  take .  pleasure  in  noticing  it  in  our  columns  and 
advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical '  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their,  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  highly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  general  interest. 

MONS  H.  LE  SOUDOR.  Librarie  Etrangere  174.  Boulevaise.  Saint  Germain  :...Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

CHARLES  RICE,  esq  ,  New  York  :...Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense 
you  for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  which 
I  will  write. 

W.  C.  BONNERJEE,  esq.  6.  Park  street,  Calcutta  :...My  dear  Pundit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya,...I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen 
of  whom  I  spoke;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to 
you  [about  drawing  their  attenticn  to]  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again  sometime 
after,... An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note  *  *  ‘considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your 
efforts  to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

FAUL  BURTHOLOM,  M.  D.  Philadelphia  :...I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with 
the  profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I 
have  ever  met  before  in  Medical  literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s 
reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  PHILLIPS,  esq.  C.  S.  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Maimensing  :...The 
translation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  DUTT,  esq.  C.  S.  C.  I.  E.  Magistrate  and  Collector  :...Your  patriotic  labours 
deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun.  *  *  *  You  deserve  the 
especial  acknowledgements  of  the  m  ;dical  profession. 

G.  A.  GRIERSf^.  esq.,  C.  g.  Gya  -....It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  bv  vour  getting  .mv  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS. 


In  that  portion  of  Lesson  I  which  is  contained  in  this  fascicule,  the 
Rishi  answers  the  remaining  questions  about  Purusha.  Many  philosophi¬ 
cal  observations  occur  of  deep  import. 

The  principal  topics  discussed  are  characteristics  of  the  Supreme 
Soul  when  invested  with  a  body,  the  characteristics  of  Manas  (Mind), 
the  chief  cause  of  sorrow,  the  means  of  destroying  all  sorrow,  the 
effects  of  the  loss  of  understanding,  the  causes  of  disease,  the  causes 
of  happiness  and  misery,  Yoga  and  Emancipation,  the  supernatural 
possessions  of  Yogins,  the  causes  that  lead  to  Emancipation,  conser¬ 
vation  of  Memory,  the  eight  causes  that  lead  to  the  strengthening  of 
Memory,  Memory  the  road  to  Emancipation,  Renunciation,  &c.  It  is 
impossible  to  understand  these  topics  and  their  connection  with  one 
another  without  carefully  going  through  the  successive  aphorisms.  Many 
of  the  aphorisms  are  exceedingly  terse.  They  are  almost  unintelligible 
without  the  aid  of  full  comments.  Accordingly,  an  endeavour  has 
been  made  to  explain  the  aphorisms  in  notes  which,  it  is  hoped,  will 
repay  perusal. 

Lesson  II  begins  in  this  fasciculous.  Observations  on  the  circum¬ 
stances  that  lead  to  procreation.  Propinquity  of  relation  between  a  man 
and  a  woman  is  unfavourable  to  procreation.  The  Rishis,  it  seems, 
fully  knew  the  principle  affirmed  by  Darwin. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


19 


The  vital  breaths  called  Prana  and  Apana,  the  opening  and 
closing  of  the  eye  (and  other  similar  motions),  the  period  of  time 
called  Life,  the  movements  of  the  mind,  the  passing  of  the  mind 
from  one  sense  to  another,  the  despatch  of  the  mind  (to  a  parti¬ 
cular  object),  and  holding  the  mind  thereto.76 


Sojourns  (of  the  mind)  to  other  places  in  dreams,  as  also  the  / 
acceptance  of  death,  the  perception  by  the  left  eye  of  objects  seen  / 
by  the  right  eye.77  P 

Desire,  aversion,  pleasure,  pain,  will,  consciousness,  apprehension,  ^ 
understanding,  memory,  and  the  idea  of  personal  identity, — theseY-'" 
are  the  indications  of  the  Supreme  Soul  (when  invested  with  a 
body).78 


Since  these  are  regarded  as  the  indications  of  the  living  (or 
Jiva-Soul),  the  great  Rishis  have  said  that  these  do  not  belong  to 
the  dead.78 


Upon  the  soul  leaving  it,  the  body  becomes  an  empty 
tenement,  reft  of  consciousness.  In  consequence  of  the  five  primal 
elements  only  remaining  as  the  residue,  the  living  (or  Jiva)  soul 
is  said  (when  death  ensues)  to  have  attained  to  fiveness.*8o 


Avyaktadini  bhutani  vyaktamadhyani  Bharata, 

Avyaktanidhananyeva  tatra  ka  parivedana. 

meaning  1  Bhutas  or  living  beings  have  the  Unmanifest  for  their  beginning,  are 
Mnifest  in  the  middle,  and  become  Unmanifest  once  again  at  the  end  (that  is,  after 
death). 

Birth  and  death  are  for  those  that  are  subject  to  pairs  of  opposites,  and 
that  are  devoted  to  selfishness.  They  that  are  above  these,  transcend  birth 
and  death,  i.  e.,  become  Emancipate  or  revert  to  their  own  original  nature  of 
purity  and  immutability.  The  idea  of  the  ‘  Para  ’  or  the  ‘  Highest  ’  being  im¬ 
mutable  is  firmly  fixed  in  the  Hindu  mind.  Change  must  either  be  (as  Plato 
observes)  for  the  better  or  the  worse  ;  if  he  changes  for  the  better,  ‘  para  ’ 
was  no  ‘  para  ’  (highest  and  most  perfect)  before  ;  if  for  the  worse,  ‘  para  ’ 
ceases  to  be  so  afterwards. — T, 

*  The  Hindu  system  of  physiology  recognises  five  airs  or  breaths  as  supporting 
the  body.  They  are  Prana,  Apana,  Samana,  Udana,  and  Vyana.  The  first  is 
the  air  that  is  inhaled  ;  the  second  is  that  which  has  a  downward  course  ;  the 
third  is  considered  as  essential  to  digestion  ;  ihe  fourth  is  that  which  rises  up 
either  in  the  form  of  eructations  or  passes  into  the  head  ;  and  the  fifth  is 

85 


20 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


The  Mind  is  unconscious  and  active.  It  is  the  Supreme  (Soul) 
that  makes  it  conscious. 

When  that  puissant  one  becomes  united  with  the  Mind,  it  is 
then  that  actions  are  imputed  to  him.81 


that  which  pervades  the  whole  body  and  moves  in  various  directions,  transverse 
and  otherwise.  By  mentioning  only  the  first,  or  the  first  and  the  second,  the 
rest  are  indicated. 

The  opening  and  the  closing  up  the  eyelid  are  mentioned  for  indicating  all 
kinds  of  similar  motions  which  are  apparently  involuntary. 

By  ‘  Jivanam  ’  is  meant  that  portion  of  time  which  is  called  ‘  Ayus  ’  or  the 
period  of  life. 

‘  Manaso  gati,’  literally  implies  the  movement  of  the  mind.  It  should  be 
noted  that  the  mind  is  the  lord  of  the  senses.  It  moves  from  one  sense  to 
another.  The  expression  certainly  includes  what  follows,  viz.,  1  the  passage  (of 
the  mind),  from  one  sense  to  another.’ 

‘  Puranam  ’  implies  the  same,  viz.,  the  despatch  of  the  mind  to  a  particular 
object  ;  and  1  dharanam  ’  is  holding  it,  thereby  meaning  the  initial  and  the  sub¬ 
sequent  stages  of  attention. 

In  dreams  a  person  sojourns  to  places  other  than  those  where  he  remains 
and  sleeps. 

‘  Panchatwa-grahanam  ’  is  acceptance  of  the  state  or  condition  of  five  (mean¬ 
ing  the  five  primal  elements  of  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  and  ether  or  space).  This, 
of  course,  implies  death.  Life  must  terminate  in  death. 

Hindu  physiology  takes  it  that  an  object  that  is  seen  by  the  right  eye  is  really 
perceived  by  the  left  eye,  and  that  what  is  seen  by  the  left  eye  is  perceived 
by  the  right  eye.  The  point  is  certainly  curious.  Those  blind  of  one  eye  cer¬ 
tainly  see  and  perceive  by  the  one  eye  they  possess.  This  would  disprove 
the  assertion. 

Verse  78  is  evidently  an  adaptation  of  Gautama’s  well-known  defini¬ 
tion  of  the  Soul,  which  runs  as  follows  :  1  Ichccha-dwesha-prayatna  sukha  duhkha 
jnanani  atmano  lingam,’  meaning  ‘  desire,  aversion,  and  will,  pleasure  and  pain, 
and  cognitions,  are  the  attributes  or  indications  of  the  soul.’  This  corresponds 
with  the  Kantian  distribution  of  mental  phenomena,  viz.,  the  cognitive  faculties, 
the  feelings  (of  pleasure  and  pain),  and  the  conative  phenomena  (of  desire 
and  will).  Only  the  order  is  otherwise.  Perhaps,  as  explained  by  Professor 
Bain,  feelings  should  come  first,  then  desire  and  will,  and  lastly  the  cognitions. 

By  the  word  ‘  Paramatman,’  as  used  in  verse  78,  should  be  understood  the 
Supreme  Soul  as  invested  with  a  body  ;  hence,  the  Jiva-Soul.  According  to 
the  system  of  philosophy  expounded  by  the  Rishi  in  this  passage,  it  is  evident 
that  no  distinction  is  contemplated,  as  regards  essence,  between  the  Supreme 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


21 


Since  the  soul  is'  endued  with  consciousness,  therefore  is  it 
regarded  as  the  actor.  In  consequence  of  its  being  unconscious, 
the  Mind,  even  though  active,  is  not  said  to:be  actor. 

As  one  cannot  be  the  controller  of  another,  every  living  creature 
despatches  his  Self  along,  with  the  life-breaths,  by  his  own  Self 
according  as  the  case  may  be  to  different  orders  of  Being.f 


Soul  and  the  Jiva  Soul.  The  only  distinction  lies  in  the  fact  of  the  presence 
or  absence  of  surrounding  conditions. 

When  death  ensues,  whatfremams  as  the  residue  is  the  five  primal  elements. 
The  soul  leaves  the  body.  The  residue  being  the  five  elements,  death  is  fre¬ 
quently  spoken  of  as  the  condition  of  fiveness.  (The  word  ‘  fiveness  ’  is  con¬ 
venient  to  explain  the;  Hindu  idea  of  death). 

*  ‘  Manas,’  it  should  be  noted,  is  the  sixth  sense.  It  is  the  lord  of  the 
senses.  It  controls  them,  directing  them  now  to  one  thing,  now  to  another.. 
In  the  Katha  Upanishada  it  is  said  : — 

Indriyani  paranyahuh,  Indriyebhyah  param  Manah, 

Manasastu  para  Buddhih,  Buddheratma  mahan  parah.. 

This  means  that  *  the  senses  have  been  said  to  be  superior  (to  their  ob¬ 
jects)  ;  Manas  is  superier  to  the  senses  ;  superior  to  Manas  is  Buddhi,  and  the 
Soul,  which  is  great,  is  superior  to  Buddhi.'  This  then  is  the  gradation  laid 
down.  The  senses,  that  is  the-  eye  and  the  rest,  are  material  substances,  and, 
therefore,  unconscious.  Manas,  or  Mind,  which  is  their  controller,  and  is 
numbered  with  them,  is  equally  unconscious.  It  is  the  Soul  that  imparts  con¬ 
sciousness  to  it. 

Acts  are  ascribable  to  the  Soul  as  their  agent.  By  itself  (or  himself)  the 
Soul  cannot  act.  When  united  with  Manas  which  has  the  senses  under  its. 
control,  the  Soul  is  capable  of  acting. 

Objects  that  are  unconscious  may  have  activity  ;  such  as  the  wind  ;  gun¬ 
powder  coming  into  contact  with  fire  ;  the  various  organs  of  the  physical  system. 

Manas  is  active.  But  being  unconscious,  it  cannot  be  spoken  of  as  an  agent- 
It  is  the  Soul  that  acts  and  is  the  agent. 

t  This  is  an  important  aphorism,  bearing  upon  the  transmigration  of  the 
Soul  from  body  to  body  in  different  orders  of  Being.  First  comes  the  general 
proposition  that  one  cannot  be  the  controller  of  another.  The  truth  of  this  is 
presumed.  Hence  arises  the  question, — what  is  it  that  forces  or  compels  the 
Soul  or  Self  to  take  birth  in  a  different  order  of  Being  after  the  dissolution 
of  its  or  his  previous  material  tenement  ?  The  answer  is  that  it  is  the  Soul  or 
Self  that  controls  itself  in  the  matter  of  a  new  birth  or  acceptance  of  a  new 
material  tenement. 


22 


CHARAKA  SAMH/TA. 


He  is  self-dependant  who  does  those  acts  the  fruits  whereof  he 
enjoys  himself. 

He  is  self-dependant  who  restrains  his  passions. 

He  is  self-dependant  who  renounces  everything.*^ 

Since  the  Soul,  though  pervading  all  things,  becomes  invested 
with  body  and,  dwelling  in  those  respective  senses  of  his  with 
which  he  comes  into  contact,  becomes  cognisant  of  all  perceptions, 
therefore  he  does  not  become  cognisant  of  all  perceptions  indwell¬ 
ing  in  all  abodes. f85 


[Some  of  the  printed  Bengal  texts  are  vicious.  Gangadhara  gives  the  cor¬ 
rect  reading  which  is  “  Yatha  swenatmanatmanam  sarvvah  sarvvasu  yon'shu, 
pranaistantrayate  Prani,  &c.”] 

Nothing  else  than  the  Self  causes  the  Self,  along  with  the  life-breaths,  to 

take  a  new  birth.  The  Self  is  a  free  agent  in  the  matter  and  owns  no  force 

out  of  itself.  This,  however,  should  be  understood  with  a  limitation.  A  man 
is  seen  to  take  service  under  another  man.  Such  service  may  at  first  be-dooked 
upon  as  implying  a  surrender  of  the  servant’s  will  to  that  of  the  employer. 
Yet,  in  reality,  it  is  not  so.  The  servant  requires  necessaries  of  life.  His  de¬ 
sire  to  have  them  is  his  own.  He  may  entertain  that  desire  or  dismiss  it. 
He  is  a  free  agent  in  the  matter,  for  in  serving  his  employer  he  seeks  to 
gratify  or  fulfil  his  own  desire.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  the  Self  impels  itself 
in  the  matter  of  a  new  birth.  The  acts  of  a  particular  life  determine  the 

next  life.  But  what  are  those  acts  ?  They  are  the  result  of  one’s  free  will. 

One,  therefore,  of  one’s  own  free  will,  takes  up  a  new  tenement  after  the  dis¬ 
solution  of  the  previous  one. 

*  What  the  Rishi  wishes  to  explain  is, — who  is  to  be  called  a  *  vacin  ’  or 
self-dependant  (implying  free)  person  ?  Ordinarily,  one  who  does  not  serve  an¬ 
other  is  regarded  as  a  1  vacin  ’  or  free  person.  This,  however,  is  not  so,  for 
‘  vacin  ’  includes  others  as  well.  He  who  does  such  acts  the  fruits  whereof 
are  enjoyed  by  himself  is  as  much  a  vacin  as  he  who  does  not  serve 
others.  This  has  been  explained  in  the  previous  note.  '  A  servant  does  not 
really  give  up  his  own  will  by  accepting  service.  What  he  really  does  is  to 
consult  his  own  will  when  he  engages  to  serve  an  employer.  Two  other  defi¬ 
nitions  of  ‘  vacin  ’  are  given,  viz.,  one  who  restrains  his  passions  and  practices 
self-  denial,  and  one  who  betakes  himself  to  a  life  of  renunciation  or  ‘  Sanyasa  ’ 
for  attaining  to  Emancipation  from  rebirth. 

t  This  is  as  literal  a  rendering  of  the  verse  as  possible  ;  yet  it  cannot  be 
hoped  that  the  sense  is  capable  of  being  caught  by  the  general  reader.  What 
the  Rishi  says  is  this  :  the  Soul  is  ‘  Sarvvagata,’  meaning  omnipresent  or-.per- 
vading  everything  in  the  universe.  This  characteristic  belongs  to  it  when  it  is 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


23 


Since  it  pervades  all  things  and  is  great,  therefore  arises  its 
condition  of  unrestricted  puissance.  By  restraining,  again,  the  Manas 
(in  Yoga),  the  Soul  beholds  all  that  is  removed  from  its  vicinage.86 

Inseparably  connected  with  Manas  which  follows  acts  and  body, 
the  Soul,  though  dwelling  in  one  (particular)  form  of  Being’  should 
be  known  as  dwelling  in  all  forms  of  Being.*87 


in  its  own  unperverted  nature.  But  when  it  is  affected  by  the  attributes  of  ‘  Rajas  ’ 
(passion)  an  ‘  Tamas  ’  (darkness)  or  ‘  Avidya  ’  it  becomes  perverted  and  falls  away 
from  its  original  nature.  It  then  becomes  invested  with  body,  that  is,  takes 
birth  as  this  person  and  that,  or  individualises  itself  into  thousands  and 
thousands  of  persons  or  living  creatures.  When  so  born,  the  Soul  becomes 
cognisant  of  all  perceptions  through  the  aid  of  those  senses  (belonging  to  par¬ 
ticular  bodies)  with  which  it  comes  into  contact.  Taking  the  soul,  therefore, 
as  representing  the  sum  total  of  individualised  creatures,  the  Rish:  says  that 
it  becomes  cognisant  of  perceptions  through  the  media  of  the  senses  belonging 
to  each  particular  body.  It  loses,  however,  the  capacity  of  universal  percep¬ 
tion  which  belongs  to  it  in  its  own  unperverted  nature.  The  perceptions  of 
the  born  Soul,  through  the  senses  of  a  particular  body  are  not  its  perceptions 
through  the  senses  of  another  body. 

What  is  meant  by  saying  that  the  soul  becomes  a  ‘  dehin  *  i.  e.,  vested 
with  body ,  is  that  it  becomes  vested  with  bodies.  Though  in  reality  the  Soul 
is  one,  it  appears,  in  conseqence  of  birth,  as  infinite  in  number. 

*  Hindu  philosophers  maintain  that  the  Soul  is  1  sarvvageta  ’  (omnipresant) 
and  ‘  vibhu  ’  (of  unrestricted  puissance).  These  attributes  follow  from  its  very 
nature.  Where,  i.  e.,  in  what  part  of  the  body,  does  it  reside  ?  No  particular 
part  of  the  body,  nor  even  the  whole  body,  can  be  named  in  answer  to  tnis 
question.  The  Soul  is  not  matter.  Being  immaterial,  nothing  can  confine  it.  Whar, 
again,  are  its  proportions  ?  Can  any  measure,  such  as  we  are  acquainted  with 
in  connection  with  matter,  be  assigned  to  it  ?  Hence,  it  is  regarded  as  Mahan, 
i.e.,  vast  or  great,  all-filling,  omniscient,  and  omnipotent.  The  attribute  of  ‘  vibhutwa  ’ 
(unrestricted  puissance)  follows  from  the  Soul  being  All-pervading  and  Great. 

If  the  senses  with  Manas  as  their  controller,  and  Buddhi  (understanding)  and 
the  rest,  be  restrained  by  yoga,  or  in  ‘  samadhi  ’  meaning  withdrawal  from  everything 
external  or  connected  with  the  external,  the  Soul  returns  for  the  time  being  to 
its  own  original  unperverted  nature.  The  knower,  the  known,  and  knowledge 
become  united,  and  universal  knowledge  or  omniscience  arises. 

The  Manas  follows  acts  and  body  ;  the  meaning  is  that  as  birth  in  a  particular 
form  is  determined  by  acts,  viz.,  the  acts  {viz.,  the  acts  of  the  previous  life),  the  nature 
or  kind  of  the  new  body  also  is  determined  by  acts.  The  Manas  that  inspires*that 


24 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A 


The  Self  has  no  beginning.  The  succession,  one  after  another, 
of  Not-self  also  is  without  beginning.  As  both  are  without  begin¬ 
ning,  it  cannot  be  said  which  is  first  (in  the  order  of  time).*88 

The  Knower  is  said  to  be  Witness,  and  not  that  which  does 
not  know.  Hence,  Self  (which  is  knower)  is  witness. 

All  phenomena  of  all  existent  beings  have  Self  for  their  witness. f89 
The  Self  which  inspires  Beings,  when  alone,  can  never  be  ap¬ 
prehended  by  the  aid  of  indications.  Of  the  Self  which,  when 
alone,  is  incapable  of  being  apprehended,  there  is  no  distinguish¬ 
ing  attribute.91 

The  union  of  Purusha  is  regarded  as  the  distinction  determined 
by  knowledge  of  pleasure'and  pain. 

There  is  distinction  where  the  knowledge  of  pleasure  and  pain 
is  inherent  ;  and  that  distinction  is  determined  by  that  knowledge 
itself.!91 


new  body  is  determined,  as  regards  its  character,  by  that  body  and  the  acts 
which  cause  that  body.  The  Manas  of  human  beings  would  differ  from  that  of 
the  lower  animals.  As  regards  human  beings,  again,  the  Manas  of  a  particu¬ 
lar  individual  would  differ  from  that  of  another  individual.  Hence,  Manas  is 
‘  dehakarmanupati,’  i.  e.,  follows  or  is  dependant  upon  both  body  and  acts. 

Connection  is  of  various  kinds,  such  as  union,  fusion,  co-existence,  adjuncts 
etc.  The  connection  between  the  Soul  and  Manas  is  that  both  are  inseparable 
adjuncts  of  each  other.  Mere  co-existence  is  implied. 

The  Soul,  which  is  the  inseparable  adjunct  of  Manas,  should  be  regarded 
as  truly  dwelling  in  all  forms  though  apparently  dwelling  in  a  particular  form* 
In  other  words,  the  Soul,  though  individualised,  is  truly  universal. 

*  Of  the  four  and  twenty  principles  that  constitute  the  being  called  Person, 
the  first  is  Self ;  the  remaining  three  and  twenty  are  Not-self.  The  universe 
consists  of  Self  and  Not-self.  Self  is  unmanifest  ;  Not-self  is  manifest.  Self 
is  knower  ;  Not-self  is  knowable. — T. 

t  Phenomena  are  transient.  They  are  known  or  witnessed  by  Self  which 
is  constant.  Self  is  the  link  that  connects  phenomena  as  they  rise  one  after 
another.  Phenomena  exist  or  appear  as  known  by  the  Self.  When  Self  succeeds 
in  dissociating  itself  from  all  phenomena,  it  regains  its  own  original  nature,  that 
is,  attains  to  Emancipation. — T. 

^  ‘  Bhutatman  ’  (the  Self  which  inspires  Beings),  meaning  the  one  Supreme 
Soul,  when  alone,  (tliatfis,  before  creation),  is  unknowable.  It  has  no  distinguishing 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


25 


The  physician  treats  pain  appertaining  to  the  past,  the  present, 
and  the  future.  Listen  now  to  the  reason  for  which  some  are  of 
this  opinion.34 

“  It  is  that  head-ache  which  has  come  back  ;  it  is  that  fever 
which  has  re-appeared  ;  it  is  that  severe  consumption  ;  it  is  that 
vomiting,  which  has  come  back.”98 

By  these  well-known  forms  of  speech  it  seems  to  be  the  opinion 
of.  people  that  it  is  the  past  that  comes  back  ;  that  the  time  of 
diseases  that  are  past  has  re-appeared.94 

The  medicine  that  is  administered  in  view  of  such  re-appearance, 
in  point  of  time,  of  the  disease,  is  regarded  as  an  alleviative  of 
disease  that  is  past.95 

It  is  that  flood,  by  which  the  crops  were  formerly  destroyed, 
that  has  re-appeared.  A  dam  is  constructed  after  the  same  manner 
(as  before),  and  similar  remedies  are  adopted.96 

Observing  the  symptoms,  during  the  period  of  incubation,  of 
diseases  that  are  about  *  to  come,  the  treatment  that  is  adopted, 
allaviates  the  pain  that  is  future.*97 


attributes.  Knower,  known,  and  knowledge  are  all  undistinguishable  at  that 
stage.  There  being  nothing  else,  the  Crutis  declare,  “  who  is  to  know  whom 
and  by  what  ?”  Human  knowledge  is  relative,  the  knower  and  the  known  are 
involved  in  knowledge.  When,  however,  there  is  no  relativity,  knowledge,:  as 
known  to  us,  cannot  exist. 

When  the  Self  becomes  manifest  in  created  beings,  that  is,  is  united  with 
the  three  and  twenty  principles,  (which,  again,  are  emanations  from  the  Self), 
distinctions  arise,  due  to  relativity.  The  Self  then  becomes  describable  by  its 
environments  or  indications.  The  knowledge  of  pleasure  and  pain  arises,  and 
gradations  of  Being  arise.  These  gradations  are  due  to  different  measures  of 
pleasure  and  pain,  or,  rather,  to  difference  of  experiences. — T. 

*  One  of  the  questions  asked  was  “what  pain  is  treated  by  physicians?” 
Pain  may  be  past,  present,  or  future.  Obviously,  pain  that  is  past  needs  no 
treatment  ;  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  pain  that  is  future  ;  while,  as  re¬ 
gards  pain  that  is  present,  it  may  be  said  to  have  actually  no  existence,  for 
the  present,  in  reality,  is  like  a  mathematical  point  between  the  past  and  the 
future.  That  question  is  answered  by  the  Rishi  in  verses  92  to  9 7.  The 
answer  is  that  the  '  Anubhava  ’  or  conviction  (faith)  of  human  being  is  a 
factor  that  is  incapable  of  being  ignored.  The  conviction  about  a  particular 
disease,  in  point  of  time,  is  that  the  disesase  which  afflicted  one  in  the 


2  6 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Through  treatment  undertaken  for  bringing  about  ease,  the 
after-effects,  connected  with  one  another,  of  diseases,  are  prevented 
and  ease  also  sets  in.98 

The  constituent  elements  of  the  body  always  grow  in  harmony 
with  causes.  These,  when  co-existing  with  accordant  causes,  never 
attain  to  a  state  of  discord.  When,  again,  they  co-exist  with  causes 
that  are  discordant  with  them,  they  never  attain  to  a  state  of  concord.39 

Keeping  this  consideration  before  his  view,  the  physician  allays 
pain  appertaining'to  the  three  stages  of  time  (viz.,  Past,  present,  and 
Future). 

Thus  has  treatment  been  explained  (with  regard  to  pain  in 
respect  of  time).100 

That  treatment  is  truly  loyal  which  is  not  prompted  by  cupidity.  101 

Cupidity  is  the  chief  cause  from  which  springs  sorrow  and 
everything  that  leads  to  sorrow. 


past  is  afflicting  him  again  in  the  present.  Future  disease,  again,  before  it 
has  fully  developed  itself,  may  be  and  is  treated.  The  answer  is  scarcely 
satisfactory.  It  would  have  :been:  to  the  point  if  it  were  said  That.-j'the  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  present  is  believed  in  by  men  in  general.  The  philosophical  idea 
of  the  present  being  a  point  between  the  past  and  the  future,  is  never 
realised  by  anybody.  Hence,  treatment  concerns  itself  with  both  the  disease 
that  is  present  and  that  is  future. — T. 

*  Verse  99  is  difficult  to  understand.  I  have  set  forth  what  I  apprehend 
to  be  its  true  sense,  introducing  a  few  additional  words  in  the  sentence.  What 
is  stated  is  this  :  the  constitutent  elements  of  the  body,  such  as  blood,  flesh, 
marrow,  bones,  etc.,  grow  harmoniously  with  their  respective  causes.  When, 
therefore,  the  causes  are  accordant  with  them,  they  show  no  signs  of  disorder 
or  distemper.  When,  again,  causes  are  not  accordant  with  them,  they  become 
disordered  or  distempered.  What  the  physician  has  to  do  is  to  make  causes 
accordant  with  the  constituent  elements  of  the  body.  If  the  causes  are  discordant, 
he  must,  by  his  operations,  restore  concordance  between  them  and  the  bodily 
elements.  In  this  case  it  is  present  pain  that  he  removes.  In  the  previous 
verses  the  removal  of  future  pain  and  then  of  past  pain  has  been  spoken  of. 
Hence,  all  the  three  kinds  of  pain,  viz.,  future,  past,  and  present,  form  the 
subjects  of  the  physician’s  operations.  Thus  the  question  has  been  fully  answered 
as  regards  the  kind  of  pain,  in  respect  of  time,  that  concerns  the  physician 
or  medical  science. — T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


6 77 

The  renunciation  of  cupidity  and  the  like  is  destruction  of  alf 
sorrow.*02' 

As  the  silk-worm  weaves  threads  for  its  own  destruction,  even- 
so  the  ignorant  man  obtains  from  earthly  possessions  nothing  but 
thirst  for  passing,  his  whole  life  in  misery.*105 

The  man  of  knowledge  who,  understanding  that  all  earthly 
possessions  are  like  fire,  withdraws  himself  from  them,  has  never 
to  suffer  sorrow,  inasmuch,  as  he  never  sets  his  heart  on  achiev¬ 
ing  anything  and  stands  aloof;  dissociated  from  all  things..!11"4 

Loss  of  Understanding,  of  Firmness,  and  of  Memory,  time  in¬ 
respect  of  the  accession-  of  disease  and'  of  the  administration  of 
correctives  as  also  the  accession  of  objects  unaccordant  with  the 
senses, — these  should  be  known  as  the  causes  of  sorrow.^105 


*  The  example  of  the  silk-worn  is  very  common  in  the  Hindu  Scriptures- 
for  illustrating  the  truth  that  one  derives  misery  or.-  meets  with  destruction  from 
one’s  own  acts.  ‘  Trishna  ’  is  thirst,  that  is,  the  desire  for  earthly  possessions.  The 
ignorant  man  is  he  who  is  encompassed  by  darkness  of  vision  ;  that  is,  he 
that  is  outside  the  light  of  true  knowledge. — T.. 

f  Abstention,  from  the  acquisition  of  earthly  possessions  is  preached  in  the 
Hindu  Scriptures  as  the  foundation  of  happiness.  The  man.  who  abstains  from 
wealth,  as  if  it  were  fire,  enjoys  happiness.  He  never  sets  his  heart  on 
achieving  any  task,  so  that  ill-success  never  frets  him.  He  stands  aloof  from 
all  things..  He  is  far  from  the  madding  crowd’s  ignoble  strife. — T. 

f  1  Dhi,’  ‘  Dhriti,’  and  ‘  Smriti  ’  are  explained  by  the  Commentators  as 
implying  only  different  functions  of  the  Understanding  or  ‘  buddhi.1'  I  render 
‘  dhi-  ’  the  equivalent  of  ‘  buddhi,’  as  Understanding  ;  ‘  dhriti  ’  as  firmness,  or 
the  power  by  which,  having  apprehended  what  is-  proper  and  beneficial,  we 
adhere  to  it,  without  being  led  astray  ;  and  lastly  *  smriti  ’  as  Memory 
or  the  retentive  power.  This  is  the  Conservative  faculty  of  the 

Hamiltonian  classification  of  the  Cognitive  faculties,  for  it  implies  the 
faculty  by  which  everything  good  and  beneficial  that  has  been  acquired  is 
retained  in  or  conserved  in  the  mind..  t  Vibrangca  ’  is,  literally,  aberration  or  a 
falling  off.. 

It  is- the  result  of  Ayoga,  Atiyoga-,  and  Mithyayoga,  that  is,  absence  of  correlation, 
excess  of  correlation,  and  impropriety  of  correlation,  {vide  Lesson  viii,  Sutra- 
sthana,  ante,' p.  88).  So  the  ‘  asamprapti  ’’  of  ‘  Kala  ’  meaning  time  and  of1  Karma  ’ 
meaning  acts,  arises  from  the  same  three  causes  of  absence  &c.,  of  correlation. 
The  accession  of  objects  before  the  senses  that  are  not  accordant  with  them, 
is  a  cause  of  sorrow.  In  their  case  also,  it  is  the  result  of  absence  &c.  of 
correlation.— T. 


86 


678 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


An  injudicious  attention  to  what  is  unchangeable  and  what  is 
changeable,  as  also  to  good  and  evil,  is  regarded  as  loss  of  under¬ 
standing,  since  the  understanding  implies  a  judicious  application 
to  things.*106 

The  mind  that  is  prone  to  earthly  objects  is  incapable  of  being 
restrained  j,  from  evil  courses  owing  to  loss  of  firmness,  for  firmness 
inplies  restrainbof  inclinations.107 

The  swerving  of  the  mind  of  a  person  who  is  overwhelmed  by 
passion  ^and  heedlessness  from  the  knowledge  of  truth,  is  known 
as  loss  of  memory,  for  that  which  should  be  remembered  (viz.y 
the  knowledge  of  truth)  dwells  in  memory.i°8 

The  evil  acts  which  a  man  who  has  lost  understanding,  firm¬ 
ness,  and  memory,  perpetrates,  should  be  known  to  constitute 
what  is  called  fault  of  judgment.  This  (fault  of  judgment)  is  pro¬ 
vocative  of  all  the  faults.^109 

The  expulsion  (by  force)  of  urine  and  stools  and  other  excreta 
(before  the  calls  are  distinct),  suppression  of  the  same  (when  the 
urgings  are  pronounced),  indulgence  in  acts  of  rashness,  over-indul¬ 
gence  in  women,110 

Postponement  of  (necessary)  acts,  injudicious  essaying  of  acts, 
abrogation  of  modesty  of  behaviour,  aggressions  on  persons  deserv¬ 
ing  of  worship, 111d 

Indulgence  in  acts  known  to  be  baneful  to  one's  own  self, 
indulgence  in  acts  that  lead  to  insanity,11® 

Roving  at  improper  times  and  improper  places,  cultivation  of  friend- 


*  The  two  words  in  this  couplet  that  require  to  be  properly  understood 
are  *  samam  ’  and  ‘  vishamam.’  By  the  first  is  meant  ‘  equable  ’  in  the  sense  of 
judicious.  By  the  second,  the  reverse  of  this.  That  man  is  said  to  labour 
under  a  loss  of  understanding  who  injudiciously  applies  himself  to  what  is 
changeable  and  what  unchangeable,  or  what  is  good  and  what  evil.  If  the 
understanding  be  all  right,  one  would  apply  oneself  to  the  unchangeable,  meaning 
Godhead  and  duty,  discarding  what  is  changeable,  meaning  all  that  is  earthly. — T. 

t  ‘  Dosha  ’  in  1  sarvadoshaprakopanam  ’  has  reference  as  much  to  the 
faults,  (wind,  bile  and  phlegm)  as  to  all  trangressions  from  duty.  The 
author,  while  enunciating  a  general  truth,  has  his  eye,  however,  on  wind,  bile, 
and  phlegm  in  particular  which  are  technically  called  ‘  doshas  ’  or  faults.— T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


679 


ship  (or  obtaining  one’s  good  will)  by  acts  painful  to  one’s  own 
self,  the  renunciation  of  those  benefical  acts  which  have  been 
spoken  of  in  the  Lesson  on  the  Senses,118 

Envy,  pride,  fear,  wrath,  cupidity,  stupefaction,  arrogance,  and 
errors,  or  all  baneful  acts  arising  from  these,  and  all  acts  in¬ 
jurious  to  the  body  :114 

These  and  such  other  acts  which  arise  from  passion  and  stupefaction, 
are  regarded  by  sages  as  disease-producing  faults  of  judgment.115 

Injudicious  apprehension  of  things  by  the  understanding,  as  also 
a  setting  £of  one’s  self  to  injudicious  acts,  should  be  known  as  fault 
of  judgment.  That  which  is  called  fault  of  judgment  really  concerns 
the  mind.#116 

In  the  Lesson  on  the  causes,  in  brief,  of  diseases,  time  in 
respect  of  the’?  accession  of  disease  has  been  explained.  This  in¬ 
cludes  the  topics,  as  previously  explained,  of  the  accession,  excite¬ 
ment,  and  alleviation  of  bile  and  the  rest,  the  seasons  ending  with 
the  rainy,  marked  by  characteristics  that  are  false,  excessive,  or 
attenuated,  as  causes  of  diseases  ;  rules  about  timeliness  and  un¬ 
timeliness  in  respect  of  food  eaten  or  in  course  of  digestion  or 
after  digestion  ;  forenoon,  noon,  and  afternoon,  and  the  three 
divisions,  called  ydmas ,  of  the  night  ;  particular  diseases  which 
spring  up  in  particular  times  laid  down  ;  fevers  which  appear  on 
every  alternate  day ;  those  which  appear  with  intervals  of  -  two  days 
between  successive  paroxysms  ;  and  those  which  appear  with  intervals 
of  three  or  four  days  between  successive  .  paroxysms.  These  set 
In,  each  at  the  fixed  time,  their  accession  of  strength  being  due  to 
time.  These  and  various  other  diseases,  all  of  which  set  in  when 
their  time  comes,  are  to  be  treated  by  the  physician  who  is 
conversant  with  •  the  measure  of  their  strength  and  the  fixed  times 
of  their  accession,  before  they  make  their  appearance.fi  17-n” 


*  What  is  said  in  the  last  sentence  is  this  :  Acts  have  two  elements, 
•viz.,  mental  and  physical.  The  physical  element  is  excluded.  Acts  that  are 
faults  of  judgment  are,  the  Rishi  says,  all  mental. — T. 

t  The  three  expressions,  viz.,  ‘  Dhidhritismritivibhrangca,’  *  kalakarmanam 
samprapti,’  or  simply  ‘  kalasamprapti,’  and  ‘  asatamyarthagama,’  (vide  verse  105, 
ante ,  of  this  Lesson)  are  gradually  explained.  The  first  is  explained  generally 


68o 


:CBAkARA  SAMHTtA. 


With  the  development  ;of  Time,  decrepitude,  death  and  such 
diseases  as  are  not  due  to  known  and  defined  causes,  are  seen  to 


in  verses  106  to  108,  ante ,  of  this  Lesson.  It  is  then  Said  that  ‘  dhidhritismriti- 
vibhrangca  ’  is  otherwise  called  ‘  Prajnaparadha.’  The  acts  which  constitute 
‘  praynaparadha  ’  are  then  laid  down  in  verses  109  to  116  Then  comes  ‘  kala- 
samprapti.’  This  is  explained  in  verses  1 17  to  120.  By  ‘  kalasamprapti  ’  is 
meant  Time  in  respect  of  the  accession  of  disease  or  its  immediate  causes. 
It  includes  such  topics  as  the  accession,  excitement,  and  alleviation  of  the 
faults,  viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  and  the  others  mentioned  lower  down. 
Generally  speaking,  morning  is  the  time  for  the  accession  of  phlegm  ;  noon  for  that 
of  bile,  and  evening  for  that  of  wind.  As  regards  the  night,  leaving  out 
the  first  quarter,  the  second  is  the  time  for  the  accession  of  phlegm  ;  the 
third  for  that  of  bile,  and  the  fourth  or  the  last,  for  that  of  wind  ;  so  each 
of  the  three  principal  seasons  is  favourable  to  the  accession  of  each  of  the 
three  faults  :  thus,  summer  is  the  time  for  the  accession  of  bile  ;  the  rainy 
season  for  that  of  of  wind  ;  and  winter  for  that  of  phlegm.  The  seasons  may 
not  present  their  natural  characteristics.  Indeed,  as  regards  their  usual  or  natural 
characteristics,  the  three  kinds  of  improper  correlation,  viz.,  the  false,  the 
excessive,  and  the  attenuated,  may  arise.  In  winter,  certain  days  may  not  be 
cold  at  all,  or  excessively  cold,  or  only  slightly  so.  Certain  days  of  winter 
may  also  present  the  characteristics  of  the  rainy  season.  The  rainy  also  may 
present,  on  certain  days,  the  characteristics  of  the  two  other  seasons,  or  its 
own  proper  characteristics  may  show  themselves  excessively  or  slightly.  So 
with  regard  to  summer  also  about  the  manifestation  of  its  own  characteristics. 
If  will  thus  appear  that  though  summer  is  the  time  for  the  accession  of  bile, 
the  rainy  season  for  that  of  wind,  and  winter  for  that  of  phlegm,  yet  even 
summer  may  help  the  accession  of  wind  and  phlegm,  the  rainy  season  of  bile 
and  phlegm,  and  winter  of  wind  and  bile,  contrary  to  their  respective  natures. 
By  ‘  jirna  ’  food  is  meant  food  that  has  been  already  digested  ;  by  ‘  bhukta  ’ 
is  implied  food  that  is  just  taken  ;  and  by  1  prajirna  ’  is  implied  food  in  course 
of  digestion.  Each  of  these  owns  the  influence  of  Time  in  respect  of  the 
accession,  accumulation,  and  alleviation  of  the  several  faults  and,  therefore, 
of  the  diseases  due  to  them.  Thus  during  meals  it  is  the  phlegm  that  accedes 
or  accumulates  ;  during  digestion  it  is  the  turn  of  bile  :  and  after  digestion, 
in  comes  the  turn  of  wind.  Hence,  in  taking  one’s  meals,  one  should  avoid 
the  morning,  the  morning  being  the  time  that  favours  the  accession  and 
accumulation  of  phlegm  ;  &c.’  Each  of  these  acts  or  operations,  it  would  thus 
appear,  owns  the  influence  of  Time.  There  are,  again,  diseases  (notably  fevers) 
whose  accession,  strength,  and  alleviatin,  own  the  influence  of  Time.  Some 
of  them  appear  at  intervals  of  one  day,  or  two  days,  or  even  four  days.  Some, 
again,  appear  on  particular  lumar  days,  such  as  days  of  the  full  morn  or 
the  new  moon.  These,  therefore,  are  included  within  the  topic  of  ‘  kalasam¬ 
prapti,’ — T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


68 1 

•come  naturally.  That  which  is  brought  about  by  Nature  has  no 
remedy.122 

The  acts  of  a  previous  birth,  which  go  by  the  name  of  Destiny, 
:are  seen  to  be  causes  of  disease  in  course  of  time.128 

There  is  no  important  act  the  fruit  of  which  the  doer  has  not 
to  enjoy  or  endure.  Those  diseases  which  are  born  of  the  acts  (of 
•a  previous  life)  are  capable  of  being  dispelled  by  propitiatory  rites 
■and  ceremonies.  Indeed,  they  are  allayed  as  soon  as  the  acts 
themselves  are  exhausted  (in  respect  of  their  effects).*124 

In  consequence  of  hearing  sounds  that  are  very  loud  and  harsh, 
in  consequence,  again,  of  hearing  no  sound  at  all  or  of  hearing 
sounds  that  are  very  low,  the  sense  of  hearing  becomes  destroyed.125 

The  contact  of  the  ear  with  sounds  that  are  rough,  exceedingly 
dreadful,’  uncongenial,  disagreeable,  and  indicative  of  danger,  is  re¬ 
garded  asffalse  correlation.126 

Total  abstention  from  touch,  excessive  indulgence  in  touch,  and 
partial  indulgence  in  it,  impair  the  sense  of  touch,  as  has  been 
said  in  the  abstract  of  touchable  objects. t2? 

Contact  with  winds  raised  by  evil  spirits  and  those  proceeding 
from  poisonous  substanees,  and  contact  with  oily  substances  and 


*  Verse  124  completes  all  the  Rishi  says  on  the  subject  of  ‘  Kalasamprapti.’ 
The  word  ‘  daiva,’  in  Verse  123,  literally  means  ‘  that  which  pertains  to  the  deities.’ 
It  is,  however,  used  here,  as  elsewhere  in  such  connections,  in  the  sense  of 
‘  Destiny.’  As  explained  in  this  treatise,  it  signifies  the  unexhausted  acts  of 
previous  lives.  Acts  must  bring  about  their  effects.  They  are  never  destroyed. 
They  are  wiped  off  only  when  their  fruits  have  been  enjoyed  or  endured.  Hence, 
he  who  seeks  Emancipation  must  abstain  from  acts  both  good  and  bad. 

The  Hindu  belief  is  that  some  diseases  are  due  to  the  acts  of  previous  lives. 
These  have  no  remedies  in  Medical  Science.  Only  propitiatory  rites  and  cere¬ 
monies,  that  is,  sacrifice,  worship  of  the  gods,  etc.,  can  destroy  those  acts,  and 
with  them  their  effects,  viz.,  the  diseases  due  to  them.  Treatment,  as  has  been 
explained  by  the  Rishi  before,  is  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  that  which  depends  upon 
science  and  drugs,  and  that  which  depends  upon  acts  of  piety  and  especial  rites 
for  propitiating  the  deities.  Then,  again,  decrepitude  and  death  may  not  be 
due  to  especial  causes.  They  are  generally  brought  about  by  Time.  It  is  the 
nature  of  the  physical  organism  that  it  should  decay  and  perish  in  time.— T 


682 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


heat  and  cold  that  are  all  untimely,  are  called  false  Correlation  of 

touch. *128 

In  consequence  of  beholding  objects  that  are  possessed  of  great 
effulgence,  or  objects  that  are  very  minute,  or  of  never  exercising 
the  eye  at  all  for  vision,  the  power  of  vision  becomes  destroyed.129 

The  sight  of  objects  that  are  hateful,  or  terrible,  or  repulsive,  or 
of  objects  at  a  great  distance  and  seen  with  straining  eyes,  or  of 
objects  that  are  of  a  dark  hue,  is  regarded  as  false  correlation  in 
respect  of  vision. f13° 

Excessive  indulgence  in  any  of  the  tastes,  or  a  total  abstention 
from  all  the  tastes,  or  indulgence,  while  taking  things  that  are  from 
habit  suitable  to  the  physical  organism,  in  tastes  that  do  not  at 
all  agree  with  them,  or  a  very  sparing  indulgence  in  tastes,  impairs 
the  organ  of  taste.J131 

Indulgence  in  scents  that  are  very  mild  or  very  keen,  or  a  total 
abstention  from  all  scents,  is  destructive  of  the  organ  of  scent.132 


*  ‘  Akalenagatah  sneha-samsparcah  ’  implies,  I  think,  contact  with  oily  sub¬ 
stances  at  unseasonable  hours,  such  as  rubbing  the  body  with  oil  at  night  time 
or  after  meals. — T. 

t  By  ‘  rupanam  tamashanancha  ’  is  meant  all  kinds  of  dark  objects,  i.  e., 
objects  of  a  deep  black  hue.  It  is  well-known  that  by  continually  looking  at 
dnrk-coloured  objects,  one  loses  one’s  power  of  vision.  Long-continued  residence 
in  perfect  darkness  impairs  or  destroys  the  sight.  This  was  well-known  to  cruel 
tyrants  and  their  as  cruel  agents.  In  Sir  Walter  Scott’s  Count  Robert  of  Paris, 
an  example  is  given  of  the  Emperor  Alexius  having  immured  a  competitor  for 
the  throne  into  a  subterranean  dungeon  from  which  light  had  been  very  care¬ 
fully  excluded,  caused  him  to  believe  that_  he  had  become  blind.  The  story 
speaks  of  the  man’s  restoration  to  sight  as  having  been  effected  easily.  In 
this,  Sir  Walter  Scott  was  in  error.  One  who  loses  his  vision  by  long-continued 
residence  :in  darkness,  regains  it  very  slowly  and  through  a  careful  regulation 
of  light.  A  sudden  exposure  to  strong  light  may  permanently  impair  the  vision. — T. 

I  ‘  Okasatmya  ’  implies  all  things  which,  through  practice  or  habit,  become 
assimilable  to,  or  accordant  with,  the  system.  Thus  in  the  case  of  inveterate 
opium-eaters,  even  large  quantities  of  opium,  which  are  sure  to  kill  others, 
become'  assimilable  or  non-injurious.  The  word  is  applied  also  to  things  which 
are  assimilable  in  the  ordinary  way.  “  Indulgence, "  while  taking  things  that 
are  from  habit  suitable  to  the  physical  organism,  in  tastes  that  do  not  at  all 
agree  with  them  ”  may  be  illustrated  by  the  use  of  mustard  oil  with  opium,  or 
chillies  with  tamarind  or  hog-plums. — T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


683 


The  contact  of  scent  with  the  organ  of  scents,  omitted  by  pu- 
trified  objects  or  objects  that  are  poisonous,  or  of  scents  that  are 
disagreeable  or  repulsive,  or  of  scents  that  do  not  belong  to  the 
season,  is  regarded  as  false  correlation  in  respect  of  the  power  of 
scent.*133 

Even  this  are  the  three  kinds  of  contact  with  the  senses  of 
objects  not  in  accordance  with  them.  Each  is  probocative  of  the 
faults  (viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm).  That  should  be  known  as 
Unaccordant  which  does  not  accord  with  the  humau  organism. f134 


*  It  is  difficult  to  understand  what  the  sense  is  of  the  word  ‘  bhuta  ’  that 
immediately  follows  ‘  puti.’  If  the  final  vowel  in  ‘  puti  ’  were  long,  ‘  bhuta  * 
would  be  intelligible  as  meaning  a  thing  become  putrified/  All  the  editions  read 
‘  puti  ’  with  the  final  vowel  short.  I  suspect  1  bhuta  ’  may  mean  evil  or  malignant 
spirits.  The  belief  in  India  is  that  evil  spirits  cast  around  them,  as  they  pass  from 
place  to  place,  a  repulsive  ordor.  In  verse  128  it  is  worthy  of  remark,  the  word 
‘  bhuta  ’  occurs  in  connection  with  wind.  There  it  has  been  taken  as  imylying 
evil  spirits.  To  this  day,  many  diseases  of  children  and  of  women  in  a  state 
of  pregnancy  are  attributed  to  contact  with  the  wind  raised  by  evil  spirits  as  they 
pass  through  the  welkin.  ‘  Bhuta  ’  may  also  be  taken  as  implying  living  creatures. 
‘  Bhuta-gandha  ’  then,  in  such  a  connection,  would  mean  such  ordors  as  are 
emitted  by  unwashed  dogs,  or  moles,  or  tigers,  or  grown  up  goats  or  sheep, 
and  worms  and  insects  of  certain  species  and  ants  of  certain  kinds. 
Not  being  sure  of  the  word  I  omit  it  in  the  translation.  ‘Anartava  ’  scents 
are  those  which  do  not  appertain  to  the  seasons  in  which  they  are  indulged 
in.  There  are  flowers  belonging  to  a  particular  season.  If  their  scent  is  taken 
in  the  season  in  which  they  appear,  such  scent  becomes  beneficial.  If,  however, 
these  flowers  are  made  to  bloom  in  another  season,  their  scent,  if  taken,  would, 
instead  of  being  beneficial,  be  baneiul.  The  same  may  be  said  of  unseasonable 
fruits.  The  mango,  for  example,  may  be,  made  to  grow  and  ripen  in  all  seasons. 
It  is  seem,  however,  that  if  taken  in  any  other  season  than  that  to  which  it 
properly  belongs,  it  actually  becomes  baneful.  Its  taste  also  is  considerably 
impaired. — T. 

t  The  adjective  ‘  trividhah  ’  applies  to  1  ashtmyarthasamyogah.’  It  will  be  seen, 
however,  that  with  ragard  to  every  one  of  the  senses,  four  and  not  three  kinds 
of1  samyoga  ’  or  ‘  yoga  ’  have  been  spoken  of,  viz.,  ‘  Atiyoga,1  ‘  Ayoga,’  ‘  Hinayoga,’ 
and  ‘  Mithyayoga.’  The  first  implies  excess  of  contact ;  the  second,  a  total 
absence  of  contact  ;  the  third,  sparing  or  partial  contact,  and  the  fourth,  contact 
with  objects  that  are  hostile.  In  speaking,  however,  of  only  three  kinds  of  con¬ 
tact,  in  verse  134,  it  would  seem  that  the  third  (or  ‘  Hinayoga’)  has  been  left 
out  of  consideration.  The  definition  of  ‘  asatmya  ’  as  something  that  ‘  sahat- 
myatam  na  yati  ’  is  a  mere  verval  one.— T. 


684 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


The  diseases  which  spring  from;  the  false,  the  excessive;,  and'  the- 
partial  correlation  of  sounds  and  the  rest  (with  the  corresponding 
organs  of  sense),  should  be  known  by  the  learned  by-  the  name  of' 
“  diseases  appertaining  to  the  senses.”*135 

Even  these  are  regarded  as  the  causes  of  all  sensations  which) 
are  productive  of  misery. 

As  regards  happiness,  it  is  said  that  there  is.  only  one  cause,  viz., 
harmonious  correlation.  It  is  extremely  difficult  of  attainment. t186 


*  The  Sanskrit  langnage  has  an  evident  superiority  to  the  English  in  the. 
matter  of  derivatives  that  may  be  formed  from  roots  and  stems.  Thus,  from  the. 
word  ‘Indriya,’  implying  sense,  is  formed  the  word  ‘Aindriyaka,’  meaning  ‘  appartain- 
ing  or  relating  to  the  Indriyas.’  There  are  many  derivatives  in  English  fromi  the: 
word  ‘  sense,’  but  none  of  them  would  convey  the  signification  of  the  Sanskrit  deri¬ 
vative  ‘  Aindriyaka.’  It  will  be  seen  that  diseases,  according  to  their  causes,  are 
divided  into  three  classes  :  i.  those  due  to  impairment  or  destruction  of  the 
understanding,  memory,  etc.,  or,  as  it  is  otherwise  called,  ‘  Prajnaparadha,’  i.  e.r 
faults  of  judgment ;  2.  those  which  fall  within  ‘  Kalasamprapti,’  i.  e.,  the  influ¬ 
ence  of  time  ;  and  3.  the  improper  correlation  of  objects  with  the  senses  by- 
which  they  are  apprehended.  The  first  and  the  third;  it  would  seem,  are  scarcely 
exclusive  of  each  other.  Some  of  the  diseases,  again,  which  fall  under  the  second! 
class,  may  be  due  to  the  same  causes,  which  being  about  those  of  the  first  and! 
the  third  classes.  Altogether,  the  classification  does  not  seem  to  be  scientific: — T_ 

f  Harmonious  correlation,  as.  regards  everything,  is  the  one  cause  of  happi¬ 
ness  or  freedom  from  pain  or  misery.  As  regards,  for  example,  the  correlation, 
of  objects  with  their  corresponding  senses,  unless  that  correlation  be  harmonious, 
there  cannot  be  freedom  from  diseases.  Harmonious  correlation,  in.  this  case, 
would  mean  the  absence  of  excessive  and  sparing  and  false  correlation  and  the- 
total  absence  of  relation.  As  regards,  again,  the  diseases  that  are  due  to  ‘  Kala- 
samprapti,’  even  here  harmonious  correlation  ensures  freedom  from  disease, 
Tnus,  in  the  summer  season,  when  the  bile  becomes  naturally  excited,  one  should 
so  eat  and  drink  and  follow  such  a  conduct  in  other  respects  that  one’s  bile 
may  not  be  excited  ;  or  one  should  migrate  to  such  a  climate  where  the  heat 
of  the  sun  is  not  excessive.  As  regards  also  the  loss  or  impairment  of  the 
understanding,  memory,  etc.,  it  follows  without  saying  that  if  harmony  exists, 
in  respect  of  these  faculties,  no  fault  of  judgment  would  occur  and  consequently 
there  would  be  no  accession  of  disease  and  misery. 

In  respect  of  the  faults  themseives,  vis.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  if  harmony 
or  concord  exists  between  them,  there  will  be  no  disease. — T. 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


683 


Neither  the  senses,  nor  their?  objects,  are  the  causes  of 
happiness  or  misery.  It  is  seen  that  only  the  correlation  (be¬ 
tween  the  senses  and  their  objects),  which  is  of  four  kinds,  is 
the  cause  of  both  happiness  and  misery.*137 

The  senses  exist,  their  objects  also  exist.  Yet  there  may 
not  be  correlation  (or  contact)  between  them  ;  and  (conse¬ 
quently)  there  may  not  be  either  misery  or  happiness. 

Hence,  the  cause  (of  happiness  and  misery)  is,  indeed,  cor¬ 
relation  (or  contact)  between  the  senses  and  their  objects,  which 
is  of  four  kinds.  !38 

Happiness  and  misery,  which  are  within  the  ken  of  the 
Self,  the  understanding,  the  mind,  and  the  senses,  never  arise 
without  acts.  The  manner  in  which  each  (viz.,  happiness  or 
misery)  becomes  perceptible  is  laid  down  below.-f183 

Contact  with  the  organ  of  touch,  and  contact  with  the  mind, 
these  are  the  exciting  causes,  of  two  kinds,  of  all  sensations 


*  It  will  be  seen  that  in  verse  134,  ante ,  the  correlation  between  the 
senses  and  their  objects  has  been  spoken  of  as  of  three  kinds.  These 
three  kinds,  as  expressly  mentioned  in  verse  135,  ante ,  are  the  false, 
the  excessive,  and  the  partial  or  sparing.  The  total  absence  of  corre¬ 
lation,  called  ‘  Ayoga,’  is  omitted.  Here,  in  Verse  137,  the  correlation  is 
spoken  of  as  of  four  kinds.  All  the  four,  therefore,  have  been  counted 
here.— T. 

+  The  words  ‘  Yatha  yattu  boddhavyam  tattathochyate  ’  have  been 
misunderstood  by  Gangadhara.  The  Bengali  translators  also  have  made 
a  mess  of  the  passage.  The  sense,  however,  is  very  plain.  Having  at  first 
declared  that  happiness  and  misery  are  cognizable  by  the  Self,  the  under¬ 
standing,  the  mind,  and  the  senses,  and  that  these  are  due  to  acts,  the 
Rishi,  in  the  verses  that  follow,  lays  down  the  manner  in  which  happiness 
and  misery  fall  within  the  ken  of  the  Self,  etc.— T. 


87 


684 


charaka  sam-hit a. 


of  happiness  and  misery.*140 

Thirst,  having  desire  and  aversion  for  its  essence,  flows 
from  happiness  and  misery. 

Again,  thirst,  it  is  said,  is  the  cause  of  happiness  and  misery.141 

It  is  thirst  that  brings  about  those  entities  upon  which  rest 
the  sensations  (of  Touch).  One  that  is  destitute  of  the  (proper) 
organs,  can  never  come  in  contact  (with  objects  of  Touch). 
One,  again,  that  is  not  touched,  cannot  experience  sensations 
(of  touch,  or  pleasure  and  pain).f148 

The  abode  (or  refuge)  of  all  sensations  are  the  mind,  and 
the  body  invested  with  the  senses,  with  the  exception  of  the 
hair,  the  bristles,  the  extremities  of  the  nails,  stools,  and  urine, 
and  other  products  of  liquified  Anna-mala 4145 


*  The  two  kinds  of  contact  mentioned  here  are  the  exciting  causes 
of  ail  sensations  of  pleasure  and  pain  with  regard  to  Touch.  Mere  contact 
with  the  external  organ,  without  contact  with  the  mind,  cannot  produce 
either  pleasure  or  pain.  The  yogin,  absorbed  in  yoga  contemplation,  is  dead 
to  all  external  impressions.  Archimedes  was  so  absorbed  in  the  contem¬ 
plation  of  a  geometrical  problem  that  he  was  not  cognisant  of  the  fact  of  the 
city  in  whose  defence  he  had  taken  an  active  part  having  already  been  stormed 
by  the  besiegers.  It  is  said  that  he  cried  out,  when  a  soldier  stepped  into 
his  circie, — “  Do  not  disturb  my  circle.” — T. 

t  The  body  consists  of  *  bhavan  vedanaijrayasamjnakan,’  that  is, 
entities  upon  which  the  sensations  (of  touch)  rest,  that  is,  organs  of  touch. 
What  is  stated,  therefore,  in  the  first  line  of  this  verse  is  that  it  is  thirst 
or  desii-e  that  originates  the  body.  By  conquering  thirst,  one  attains  to 
Emancipation,  or  freedom' from  re-birth. 

In  the  second  line,  it  is  said  that  one  who  is  uninvested  with  the  organs 
of  touch,  cannot  come  into  contact  with  the  objects  of  touch  ;  one  that 
is  untouched,  can  have  no  sensations  of  touch. — T. 

J  ‘  Annamala  dravaguna  ’  implies  the  products  of  liquified  ‘  Anna-mala.’ 
In  Lesson  28  of  Sutrasthana,  ante,  ( vide  p.  392)  it  has  been  stated  “From 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA  6S5 

In  Yoga  as  also  in  Emancipation  there  is  an  absence  of 
all  sensations. 

Emancipation  is  absolute  cessation  (of  everything).  Yoga 
leads  to  Emancipation.*114 


that  (viz.,  the  food  thus  taken)  arises  a  juice  which  is  call  Aharaprasada, 
or  food-substance,  as  also  a  refuse  called  dregs  or  dross. 

“  From  the  Refuse  arise  urine,  sweat,  fasces,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  ; 
as  also  those  excrements  which  have  for  their  sources  the  ears,  and  eyes, 
and  nose,  and  mouth,  the  hair  cells  of  the  body,  and  genital  organs,  and 
such  limbs  of  the  body  as  hair,  beard,  bristles,  nails,  etc. 

“  From,  however,  that  juice  which  springs  from  food,  grow  the  fluids, 
blood,  flesh,  fat,  bones,  marrow,  vital  seed,  and  that  which  has  been  called 
ojas  ;  as  also  those  substances  that  are  requisite  for  the  functions  of  the 
five  senses.  These  latter  are  called  the  essence  of  the  cihatus.  From  the 
same  source  grow  the  joints  of  the  body,  the  ligaments,  wings  and  feathers, 
and  other  limbs,  etc.’’ 

It  would  thus  seem  that  the  hair,  the  bristles,  the  extremities  of  the  nails, 
etc.,  are  all  produced  from  ‘  Annamala  ’  or  the  Refuge  or  dross  or  dregs 
into  which  food  passes  after  yielding  ‘  Aharaprasada  ’  or  -food-substance. 

‘  Annamala  ’  produces  other  ingredients  of  the  body  besides  hair,  etc. 
These  are  all  mentioned  in  the  passage  extracted  above  from  Sutrasthana. 
Gangadhara  explains  the  word  ‘  Annamala- dravaguna  ’  wrongly.  He  is 
silent  about  the  word  ‘  guna  ’  which  means  product  or  result.  The  Bengali 
translators  also  have  misunderstood  the  words.  *  Body  invested  with  the 
senses’  includes  the  hair,  etc.,  and  the  other  products  of  ‘  Annamala,’  but 
these  latter  are  not  sensitive. — T. 

*  Having  said  that  sensations  have  for  their  abode  or  refuge  the  mind, 
and  the  body  invested  with  the  senses,  excepting  such  parts  or  appendages 
as  arise  from  the  food- refuse,  the  Rishi  proceeds  to  say  that  in  Yoga  and 
Emancipation,  there  is  a  complete  absence  of  all  sensations.  Yoga  has 
been  defined  to  be  ‘  chittavrittinirodhah,’  i.  e.,  a  suspension  of  all  the 
functions  of  the  mind.  Yoga,  of  course,  is  an  absolute  concentration  of 
the  mind,  implying  its  total  withdrawal  from  all  external  objects.  In  su<;h. 


686 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Happiness  and  misey  flow  from  a  union  of  objects  and  the 
senses,  the  mind,  and  the  Soul. 

In  the  absence  of  all  exertion,  when  the  mind  is  in  perfect 
tranquillity,  and  when  one  rests  on  one’s  Self,  both  ( viz.,  happi¬ 
ness  and  misery)  cease,  and  one  attains  to  perfect  Self-control. 

Even  this  state  (of  perfect  Self-control)  is  what  Rishis  conver¬ 
sant  with  yoga,  call  the  yoga  of  embodied  beings.115-48 

Entrance  into  Self,  true  knowledge  of  all  objects,  accomplish¬ 
ment  of  acts  by  fiats  of  the  will  alone,  unimpeded  vision,  un¬ 
impeded  hearing,  unobstructed  memory,  wealth  of  beauty  (in 
respect  of  the  body),  and  the  power  of  making  oneself  invisible 
at  will, — these,  it  is  well-known,  are  the  eight  kinds  of  super¬ 
human  powers  possessed  by  Yogins. 

These  powers  arise  from  a  life  that  rests  on  the  principle 
of  unmixed  Goodness. *147-48 


a  state  there  is  no  sensation,  for  to  one  in  yoga,  external  objects  are  as  not. 
Yoga  leads  to  Emancipation,  or  that  state  in  which  the  Self  exists  in  the 
Self.  It  implies  the  non-existence  of  the  body.  Of  course,  the  Rishi  speaks 
here  of  the  condition  of  those  who  are  ‘  Jivan-mukta,’ /.<?.,  Emancipated  in 
life  ;  in  other  words,  of  those  who  withdraw  themselves  from  all  external 
objects  and  are  in  ‘  Samadhi  ’  for  hours  together.  Those  who  can  thus  re¬ 
main  in  1  Samadhi  ’  for  hours  together  are  said  to  be  ‘  Jivan-mukta.’ — T. 

*  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  render  these  words  into  English  which  relate 
to  the  powers  acquired  by  yogins  through  emancipation  from  the  attributes 
of  Passion  and  Darkness  and  dependance  on  the  attribute  of  pure  Goodness. 
‘  Aveca  ’  means  penetration.  By  withdrawing  the  mind  from  all  external 
objects,  one  succeeds  in  entering  one’s  self.  The  yogin,  in  ‘  Samadhi,’ 
enters  his  own  Self.  He  can  also  enter  into  another  person’s  Self.  This 
capacity  to  enter  into  the  Self  is  called  *  aveca.’  True  knowledge  of  all 
external  objects  is  acquired  by  yogins.  This  knowledge  is  not  the  result 
of  observation  and  reflection,  but  of  inspiration  or  inward  light.  It  is  said 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A 


68  7 


Emancipation,  it  is  said,  consists  in  freedom  from  rebirth 
due  to  absence  of  passion  and  darkness,  the  exhaustion  of  all 
serious  (or  significant)  acts,  and  dissociation  with  the  contact 
of  acts.*  14> 


that  to  the  eye  of  the  yogin,  the  whole  universe  is  as  an  emblic  myrobalan 
on  the  palm  of  his  hand.  The  yogin  can  achieve  everything  by  a  simple 
fiat  of  his  will.  He  can,  within  the  twinkling  of  the  eye,  raise  palaces  in 
the  midst  of  deserts.  {Vide  the  story  of  Vasishtha,  in  the  Mahabharata, 
_Vana  Parva,  doing  the  duties  of  hospitality  to  King  V^wamitra  and  his 
whole  army).  ‘  Dristi  ’  is  vision,  ‘  Crotram  ’  is  the  ear  or  hearing,  and 
*  Smriti  ’  is  memory.  In  the  case  of  the  ' yogin,  every  one  of  these  is  un¬ 
impeded  or  unobstructed.  The  yogin  can  look  through  mountains  and 
across  wide  oceans.  His  sense  of  hearing  also  extends  to  the  remotest  stars. 
His  memory  extends  to  previous  lives,  even  countless  ones.  By  *  Kanti,’ 
which  I  have  rendered  as  ‘  wealth  of  beauty  (in  respect  of  the  body),’  is  meant, 
as  some  Commentators  explain,  ‘  Animadi  pradurbhava  etc.,’  implying  the 
power  of  becoming  minute  as  a  point  or  gross  as  a  mountain,  and’also  of 
assuming  any  form  or  shape  at  will.  The  yogin  can  make  himself  as  hand¬ 
some  as  a  young  man,  or  as  strong-built  as  a  professional  athlete  or  wrestler. 
In  the  Bhagavata,  Krishna,  the  prince  of  yogins,  is  described,  when  enter¬ 
ing  the  court  of  King  Kangsa  who  had  arranged  for  his  death  at  the  hands 
of  some  celebrated  wrestlers,  as  having  assumed  a  form  that  appeared  differ¬ 
ent  to  different  persons.  For  dignity  of  language  and  beauty  of  conception, 
the  verse  is  one  of  the  best  in  the  Bhagavata.  I  cannot  resist  the  tempta¬ 
tion  of  citing  it  even  in  translation.  “  To  the  wrestlers  he  seemed  as  one 
whose  body  was  made  of  thunder  ;  to  the  common  people,  as  a  prince  of 
men  ;  to  the  woman  as  the  god  of  love  incarnate  ;  to  his  parents  (the 
bereaved  Vasudeva  and  Devaki)  as  an  infant  ;  to  the  cowherds  of  Brindabana 
as  their  companion  ;  to  the  king  of  the  Bhojas  {viz.,  Kangsa)  as  the  Destroyer 
himself ;  to  all  wicked  chiefs  as  their  chastiser  ;  to  yogins  as  the  highest 
object  of  their  meditation  ;  and  to  the  Vrishnis  as  their  tutelary  deity.” 

The  power  also  of  making  themselves  invisible  at  will  belongs  to 
yogins — T. 

*  ‘  Valavat  karma  ’  means  all  serious  or  significant  acts,  i.e.,  those  acts 


688 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Close  association  with  the  good,  complele  avoidance  of 
those" that  are  not  good,  practice  of  (pious)  vows,  fasts  (abstention 
from  food  and  drink),  observances  of  other  kinds,  apprehension 
of  the  scriptures,  knowledge  of  objects,  pleasure  in  privacy, 


whichhave  effects  to  be  enjoyed  or  endured  ;  hence,  acts  that  are  good  and 
bad  and  that  are  productive  of  happiness  and  misery.  The  limitation  implied 
by  ‘  valavat  ’  excludes  all  minoriacts  or  exertions  which  have  no  consequeces 
such  as  the  inhaling. ]and  exhaling  of  breaths,  or  eating,  or  walking,  or 
exercising  the  eye,  the  ear,  &c.,  under  circumstances  that  do  not  involve 
judgment  of  any  kind.  As  long  as  there  is  an  act  the  fruit  of  which,  whether 
pleasurable  or.  painful,  is  to  be  enjoyed  or  endured,  there  can  be  no  Eman¬ 
cipation.  Acts  lead  to  Heaven  or  Hell  and :  rebirth.  The  yogin,  who 
covets  Emancipation,  gives  up  all  acts.  Acts,  again,  are  incapable  of 
being  enhausted  or  destroyed,  until  their  fruits:(are:j]enjoyed  or  endured. 
Manu  says  ‘  Maabhuktam  kshiyate  karma  kalpakoti  Qatairapi,  Ava?yameva 
bhoktavyam  kritara  karma  Qubhajubham  ’  meaning  that  unless  the  fruits 
thereof  be  enjoyed  or  endured,  an  act  is  not  destroyed  in  even  a  hundred 
thousand  ages.  Good  and  bad  acts  done,  produce  fruits  which  must  have 
to  be  enjoyed  br  endured. 

‘Viyogah  karmasamyogaih’  is  apparently  an  instance  of  syntactical  pleonasm. 
In  reality  it  is  not  so.  Acts  attach  themselves  to  their  doers.  Dissociation 
from  this  attachment  -'isr  what  is  intended  by  the  words.  Such  dissociation 
can  never  occur  except  upon  the  destruction  or  exhaustionjof  the  act. 

The  incapacity  of  acts  to  be  destroyed,  may  now  be  regarded  to,be  a 
scientific  fact.  Acts  imply  force.  Force  is  never  destroyed.  As  poetically 
expressed  by  Mr.  Babage,  the  force  which  the  assasin’s  dagger  imparts 
to  the  body  of  the  victim  lives  to  eternity  'in  minute  vibrations  in  ether 
which  the  All-seeing  eye  alone  perceives.  The  last  gurgle  of  the  Atlantic 
waters  over  the  spot  where  the  captain  of  a  slaver  casts  the  hand-cuffed 
wretch  of  a  Negro  for  destroying,  as  he  imagines,  the  ^evidence  of  his  guilt 
when  he  is  pursued  by  a  fast-sailing  British  cruiser,  imparts  a  motion  to  the 
minutest  sand-grain  on  the  shores  of  remote  Greenland  which  the  All¬ 
knowing  Being  easily  detects  at  the  expiration  of  even  millions  of  years. 
The  subject  is  well  worth  reflection  by  every  thoughtful  mind.— T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


absence  of  pleasure  in  worldly  objects,  perseverence  in  (attaining 
to)  Emancipation,  fortitude,  abstentention  from  acts,  exhaustion 
(or  destruction)  of  acts,  renunciation  of  home,  absence  of  pride, 
fright  in  contact  with  worldly  objects,  concentration  of  mind 
and  understanding,  survey  of  objects  in  their  true  light, — all 
these  indications  flow  from  the  conservation  of  memory  *  250-58 

It  is  by  the  evidence  of  these,  beginning  with  close  association 
with  the  good  and  ending  with  fortitude,  that  the  conservation  of 
memory  is  ascertained. 

Recollecting  by  the  aid  of  the  memory  the  true  nature  of 


*  ‘  Upasanam  ’  is,  literally,  sitting  by  one’s  side  ;  hence,  association 
or  contact.  Association  with  those  that  are  good  is  an  indication  of  judg¬ 
ment.  ‘  Samyak  ’  qualifies  ‘  upasanam.’  ‘  Vrata  ’  and  ‘  niyama  ’  imply 
the  same  sort  of  practices.  They  involve  self-denial.  1  Upavasa,’  mean¬ 
ing  fast,  falls  within  both  ‘  vrata  ’  and  ‘  niyama  ;  ’  hence,  the  adjective  1  pri- 
thagvidhah,’  meaning  ‘  of  other  kinds,’  for  qualifying  ‘  niyama.’  ‘  Dharanam  ’ 
is  the  holding  or  conserving  a  thing  in  the  mind  ;  hence,  apprehension. 
‘  Vijnanam  ’  is  accurate  knowledge  of  objects,  their  composition,  attributes, 
relations,  etc.  The  word  is  frequently  used  in  the  sense  of  Science.  ‘Vijana’ 
is  privacy,  seclusion,  or  solitude.  Pleasure  or  delight  in  solitude  belongs 
to  them  that  are  of  a  contemplative  disposition.  It  has  been  already  ex¬ 
plained  that  Emancipation  can  never  become  attainable  if  there  is  any 
remnant  of  acts  whose  fruits  are  to  be  enjoyed  or  endured.  Hence,  absten¬ 
tion  from  acts,  and  the  destruction  or  exhaustion  of  acts  already  done, 
are  necessary  in  view  of  Emancipation.  ‘  Naishkramyam  ’  is  leaving  or 
abandoning  one’s  home,  i.  e.,  casting  off  the  householder’s  mode  of  life  for 
adoption  of  ‘  Sanyasa  ’  or  a  life  of  Renunciation.  One  must  be  afraid  of  contact 
with  worldly  objects  if  one  is  to  strive  for  Emancipation.  ‘  Artha  tattwa- 
parikshanam  ’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  ‘  vastunam  yatharthana  pari- 
skhanam,’  i.  e.,  a  survey  of  objects  in  their  true  light.  Unless  objects  be 
known  in  their  true  light,  those  amongst  them  that  deserve  to  be  abandoned 
cannot  be  abandoned,  and  those  amongst  them  that  deserve  to  be  pursued 
cannot  be  pursued. — T. 


690  CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 

all  entities,  one  becomes  freed  from  pain.* 

Those  eight  causes  are  now  laid  down  by  which  the  Memory 
is  strengthened.  It  is  said  that  Memory  arises  from,  I.  appre¬ 
hension  of  cause  and  form,  2.  similarity,  3.  contrariety,  4.  adjuncts 
of  entities,  5.  frequent  recapitulation,  6.  acquisition  of  knowledge, 
7.  re-hearing,  and  8.  recollection  of  what  has  been  seen,  heard, 
and  feltf155-58 


*  The  presence  or  conservation  of  memory  is  to  be  inferred  from  the 
several  practices  and  attributes  beginning  with  association  with  the  good 
and  ending  with  fortitude.  The  other  practices  and  attributes,  viz.,  those 
beginning  with  abstention  from  acts  and  ending  with  survey  of  objects  in  their 
true  light,  may  spring  not  only  from  the  conservation  of  memory  but  from 
other  causes  as  well.  Thus  one  may  abandon  home  from  anger ;  one’s 
humility  may  be  due  to  one’s  disposition  by  nature. — T. 

t  The  causes,  as  mentioned  here,  from  which  Memory  arises  or  is 
strengthened,  are  not  exclusive  of  each  other.  The  classification  is  not 
scientific.  Apprehension  of  cause  includes  the  recollection  of  effects  from 
causes,  as  of  explosion  and  of  the  devastation  it  brings  about,  from  a  sight  of 
gun-powder.  Apprehension  of  form,  as  an  exciting  cause  of  memory,  refers 
to  the  recollection  of  an  elephant  or  more  particularly  its  legs  from  a  sight 
of  columns  of  stone  or  bricks.  Similarity  implies  the  recollection  of  one’s 
absent  son  from  sight  of  a  similar  face  or  hearing  of  a  similar  voice. 
Contrariety  implies  the  recollection  of  a  fat  person  from  sight  of  a  lean 
one,  or  of  a  lean  person  from  sight  of  a  fat  one.  Adjuncts  of  entities  imply 
the  recollection  of  one’s  school-mates  and  the  events  of  early  years  from 
the  sight  in  after  life  of  the  school  building.  Frequent  recapitulation 
certainly  strengthens  the  memory.  Gangadhara  explains  that  acquisition 
of  knowledge  means  that  knowledge  which  is  the  fruit  of  yoga.  In  conse¬ 
quence  of  this  knowledge,  the  events  of  many  previous  lives  are  capable 
of  being  called  back.  Knowledge,  however,  as  an  exciting  cause  of  me¬ 
mory,  may  not  mean  that  knowledge  which  is  the  result  of  yoga.  It  may 
mean  ordinary  knowledge,  for  one  who  acquires  knowledge  by  reading  and 
study  certainiy  lays  the  foundation  for  improving  his  memory.  Re-hearing, 
as  a  cause  of  the  strengthening  of  memory,  needs  no  explanation.  The  last 
cause  requires  no  explanation.— T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


691 


Even  this,  viz.,  strength  of  memory  relating  to  the  highest 
principle,  is  the  one  road  to  Emancipation,  as  pointed  out  by 
those  that  become  Emancipated. 

The  same  has  been  represented  by  yogins  as  the  road  of 
yoga. 

By  those  that  are  Emancipated  among  also  the  Sankhyas 
who  have  taken  the  measure  of  every  duty,  the  same  has 
been  spoken  of  as  the  road  to  Emancipation.*I57-58 


*  '  Tat '  is,  literally,  ‘  That,’  implying  the  Unknowable  Principle  of 
the  Universe,  vis..  Supreme  Soul  or  Deity.  All  other  objects  are  capable 
of  being  explained  or  described  by  means  of  their  attributes.  The  Supreme 
Soul  is  incapable  of  being  so  explained  or  described.  By  vesting  Him  with 
attributes,  one  limits  what  is  in  reality  illimitable.  He  is,  again,  without  sex, 
and  attributes  diametrically  opposed  to  each  other  may  co-exist  in  Him. 
The  following  hymn  explains  the  matter  clearly.  “  Salutations  to  that  which 
Is  inconceivable,  of  unmanifest  form,  divested  of  attributes,  and  the  soul 
of  attributes,  etc.,  etc.”  In  the  Upanishads  the  deity  is  described  by  negatives. 
He  is  not  this  ;  not  this  ;  not  this  ;  and  so  on.  Hence,  the  pronoun  ‘  That  ’ 
is  a  convenient  mode  of  referring  to  Him.  ‘  Tattwa  ’  is  ‘  Thatness,1  if  such 
a  derivative  could  be  formed  in  English. 

It  is  by  strength  of  memory  relating  to  the  highest  principle  or  ‘  Thatness  ’ 
that  one  can  attain  to  Emancipation.  The  first  couplet  has  reference  to  the 
theory  of  the  Vedantists,  that  oblivion  of  its  own  true  nature  leads  the  soul  to 
birth  and  rebirth.  By  reverting  to  its  own  true  nature,  which  can  never  be 
accomplished  without  the  aid  of  Memory,  the  soul  or  self  avoids  rebirth 
or  becomes  Emancipate.  Yogins  also  regard  memory  as  the  only  path  to 
yoga-success.  The  memory  of  which  yogins  speak  as  the  sole  means  of 
success  is  not  the  memory  of  ordinary  occurrences,  or  memory  relating  to 
ordinary  branches  of  knowledge,  but  it  has  reference  to  Iswara  as  distinct 
from  both  Purusha  and  Prakriti.  Of  course,  it  is  the  yoga-system  of  Patanjali 
which  endorses  this  view. 

The  Sankhyas  also  regard  Memory  as  the  path  to  Emancipation,  for, 
according  to  them,  when  one  succeeds  in  distinguishing  Purusha  from  Prakriti, 


692 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


All  this,  which  has  a  cause,  is  misery  ;  is  not  of 'Self;  is 
not  immutable. 

Nor  is  it  Self ;  since  it  is  created  ;  in  it  arises  (the  idea  of) 
Selfness,  as  long  as  true  understanding  arises  not,  by  which, 
knowing  that  this  is  not  Self  and  this  is  not  of  Self,  the 
Knower  transcendeth  all.*1®9-60 


that  is,  when  one  realises  that  one  is  not  identical  with  Prakrit!  and  lias, 
further,  no  relation  with  Prakriti  or  what  is  born  of  Prakriti, — one  becomes 
Emancipate. 

The  Rishi  gives  in  the  last  line  of  the  verse  something  like  an  explana¬ 
tion  or  derivation  of  the  word  ‘  Sankhya.’  Some  European  scholars  take 
the  word  as  implying  a  connection  with  numbers.  According  to  them,  the 
‘Sankhya  system  of  philosophy  was  probably  connected  with  mathematics 
or  the  science  of  numbers  before  it  assumed  the  form  in  which  we  know  it. 
Atri  (or  Charaka),  in  the  passage  before  us,  uses  the  adjective  ‘  Sankhyl- 
tadharma  ’  for  qualifying  ‘  Sankhyas.’  The  word,  literally,  means  *  those  who 
have  measured  all  the  duties,’  probably  in  the  sense  of  ‘  those  who  have 
taken  the  measure,  by  study  and  observation,  of  the  entire  range  of  duties, 
or  of  all  the  duties  prescribed  by  religion  or  the  religious  systems  or  creeds 
of  the  country.’  Evidently,  in  the  popular  estimation,  the  Sankhyas  were 
•more  deeply  learned  in  religious  lore.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  Pauranik 
and  the  Tantrik  forms  of  faith  are  all  entirely  based  upon  the  two  main 
principles  of  the  Sankhya  philosophy,  vis.,  Purusha  and  Prakriti.  On  the 
one  hand,  Vishnu,  Brahman,  Siva,  Ganesha,  Surya,  and  all  the  male  deities 
represent  Purusha,  while  Durga,  Kali,  Lakshmi,  Saraswati,  etc.,  are  symbols 
•of  Prakriti. — T. 

*  The  first  verse  : is  exceedingly  ahstr-use.  The  Bengali  translators  have 
misunderstood  it  completely.  Gangadhara  also  makes  a  mess  of  it. 

What  the  Rishi  wishes  to  say  is  this  :  All  this,  meaning  the  not- Self, 
has  a  cause,  being  created.  Hence,  it  is  misery.  Being  so,  it  is  not  of  the 
Self,  for  Self  is  increate.  It  is  also  not  immutable,  for  all  that  is  not-Self 
is  characterised  by  mutability.  Having  said  so  much  in  the  first  line,  the 
Rishi  says,  in  the  second  line,  though  in  one  sense  it  is  only  a  repetition, 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


693 


In  that  last  stage  of  Renunciation,  all  Consciousness  with  its 
roots,  and  all  "desires,  in  consequence  of  true  knowledge,  are 
•completely  exterminated.*161 


that  ‘  Nor  is  ail’''  this  Self,’  the  reason  being  ‘  Kritakataddhi,’  meaning 
1  for  it  is  created.’  For  all  that,  ‘the  idea,  arises:  of  Selfness  in  it,’ implying 
that  although  all  this  is  really  not  Self,  yet  it  is  taken  as  either  Self  or, 
belonging  to  the  Self.  He  takes  care,  however,  to  add  that  this  erroneous 
idea-  arises  only  till  one  attains-  to  the-  true  understanding.  It  is  by  the  aid 
of  that  true  understanding  that  one  realises  the  truth,  viz.,  ‘  naitadaham- 1 
and  ‘  naitanmamacha,’  meanining  ‘  this  is  not  Self  ’  and  ‘  this  is  not  of  Self.’ 
When  these  truths  are  realised,  the  Self  or  Knower  transcends  everything, 
that  is,  experiences  its  own  exalted  position. — T. 

*  r  am  not  certain  that  I  have  understood  the  sense  of  this  verse  correctly. 
Gangadhara  indites  a  learned  note  of  about  17  quarto  pages  on  this  verse. 
Lt  is  difficult  to  catch  his  meaning,  if,  indeed,  he  has  a  meaning  to  convey. 

‘  Vedana  ’  in  the  first  line  does  not  certainly  mean  ‘  misery  ’  or  ‘  pain  ’  as, 
he  would  explain,  but  Consciousness,  or,  rather,  the  ideas  of  which  we- 
are  conscious,  or  the  sum  total  of  our  knowledge.  ‘  Samajna  ’  is-, used  here 
for  implying  ‘desire’  or  ‘wish.’  ‘  Jnana-Vijnanat  ’  is  used  for  indicating 
the  true  knowledge  which  is  not  dependent  on  the  senses  or.  experience. 
What  the  Rishi,  therefore,  says  here  is  this  :  when  the  Soul  apprehends 
that  ‘  this  is  not  I  ’  or  ‘  this-  is  not  of  me,’  (as  explained  in  the  previous 
verse),  it  transcends  everything  ;  in  other  words,  it  returns  to  its  own  true 
nature.  This  is  further  explained  in,  verse  161-.  When  this  last  stage  of 
‘  Sanyasa  ’  or  Renunciation  is  reached,  all  knowledge  derived  from  experience, 
and  all  desires,  cease;  What  remains  is  Pure  Knowledge.  In  our  present 
state  of  being,  Jnatri  (knower),  Jneya  (the  object  known),  and  Jnaana  (know¬ 
ledge)  exist.  When  the  Soul  returns  to  its  true  nature,  that  is,  is  divested  of- 
the  senses,  the  mind,  and  the  understanding,  the  distinction  between  knower, 
known,  and  knowledge  disappears.  What  remains  is  knowledge  without  ther 
consciousness  of  knower  and  known,  for  knower  and  known  then  disappear,, 
these  being,  dependent  on  such  experience  as  is  supplied  by  the  senses,  etc. — T.. 


694 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


After  this,  the  Jiva-Soul,  becoming  identified  with  Brahma, 
cannot  be  known  as  such,  having  been  divested  of  all  ideas  of 
experience.  It  leaves  no  sign  (of  its  individual  and  separate 
existence).164 

Brahma  is  the  goal  of  those  who  are  conversant  with  Brahma. 
That  is  indestructible  and  without  attributes.  The  knowledge 
of  those  who  are  conversant  with  Brahma  is  concerned  with 
Brahma.  One  that  is  not  conversant  with  Brahma  is  unable 
to  attain  to  that  knowledge.*168 

(  Here  is  a  verse.  ) 

Three  and  twenty  excellent  questions,  regarding  Purusha, 
have  been  answered  by  the  truth-seeing  (Rishi)  in  this  Lesson 
on  “  How  many  kinds  of  Purusha  are  there.’1 

Thus  ends  the  Lesson  called  “  How  many  Purushas  are  there” 
in  the  division  called  Qarira,  of  the  treatise  by  Agnivega  as 
revised  by  Charaka. 


*  When  the  Jiva-Soul  attains  to  or  becomes  identified  with  Brahma 
or  the  Supreme-Soul,  it  becomes  divested  of  everything  that  is  dependent 
on  experience,  i.  e.,  the  senses,  mind,  etc.  Its  indications,  ‘  chinhas  ’  or 
‘  lingas,’  cease.  According  to  the  Nyaya  philosophy,  the  ‘  lingas  ’  of  the 
atman  (Jiva  Soul)  are  desire,  aversion,  and  will,  and  pleasure  and  pain,  and 
cognitions  (Ichccha-dwesha-prayatnah  sukha-dukha  jnanani).  These  drop  off 
when  the  Soul  returns  to  its  own  original  nature. — T. 


LESSON  II. 


We  shall,  after  this,  expound  the  Lesson  called  “  That  relat¬ 
ing  to  unlike  clans,”  in  the  Division  called  Qarira. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri,*1 


*  The  Rishi  explains  in  this  Lesson  the  manner  in  which  the  foetus 
is  generated  in  the  mother’s  womb.  He  calls  the  Lesson  “  That  relating 
to  unlike  clans,”  in  the  matter,  of  course,  of  the  procreation  of  progeny. 
The  Hindoos  had  succeeded  in  discovering  the  fact  at  an  early  age  that 
children  procreated  by  a  man  and  a  woman  of  the  same  clan  or  family 
never  become  healthy  or  intelligent.  The  procreation  of  good  children 
depends  upon  the  father  being  a  person  of  a  clan  or  family  different  from 
that  of  the  mother.  The  Hindu  law,  as  laid  down  by  Manu,  about  the 
degrees  of  propinquity  within  which  marital  alliances  are  prohibited,  has 
been  variously  interpreted.  Generally,  the  wife’s  grandfather  in  the  paternal 
line  must  not  be  one  from  whom,  either  through  a  male  or  a  female,  the 
husband  is  descended.  In  very  ancient  times,  however,  the  prohibited  degrees 
were  much  nearer,  for  we  find  Arjuna,  one  of  the  heroes  of  the  Mahabharata, 
marrying  the  daughter,  Subadhra,  of  his  maternal  uncle,  Vasudeva.  The 
curious  reader  is  referred  to  the  pages  of  the  learned  work  of  Dr.  Jogendra 
Nath  Bhattacharyya  entitled  “  Commentaries  on  Hindu  Law,”  Part  III, 
Chaps.  . I — V,  in  which  he  will  find  the  prohibited  degrees  according  to  both 
the  Bengal  and  the  Mithila  schools  ably  and  intelligently  discussed.  The 
word  ‘  Gotra  ’  literally  signifies  all  persons  who  rescue  a  particular  ancestor 
from  the  hell  called  put,  the  belief  of  the  Hindus  being  that  a  childless  man 
goes  to  the  hell  of  that  name.  Children  are  rescuers  of  their  ancestors. 
Hence  ‘  Gotra  ’  means  a  clan  or  race.  The  superior  Brahmans  of  Bengal 
whether  of  the  RSrhiya  or  the  Varendra  sections,  are  distributed  into  five 
‘  Gotras,’  named  after  five  Vedic  sages,  Bharadwaja,  Qandilya,  Kafyapa, 
Savarni,  and  Vatsya.  The  husband  and  wife  should  never  be  of  the  same 
‘  Gotra.’  ‘  Atulya  ’  is  literally  ‘  unlike  ’  or  ‘  not  same.’ — T. 


696 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Of  a  person  of  unlike  clan,  who  pairs  with  a  woman-,, 
what,  in  truth,  is  the  secretion,  composed  of  four  (out  of  the 
five  primal  elements)  and  born  of  the  six  tastes,  which 
is  cast  in  privacy,  after  the  expiration  of  the  menstrual  flow, 
(into  the  womb)  and  which  develops,  in  women  into  conception  ?*a 
The  wise  say  that  that  secretion  of  the  man  is  called  gukra 
(vital  seed).  It  is  secreted  for  originating  conception.  It  con¬ 
sists  of  the  four  primal  elements,  viz.,  air,  heat  (or  light),  earth, 
and  water,  in  efficient  proportions.  It  is  generated  by  the  (food, 
and  drink  of)  six  tastes  which  the  man  cousumes.fs 


*  The  Rishis  knew  the  baneful  effects  of  sexual  congress  between  man- 
and  woman  during  the  continuance  of  the  functional  flow  of  the  latter.  The 
Hindu  scriptures  abound  with  passages  interdicting  such  congress  which, 
is  believed  to  be  productive  of  premature  death.  Hence,  in  the  question! 
which  AgniveQa  puts,  he  assumes  that  the  vital  seed  is  cast  into  the  womb' 
after  the  cessation  of  the  menstrual  flow.  The  menstrual  period  is  regarded 
by  the  Hindus  as  lasting  for  three  days.  This  is  regarded,  again,  as  a  period, 
of  impurity  for  woman.  During  the  menstrual  period  the  woman  is  not 
allowed  to  do  any  domestic  duty.  On  the  fourth  day,  when  the  flow  ceases, 
the  woman  takes  a  bath.  She  then  becomes  pure  and  fit  for  sexual  union.. 
*  Shadbhyah  prabham  ’  is  ‘  born  of  the  six.’ 

The  vital  seed,  Agnivefa  takes  it  for  granted,  is  born  of  the  food  and. 
drinks  which  a  man  takes.  Food  and  drink  are  of  six  principal  tastes,. 
viz.,  sour,  sweet,  bitter,  astringent,  pungent,  and  saline.  The  vital  seed 
is  called,  again,  as  ‘  Chatuspat,’  meaning  ‘  combined  of  four.’  The  Hindu 
medical  scriptures  assume  that  into  the  composition  of  the  vital  seed,  the 
four  out  of  the  five  primal  elements,  viz.,  earth,  water,  light,  and  air  enter,, 
to  the  exclusion  of  ether  or  space. 

‘  Garbha  ’  is  either  conception,  meaning  the  birth  of  the  foetus,  or  the 
foetus  itself.— T. 

+  Gangadhara  explains  that  ether  (or  space)  is  not  enumerated  as  a 
constituent  of  the  secretion,  simply  because  it  enters  into  the  constitution 
of  every  material  substance,  without  being  the  especial  ingredient  of  any 
particular  substances. — T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA.  6g7 

For  what  reason  does  a  foetus  once  formed  meet  with  des¬ 
truction  ?*4 

Punarvasu  replied  :  That  foetus  which  is  endued  with  wealth 
of  semen,  of  blood,  of  Soul,  of  womb,  and  of  time,  and  whose 
surroundings  are  limited  with  all  that  is  beneficial,  attains  to 
happiness  and  becomes  full-bodied  in  time  without  accidents 
of  any  kind.f 5 

Agnivega  said  :  In  what  manner  and  through  what  cause 
does  the  foetus  become  full-bodied  in  time  without  accidents 
of  any  kind  ?  For  what  reason  does  a  woman  who  has  already 
given  birth  to  children  (sometimes)  conceive  after  a  consider¬ 
able  lapse  of  time  ? 


*  ‘  Sapraja  stri  ’  means  a  woman  who  has  children.  The  second 
question  of  AgniveQa  (in  verse  4)  is  this  :  Why  does  a  woman,  who  has 
already  given  birth  to  children  (z.  e.,  who  is  not  sterile),  conceive  after  a 
considerable  lapse  of  time,  (the  usual  conditions  of  conception,  vis.,  health 
■and  sexual  congress,  not  being,  of  course,  absent  all  the  while)  ?  The  last 
question  (in  verse  4)  does  not  relate  to  abortions  alone,  as  the  answer 
coming  later  on  will  show.  .  What  Agnivesa  really  asks  is  this  :  Why  does 
a  conception,  once  originated,  disappear  ?  The  disappearance  of  which 
Agnive^a  speaks  may  be  due  to  actual  abortion,  or  to  the  appearance  of 
the  menstrual  flow  and  the  womb  losing  its  swelling  condition  and 
returning  to  its  normal  state. — T. 

t  1  Sampat’  is,  literally,  wealth.  What  is  meant  by  ‘wealth  of  semen’ 
is  the  faultless  character  of  the  semen  or  vital  seed  injected  into  the 
uterus.  By  ‘  wealth  of  blood  ’  is  meant  the  faultless  character  of  the 
menstrual  blood.  ‘  Wealth  of  Soul  ’  has  reference  to  favourable  destiny 
•due  to  good  acts  in  the  Soul’s  previous  state  of  existence.  The  theory 
of  the  Hindu  Shastras  is  that  as  soon  as  an  ovum  comes  out  into  the  uterus 
it  is  penetrated  by  a  bodiless  Soul  or  Self  that  was  wandering  in 
vast  space.  ‘  Wealth  of  womb  or  uterus  ’  implies  the  faultless  character 
of  the  uterus  into  which  the  semen  is  injected.  ‘  Wealth  of  time  ’  indicates 
an  auspicious  conjunction  of  planets  and  lunar  asterisms. — T. 


698 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Through  disease  or  defect  of  the  (mother’s)  organs  of  gener¬ 
ation,  through  mental  grief,  through  faults  of  the  semen,  of 
the  menstrual  flow,  and  of  (the  mother’s)  food  and  movements, 
through  absence  of  timeliness,  and  through  loss  of  strength, 
even  a  woman  who  has  given  birth  to  children  (sometimes) 
conceives  after  a  considerable  lapse  of  time.*8 


Gangadhara  takes  1  hitaih  arthaih  (samjuktS.)  upacharah  *  as  grammati¬ 
cally  connected  with  ‘  matuh  ’  understood.  This  is  certainly  erroneous. 
‘  Upacharah  ’  is  grammatically  connected  with  the  genetive  ‘  yasya  ’ 
having  reference  to  ‘  garbha  1  in  the  second  line.  Hence,  ‘  upachara  ’ 
should  be  taken  as  implying  ‘  surroundings,’  in  the  sense  of  the  sustenance 
and  motions  of  the  foetus.  No  doubt,  these  depend  on  the  regimen  and 
acts  of  the  mother  or  woman  conceiving. 

In  the  question  (verse  4)  occur  the  words  ‘  sukhancha  jayate.’  In  the 
answer  also  (verse  5)  occur  the  words  ‘  sukhancha  sanjayate.’  The  mean¬ 
ing  is  ‘  grow  or  develop  with  ease,’  i.  e.,  without  accidents  of  any  kind  ; 
some  of  the  vernacular  translators  have  taken  the  words  as  implying  ‘  comes 
out  easily.’  This  is  erroneous. 

What  is  meant  by  the  foetus  attaining  to  happiness  is  its  growth  in  health, 
viz.,  the  absence  of  diseases  and  defects,  etc. — T. 

*  ‘  Yoni  ’  means  the  female  organs  of  generation  ;  it  includes  the  uterus, 
the  fallopean  tubes,  and  the  ovaries.  ‘  Yani-pradosha  ’  would  imply  the 
diverse  kinds  of  the  diseases  of  the  ‘  yoni.’  Charaka  lays  down  twenty 
different  kinds  of  such  diseases. 

Mental  sorrow  stands  in  the  way  of  conception.  This  fact,  it  seems, 
was  well  understood  by  the  Rishis. 

‘  Akalayoga,’  meaning  the  absence  of  timeliness.  This  has  reference 
to  the  time  of  sexual  union.  If  it  is  untimely,  that  is,  if  it  does  not  imme¬ 
diately  precede  or  follow  the  menses,  it  does  not  prove  fruitful.  Then, 
again,  there  is  some  reference  (in  the  words)  to  particular  planetary  com¬ 
binations  and  lunations. 


Dr.  GRIFFITH  EVANS,  M.  D.,  Brynkynall,  Bangor  North  Wales. ...The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting,  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fund  of  tracing  the  origin, 
growth  and  development  of  medical  science,  also  illustrates  some  ancient  social  customs 
of  India. 

PROFESSOR  MAX  MULLER  I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an 
English  translation  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very 
glad  to  help  you  in  any" way  you  may  wish — Writing  again  in  November  1893.  he 
says — *  *  *  I  am  surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation 
has  not  attracted  more  attention  *  ^  *  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir 
Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested  in  it. 

SIR  MONIER  WILLIAMS,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift 
of  the  successive  parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susrata  Samhitas.  I  regard  them 
as  a  valuable  addition  to  my  library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would 
be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  REINHOLD  ROST,  C.  L.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office —  *  * 
*  Your  excellent  translation  *  *  *  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work- 
which  will  not  fail  to  make  ancient  Hindu  Medicine  better  understood  and 
appreciated  in  the  West  *  *  *  1  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars 
to  vour  difficult  and  meritorious  work  *  *  *  Many  important  additions  to  our 
Sanskrit  dictibnaries  will  be  gleaned  from  your  translation. 

’  AUSTIN  FLINT,  Esq.,  New  York  U.  S.  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much 
pleasure  the  first  fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall 
be 'very,  glad  to  receive  the  rest  of  the  work.  It  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great 
interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will  be  under  great  obligation  to  you. 

A.  H.  EDGREN,  JEsq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in 
anything  Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain 
whatever  insight  I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation., 

PROFESSOR  A.  V.  WILLIAM  JACKSON.,  Columbia  College,  New  York, 
U.  S.  A.  : — I  must  congratalate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I 
should  very  much  like  to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praise¬ 
worthy  work  you  are  doing.  Be  assured.  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appre¬ 
ciation  and  oi  my  deep  interest  in  India  and  antique  lore. 

MONS.  A.  BARTH.,  Paris  :--Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers 
of  ancient  literature  a  work  of  so  Interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars 
and  to  the  men  of  medicine,  are.  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring 
the  work  to  the  notice  of  the  French  public,  or,  at  'least,  of  those  who  take  an 
interest  in  these  researches. 

MONS.  B.  ST,  HILAIRE,  Paris  : — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and 
wish  you  all  success.  The  work  is  of .  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical 
men  and  the  commentaries  written  on  .  ft' prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  putt 
.in  a  notice  in  the  Journal  ties  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy 
to  do  you  justice. 

PROFESSOR  H.  JACOBI,  Bonn  University,  Germany  The  work  you  have 
undertaken  will  interest -Sailskrilists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the 
History  of  their  science.  I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent 
physicians  whom  I  know  personally,  to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

HERR.  R.  GARBE,  Prinzenstram  Keningsburg,  Germany  : — The  English 
translation  of  CTfaraka  Samhita  is  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of 
view,  the  most  important  work  of  the  medicinal  literature  of  your  country. 

SIR  ALFRED  CROFT,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.  Director  of  Public  Instruction. 
Bengal I  have  been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination 
in  part  I  V  of  all  the  things  which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand 
the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life  cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 

JAMES  W.  REESE,  Esq.,  Westminister,  Maryland,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  have 
undertaken  a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves 
the  approbation  and  encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of 
the  past  ages  thought  and  taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation 
of  health  and  the  cure  of  disease. 


WILLIAM  EMETTE  COLEMAN,  Esq.,  San  Fra?ttisco,  California.—*  *  *  ' 
As  each  successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent. 

*  *  *  There  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind, 

occidental  medical  science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science 
has  much  to  learn.  *  *  * 

CHAS.  E.  SAJONS,  ESQ.,  Philadelphia ,  U.  S.  A.  You  are  entitled  to  the 
greatest  praise.  Next  May  or  Jute  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  : 
management — will  begin  to  review  books,  etc.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken 
up  will  be  yours. 

CHAS  O.  COURTMAN  Esq.,  St.  Louis ,  Othio  U.  S.  A.  : — The  work  interests 
me  very  highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night,  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of 
one  of  our  medical  societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively 
curiosity  and  expressions  of  interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical 
journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical  monthly. 

GEO.  H.  CLARK.,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  PHILADELPHIA  As  I  go  over  each 
fasciculus  I  always  arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians 
ofthe  present  day  would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  modem  Drugs 
and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients  according  to  the  method  of  Charaka, 
there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and  fewer  chronic  invalids  iu 
the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of  the  work,  for  I 
am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

b\  H.  SKRINE,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  : — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest. 

It  is  marverllously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful 
to  note  the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country 
and  how  completely  they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter 
ourselves  are  due  to  the  enlightment  of  this  age. 


PART  XXIII. 


*7357 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


(  TRAN  SLA  TED  INTO  ENGLISH ) . 


PUBLISHED 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita 
(in  original)  with  Commentaries  ;  Bengali  and 
Hindi  Translator  of  Charaka-Samhita 
and  of  Susruta-Samhita  ;  Editor  of 
Chikitsa-Sammilani  (Medical  Journal 
in  Bengali) ;  Practitioner  of  the 
Hindu  System  of  Medicine, 

&c.,  &c.,  &c.,  &c., 


Printed  by  B.  C.  SANIAL, 

AT 

the  Herald  Printing  Works. 

$aUutta: 


(  The  Right  of  Translation  is  Reserved). 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

(Extract  from  their  Letters .) 

Prossor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English 
translatjonof  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very 
glad  to  help  you  in  any  way  you  may  wish — Writing  again  in  November 
1893.  he  says — *  *  *  I  am  surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful 
translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention  *  *  *  Our  Regius  Pro¬ 
fessor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested  in  it. 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E. : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of 
the  successive  parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susrata  Samhitas.  I  regard  them 
as  a  valuable  addition  to  my  library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would 
be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office —  *  *  * 
Your  excellent  translation  *  *  *  a.  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work% 
which  will  not  fail  to  make  ancient  Hindu  Medicine  better  understood  and 
appreciated  in  the  West  *  *  *  I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental 
scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work  *  *  *  Many  important 
additions  to  our  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from  your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq-,  New  York  U.  S.  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure 
the  first  fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very 
glad  to  receive  the  rest  of  the  work.  It  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest 
to  the  medical  profession,  which  will  be  under  great  obligation  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden  : — I  am  deeply  interested  in 
anything  Indian,  p  nd  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to 
obtain  whatever  'nsight  I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable 
translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College ,  New  York, 

TJ-  S.  A. — I  must  congratalate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts. 

I  should  very  much  like  to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the 
praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing.  Be  assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and 
approbation  and  ol  my  deep  interest  in  India  and  antique  lore. 

Mons  A.  Birth.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the 
readers  of  ancient  literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the 
Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men  of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and 
I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice  of  the  French  public, 
or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hilaire  ,  Paris  I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and 
wish  you  all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to 
medical  men  and  the  commentaries  written  on  it- prove  its  value  and  utility. 

I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the  Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can. 
and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University ,  Germany  : — The  work  you  have 
undertaken  will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for 
the  History  of  their  science.  I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of 
some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally,  to  the  ancient  work  of 
Charaka. 

i  Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Keningsburg ,  Germany  : — The  English 
translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  is  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point 
of  view,  the  most  important  work  of  the  medicinal  literature-  of  your 
country. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS, 

Part  XXIII  contains  the  concluding  portion  of  Lesson  II  and 
the  greater  portion  of  Lesson  III. 

In  Lesson  II,  the  several  kinds  of  impotence  are  explained  ;  the 
causes  also  are  laid  down  which  lead  to  the  birth  of  impotant 
children.  Lesson  III  is  very  important.  It  explains  how  Concep¬ 
tion  takes  place.  Eunarvasu  finds  an  uncompromising  critic  in 
Bharadawja  who  challenges  almost  every  proposition  that  the 
former  lays  down.  The  answers  of  Punarvasu  to  Bharadwaja’s 
objections  are  not  always  happy. 

It  is  impossible  to  give  an  intelligible  summary  of  the  discus¬ 
sions  contained  in  this  Lesson.  Each  aphorism  requires  to  be 
studied  carefully  in  order  to  understand  its  sense. 

The  conditions  under  which  the  Self  becomes  invested  with 
a  material  case  have  been  explained.  The  true  meaning  of  the 
word  birth  is.  set  forth.  Altogether,  Lesson  III  is  more  a 
philosophical  than  medical  disquisition,  considering  the  specula¬ 
tions  it  contains  on  the  nature  of  the  Self. 

ERRATA. 

Various  circumstances  have  delayed  the  publication  of  Part 
XXIII.  Few  people  could  work  continuously  at  Calcutta  during 
the  plague.  The  press  in  which  our  work  is  done  had  to  be  shut 
up  for  some  months. 

We  regret  to  state  that  the  present  Part  is  disfigured  by  a 
number  of  printer’s  errors.  These  require  to  be  corrected.  The 
following  is  the  list  of  errata.  Subscribers  are  requested  to  make 
the  corrections  in  their  books. 


In  p.  699 

line  3j 

for 

odnwright. 

read  downright, 

» 

27 

„ 

sech 

„  such 

»  7°4 

..  33 

„ 

sustenanee 

„  sustenance. 

»  705 

11  10 

got 

•1  get 

11  •• 

»  *5 

„ 

form 

„  formed 

»  7o6 

.1  19 

11- 

insummation 

„  insemination 

11  11 

24 

„ 

‘Kashata’  is  word 

„  ‘Kashta’  is  a  word 

»  » 

..  25 

, 

swallen 

„  swollen 

In  p. 

706 

line 

26 

for 

well 

ead  hill 

„ 

„ 

, 

36 

„ 

soul 

„  soul ; 

„ 

„ 

„ 

36 

budhi 

„  buddhi 

„ 

„ 

„ 

37 

„ 

phraselogy, 

„  phraseology, 

„ 

708 

„ 

14 

„ 

either 

„  ether 

33 

tautoligical 

„  tautological 

710 

10 

said 

„  said 

„ 

32 

she 

„  the 

711 

„ 

3® 

1  Purusha  ’ 

„  ‘  Paurusha  ’ 

„ 

712 

„ 

11 

ailmeuts 

„  ailments 

„ 

H 

„ 

should  directed . 

„  should  be  directed. 

„ 

„ 

21 

word 

„  words 

7i3 

„ 

10 

whenee 

„  whence 

„ 

35 

and  not  two  ; 

„  and  not  two) ; 

„ 

34 

every 

„  very 

7i4 

14 

„ 

the  Sutrasth&na 

„  Sutrasthana 

„ 

7i5 

„ 

3i 

„ 

Sattwasampraysga 

„  Sattwasamprayoga. 

„ 

„ 

„ 

34 

actermines 

„  determines 

716 

4 

woul  indulged 

„  would  indulge 

V, 

„ 

5 

desise 

„  desire 

,, 

„ 

11 

enistence 

„  existence 

„ 

717 

11 

„ 

affim 

„  affirm 

>. 

» 

14 

shup 

„  sheep 

„ 

16 

Phoseohts 

„  Phaseolus 

719 

>, 

8 

„ 

tide ; 

„  tude ; 

.< 

„ 

14 

„ 

semon 

„  semen 

„ 

30 

Punarvasus’s 

„  Punarvasu’s 

720 

17 

is  said  to  be 

„  it  is  said  to  be 

„ 

„ 

36 

'  „ 

mentof 

„  ment  of 

721 

>, 

9 

„ 

After  th 

„  After  the 

» 

» 

11 

„ 

as  t  remains 

„  as  it  remains 

» 

» 

24 

often 

„  after 

722 

6 

ar  conversant 

„  are  conversant 

„ 

724 

17 

„ 

incedents 

„  incidents  ’ 

735 

» 

25 

„ 

Garbhasya 

„  Garbhasya 

» 

.» 

» 

27 

bhuyastam 

„  bhuyishtham 

» 

35 

‘  rasatoh  ’ 

„  ‘  rasatah  ’ 

„ 

726 

14 

tho 

„  the 

737 

29- 

‘  Ajatau  ’ 

„  *  Ajatau  ’ 

729 

» 

2 

% 

predominent 

„  predominant 

CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


699 


The  suspension-  of  the  menstrual  flow  of  a  woman,  caused 
by  (vitiated)  wind,  is  sometimes  regarded  as  conception  by 
men  reft  of  intelligence  and  learning.  In  such  cases,  the 
menstrual  blood  not  coming  out,  presents  the  aspect  of  a 
growing  conception..*7  .  \ 


Beholding  not  the  foetus  but  only  the  blood  flowing  out  through.^  ,y. 
the  effects  of  fire,  or  the  sun,  or  excessive  toil,  or  grief,  ok?  /  ^ 
disease,,  or  through  the  effects  of  heat-producing  food  and  ".  .  ' 

drink,  some  men  reft  of  knowledge  say  that  the  conception''  ...  - 

has  been  done  away  with  by  evil  spirits.f8 


Of  night-wanderers,  who  have  the  ojas  for  their  food,  the 
body  is  never  agreeable  as  food.  If,  indeed,  they  would  do 
away  with  the  foetus,  why  would  they  not,  having  got  the 
opportunity,  eat  up  the  mother’s  of  as 


*  The  last  half  of  the  second  line  of  this  verse  is  read  incorrectly  in. 
some  texts..  The  true  reading  is  ‘  asrigasrltvi,’  meaning  the  unflowing, 
blood,  that  is,  the  suspended  menstrual  flow..  The  word  before  ‘  asrik;’ 
may  be  taken  either  as  ‘  Tad  ’  or  ‘  Tada.1 — T. 

t  The  first  half  of  the  second  line  is  incorrectly  read  in  some  texts.. 
The  correct  reading  is, —  ‘  d'rishtwasrigekam  na  cha  garbhamajnah,’  mean¬ 
ing, — ‘  seeing  only  the  blood  but  not  anything;  in,  the  form  of  fcelus,  some 
ignorant  men,  etc.’ 

J  The  argument  contained  in  this  verse  is.  so  childish  that  it  is  diffi¬ 
cult  to  believe  that  either  Punarvasu  or  Charaka.  could  have  used  it.  It 
seems  that  the  verse  is  an  interpolation. 

‘  Rajaniehara  ’  is,  literally,  a  night-wanderer.  The  word  is-  used  to- 
signify  evil  spirits  and  Rakshasas.  The  popular  belief  is  that  these  spirits 
feed  on  the  ojas ,  meaning  the  essence  of  the  heart’s  blood..  They  do  not 
affect  the  flesh.  Hence  it  is  said  that  when  only  blood  is  seen  to  flow 
but  no  foetus  comes  out,  it  cannot  be  taken  that  the  foetus  has  been  eaten 
up  by  evil  spirits.  Indeed,  if  evil  spirits  get  the  opportunity  of  attacking 
a  woman  that  has  conceived,  they  would  eat  up  her  ojas  and  kill  het 
odnwright.  Why  would  they  be  content  with  eating  up  the  foetus  alone  ? 

It  should  be  stated  here  that  in  India  a  woman  that  has  conceived  is 
forbidden  to  expose  her  body,  particularly  in  the  morning  or  the  evening 
twilight,  or  while  passing  along  a  solitary  road.  She  should  not  allow 
the  end  of  her  cloth,  called  anckala ,  to  drop  down  on  the  ground.  She 
should  not  eat  or  drink  anything  that  has  been  brought  along  a  road 

89 


7oo 


CHARAKA  SAM  HIT  A 


Agnjvega  asked, — Why,  (O  illustrious  one),  does  a  woman 
give  birth  to  a  daughter  ?  why  to  a  son  ?  why  to  a  son  and 
daughter  together  ?  why  to  one  of  a  particular  sex  separately  ? 
why  to  twin  sons  ?  why  to  twin  daughters  ?  why  to  many  at 
a  time  ?  why,  again,  does  she  deliver  (sometimes)  after  a  much 
longer  time  than  usual  ?  why  also  does  one  of  a  twin-birth 
attain  to  development  (while  the  other  languishes)  ?1Q 

Punarvasu  said, — If  blood  predominates  (in  the  seed),  the 
result  is  a  girl  ;  if  semen  predominates,  the  result  is  a  boy. 
If  the  seed  becomes  divided  into  two  portions  (through  the 
action  of  the  wind),  the  result  is  a  twin  of  opposite  sexes  accord¬ 
ing  as  blood  or  semen  may  predominate  in  each  portion.11 

She  who  gets  (injected  into  her  womb)  seed  divided  into 
two  portions  in  each  of  which  semen  predominates,  brings 
forth  a  twin  consisting  of  males  only.  She,  on  the  other 
hand,  who  gets  seed  divided  into  two  portions  in  each  of 
which  blood  predominates,  brings  forth  a  twin  consisting  of 
females  only.11 

If  the  wind,  exceedingly  excited,  entering  (into  the  womb), 
divides  the  seed,  which  always  consists  of  semen  and  the  men¬ 
strual  blood,  into  several  portions,  then  as  many  children, 
each  governed  by  his  or  her  acts  in  previous  lives  and  irres¬ 
pective  of  his  or  her  own  will,  are  brought  forth  as  the 
number  of  such  portions.13 

When  the  foetus  in  the  womb  does  not  get  proper  suste¬ 
nance,  it  becomes  either  wasted  or  is  brought  forth  prematurely. 
Such  foetus  the  mother  brings  forth  after  a  considerable  lapse 
of  time  ;  indeed,  it  is  brought  forth  only  when  it  is  developed, 


in  an  uncovered  state,  or  that  has  been  seen  by  old  beggar-women.  She 
should  not  go  to  the  river  side  or  a  tank  for  washing  raw  fish.  At 
noontide,  again,  she  should  never  go  to  a  garden  in  which  there  are  large 
trees.  She  should  never  remain  in  an  impure  state  for  any  length  of 
time.  While  asleep,  she  should  keep  a  piece  of  iron  under  her  pillow 
or  bed.  If  she  neglects  these  and  many  other  precautions  well-known  to 
every  matron,  she  is  sure  to  be  ‘  possessed  ’  by  evil  spirits.— T. 


CHAR  AKA  SAMHITA 


701 


be  that  development  delayed  by  even  many  years.14 

If  in  consequence  of  the  acts  of  previous  lives,  the  seed 
consisting  of  both  semen  and  blood  becomes  divided  into  two 
unequal  portions,  both  grow  in  the  womb,  one  becoming  larger, 
the  other  becoming  less.  Even  this  is  the  reason  why  one 
in  a  twin  becomes  more  developed  than  the  other.*15 

Agnivega  said, — Through  what  cause  (or  causes)  is  born  a 
Dwiretas ,  or  a  Pavanendriya,  or  a  Samskdravdhin ,  or  a  male 
Skanda,  or  a  female  Shanda,  or  a  Vakri,  or  an  Irshyabhirati , 
or  one  that  is  a  Vdtikashanda  ?f 1 6 

Punarvasu  said, — A  ‘  Dwiretas  ’  (hermaphrodite  of  both  sexes 
or  common  sex)  is  born  of  seed  that  consists  of  blood  and 


*  In  verse  10,  the  questions  asked  by  Agnive9a  are  9  in  number. 
Those  9  questions  are  answered  by  Punarvasu  in  verses  11  to  15.  The 
theories  expounded  here  are  exceedingly  crude.  Western  science  has 
scarcely  been  able  to  explain  these  problems  satisfactorily.  The  semen 
contains  bacilli  known  by  the  name  of  spermatozoa.  These  entering  into 
the  uterus  get  into  the  fallopian  tubes  and  through  them  into  the  ovaries, 
with  the  result  that  a  particular  ovum  or  ova  comes  or  come  out.  This  may 
be  quite  true,  but  how  to  account  for  the  resemblance  of  the  child,  male 
or  female,  with  the  sire  ?  The  action  of  the  sire,  therefore,  cannot  be 
limited  to  that  of  the  bacilli  in  the  semen  bringing  out  an  ovum  or  ova. 
The  principle  of  heridity,  ia  matters  both  physical  and  mental,  is  a  stumbling 
block  to  the  accepted  theory  of  western  science  about  procreation  being 
the  result  of  only  the  spermatozoa  in  the  semen. — T. 

t  It  is  difficult  to  render  the  words  used  in  the  text.  Hence,  it  is 
proper  to  retain  them  in  their  original  form.  Sech  explanations  as  may 
be  gathered  from  the  etymologies  of  the  words  as  also  the  observations 
of  the  commentators,  are  appended  below. 

(1)  ‘  Dwiretas,’  literally,  signifies,  *  double-seeded,’  indicating  ‘  one  whose 
seed  consists  of  both  blood  and  semen.’  The  word  is  used  to  signify  a 
hermaphrodite  who  is  neither  a  male  nor  a  female,  but  whose  sex  is 
purely  neuter. 

(2)  A  ‘  Pavanendriya  ’  is  a  male  whose  vital  seed  has  been  dried  up, 
or  who  is  bereft,  from  birth,  of  virile  power. 

(3)  A  ‘  Samskaravahin  ’  is  a  male  who  is  capable  of  sexual  congress 
only  under  the  influence  of  aphrodisiacs. 

(4)  Shandas  are  hermaphrodites.  A  nara-shanda  is  a  male  hermaphrodite. 


702 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


semen  in  equal  measures  or  of  semen  whose  productive  power 
has  been  burnt  up. 

The  wind  destroying  the  organism,  which  contains  the  semen, 
of  the  foetus  (that  would  produce  a  male)  in  the  womb,  begets 
that  variety  of  impotence  which  is  called1  Pavanendriyatwam.’17 

The  wind,  grinding  the  outlet  of  the  organism  containing 
the  semen,  generates  that  class  of  impotent  persons  who  are 
called  ‘  Samskaravahins.’ 

Parents  emitting  seed  i.  e.,  (blood  and  semen)  that  is  not 
possessed  of  vigour  and  that  is  small  in  measure,  parents  that 
are  weak,  or  those  that  are  cheerless  at  the  time  of  procreation 
or  those  whose  seed  is  sterile,*  are  causes  of  the  two  defective 
births  {viz.,  ‘  Nara-shanda  ’  and  ‘  Nari-shanda  ’).lS 

Through  the  unwillingness  of  the  mother  and  the  weakness 
of  the  father’s  semen,  a  ‘  Vakri  ’  is  generated. 


A  ‘  Nari-shanda  ’  is  a  female  hermaphrodite. 

(5)  A  ‘  Vakri  ’  as  Gangadhara  points  out,  is  called  in  Su^ruta,  an 
‘  Asekya.’  Commonly,  such  a  person  is  called  ‘  Mukha-yoni.’  It  is  a  form 
of  impotence  under  which  a  ‘  Vakri  ’  or  ‘Asekya1  labours.  He  is  incapable 
of  sexual  excitement  unless  he  drinks  another  person’s  seed.  According  to 
some,  a  ‘  Vakri  1  is  synonymous  with  ‘  Kumbhika.’  Su9ruta  mentions 
‘  Kumbhikas.1  They  are  persons  who  act  as  catamites  before  they  can  have 
any  sexual  excitement. 

(6)  An  ‘  Irshyabhirati  ’  is  noticed  by  Sugruta  also.  He  is  otherwise 
called  ‘  Irshaka  1  or  ‘  Drigyoni.’  It  is  a  form  of  impotence  under  which 
an  ‘  Irshaka  ’  suffers.  He  is  one  whose  sexual  appetite  is  never  excited 
unless  at  the  sight  of  some  one  else  gratifying  such  appetite. 

(7)  ‘  Vatikashanda  ’  is  one  who  has  no  testicles  and  is  consequently 
impotent. 

Sugruta  mentions  all  these  varieties  of  impotence,  with  some 
others.  For  the  most  part,  all  these  are  congenital,  although  some,  accord- 
ding  to  western  physicians,  are  due  to  a  premature  decay  of  power  awing 
to  over-indulgence  or  unnatural  indulgence— T. 

*  ‘  Klivau  1  would  indicate  not  exactly  parents  whose  seed  is  actually 
sterile,  but  those  whose  seed  has  not  a  vigorous  productivity.  It  seems  to  be 
a  pleonastic  adjective  in  the  sentence  inasmuch  as  1  Mandaviryyau  1  has 
been  used.— T. 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


703 

It  is  said  that  the  cause  of  an  ‘  Irshyarati  ’  (otherwise  called 
*  Irshyabhirati  ’  or  *  Irshaka)  is  a  couple  any  individual  of  which 
is  under  the  influence  of  malice,  or  a  couple  that  is  cheerless 
at  the  time  of  procreation.13 

He  whose  testicles  have  been  destroyed  through  vitiated 
wind  and  digestive  fire,  is  called  ‘  Vatika-shanda.’  Even  these 
are  the  eight  varieties  of*  individuals  of  defective  organisms, 
noticeable  (among  human  beings,)  due  to  the  (evil)  deeds  (of 
prior  lives).30’!' 

Agnivega  said, — What  are  the  indications  of  a  new-born 
conception  in  the  womb  ? 

What  are  the  indications  of  a  male,  a  female,  and  a  neuter 
foetus  in  the  womb  ? 

What  is  regarded  as  the  cause  by  which  a  child  resembles 
its  parents  ?31 

Punarvasu  replied, — Salivation,  sensation  of  heaviness  of  the 
body,  langour  of  limbs,  drowsiness,  cheerlessness,  pain  in  the 
cardiac  region,  sense  of  gratification  (without  having  taken 
any  food),  acceptance  of  the  seed  by  the  uterus, }  are  the  indi¬ 
cations  of  a  new-born  conception.32 

That  woman  produces  a  daughter  who  (during  gestation) 
uses  her  left  limbs  (more  than  the  right  ones)  for  doing  all 
acts,  who  becomes  desirous  of  male  companionship ;  whose 
sleep,  drinking,  eating,  conduct,  and  movements  are  more  femi- 


*  ‘  Dwiretas  ’  of  2  kinds  ;  Pavanendriya,  Samskaravahin,  Nara-shanda, 
Nari-shanda,  Vakri,  and  Irshyarati. — T. 

t  It  will  be  seen  from  these  passages  that  the  experience  of  the  Rishis 
was  very  wide  of  impotence  or  sterility  in  all  its  forms.  The  causes  as 
set  forth  are  scarcely  scientific.  The  theory  of  blood  and  semen  together 
being  the  cause  of  the  foetus  in  the  womb  has  yet  to  be  proved.  Much 
depends,  no  doubt,  upon  the  productivity  of  the  father’s  seed,  as  also  upon 
the  temper  of  both  the  father  and  the  mother  at  the  time  of  procreation. 
Some  French  physicians  have  gone  to  the  length  of  asserting  that  the 
mother's  cheerfulness,  in  particular,  breaking  out  into  even  a  joyous  song, 
is  sure  to  produce  a  cheerful  baby  of  the  male  sex. — T. 

t  Gangadhara  explains  this  as  implying  a  stoppage  of  the  usual  emission 
of  fluid  by  the  mother.— T. 


704 


CHARAKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


nine  than  usual,  who  seems  to  hold  the  foetus  on  the  left  side 
(of  the  womb) ;  whose  womb  does  not  swell  all  round  ,•  and 
whose  left  breast  (first)  shows  signs  of  milk.25 

When  the  reverse  of  these  signs  is  shown,  the  woman  pro¬ 
duces  a  son. 

When  the  signs  manifested  are  a  mixture  of  the  two,  the 
woman  produces  an  offspring  of  the  third  kind. 

The  woman  produces  an  offspring  like  that  being  upon 
whom  her  thoughts  dwell  at  the  time  of  conceiving.*24 

These  are  all  that  occur  in  the  body  of  every  foetus,  viz.,  the 
four  fold  four  elements,  that  is,  those  derived  from  the  mother, 
those  derived  from  the  father,  those  derived  from  the  suste¬ 
nance  (which  the  foetus  receives),  and  those  derived  from  the 
acts  of  previous  births. f25 


*  This  is  precisely  the  theory  of  the  ancients,  including  Aristotle.  The 
word  ‘  jantu  ’  used  in  the  text,  implies  a  living  creature.  Generally,  it 
signifies  an  animal  of  the  lower  order.  Here,  however,  it  evidently  implies 
a  man.  The  question  asked  by  Agnivega  is, — What  is  regarded  as  the 
cause  of  the  child’s  resemblance  (of  course,  with  its  parents)  ?  The  Rishi’s 
answer  must  be  taken  as  implying  that  the  resemblance  is  due  to  the 
mother’s  thoughts  dwelling  upon  the  person  through  whom  she  conceives. 
The  usual  resemblance  of  the  child,  therefore,  to  the  father,  must,  according 
to  this  theory,  be  taken  as  due  to  the  mother’s  thoughts  dwelling  upon  the 
person  who  makes  her  conceive.  This  accounts  not  only  for  a  human 
mother  producing  a  human  being  but  also  for  such  a  mother  producing  a 
copy  either  of  the  father  or  of  herself  or  one  with  the  features  of  both. 
This  is  further  explained  in  the  following  verses. — T. 

t  In  verse  25  the  Rishi  explains  what  the  constituent  ingredients  are 
of  the  body  of  the  foetus  in  the  womb.  He  says  that  the  ingredients  he 
mentions  are  all  that  occur  in  the  body  of  every  foetus,  there  being  nothing 
more.  The  ingredients  he  mentions  are  four  kinds  of  bhutas  or  primal 
elements,  viz.,  (1)  those  derived  from  the  mother,  (2)  those  derived  from 
the  father,  (3)  those  derived  from  the  food  or  sustenanee  which  the  foetus 
draws  for  its  growth,  and  (4)  those  derived  from  the  acts  of  previous 
births.  Each  of  those  is  of  four  kinds,  viz.,  earth,  water,  light  or  heat, 
and  air.  Ether  or  space  is  left  out,  as  it  is  untransmutable  and  occurs  in 
every  form  or  substance.  The  mother,  through  the  blood  she  supplies 
for  the  formation  of  the  seed,  contributes  these  four  primal  elements.  The 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


705 


Amongst  these,  those  elements,  derivable  from  the  mother, 
the  father,  and  the  acts  of  previous  lives,  which  become  parti¬ 
cularly  predominant,  should  be  regarded  as  the  reason  of  the 
resemblance.  The  mind  should  be  regarded  as  the  result  of 
previous  states  of  birth.*26 

Agnivega  said, — Through  what  cause  does  a  woman  produce 
a  deformed  issue,  such  as  one  divested  of  some  limb  or  limbs 
or  one  possessed  of  some  superfluous  limb  or  limbs  or  one  with 
some  sense  or  senses  incapable  of  discharging  its  or  their  function  ? 

How  does  the  Soul  (or  Self)  travelling  out  of  one  body  got 
another  ? 

What  are  those  things  by  which  the  Soul  (or  Self)  is  always 
followed  (in  its  peregrinations  from  body  to  body)  ?'17 

Punarvasu  answered, — The  faults  (viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm), 
vitiated  by  defects  appertaining  to  the  seed,  the  acts  of  the  form 
being  in  previous  lives,  the  womb,  and  time,  as  also  by  defects 


father,  too,  through  the  semen  he  supplies  for  the  formation  of  the 
seed,  contributes  the  same  four  elements.  The  measures,  of  course,  of 
each,  as  supplied  by  the  mother  and  the  father,  differ  in  proportion. 
Through,  again,  the  food  or  sustenance  which  the  fcetus  draws 
from,  of  course,  the  mother,  the  same  four  elements  are  supplied,  in  measures 
of  differing  proportions.  Last  come  the  four  elements  which  the  fcetus 
derives  from  the  acts  of  previous  births.  The  chit  or  Self,  before  birth 
gravitates,  according  to  its  previous  acts,  towards  particular  measures  of 
the  four  (according  to  Punarvasu,  or,  five,  according  to  others,  for  they 
include  ether  or  space)  primal  elements  and  becomes  invested  with 
the  body  of  a  goat,  a  sheep,  a  cow,  a  horse,  or  a  man,  etc.  Every 
live  or  dead  body,  as  also  every  inanimate  substance,  consists  of  the  four 
(or  five)  primal  elements.  The  chaturi  or  panchi-karana,  meaning  mixture 
or  combination  of  the  four  or  five,  takes  place  in  different  proportions. 
Hence,  the  difference  between  object  and  object,  or  body  and  body.— T. 

*  In  verse  26,  the  Rishi  explains  tbe  reasons  of  the  resemblance  which 
the  child  has  with  its  parents.  This  resemblance  is  both  general  and  parti¬ 
cular.  By  the  former  is  meant  the  resemblance  of  genus  and  species  ; 
by  the  latter,  that  of  individuality.  Thus,  a  human  mother  not  only  begets 
a  human  being  but  also  a  being  that  is  very  like  herself  or  the  person 
through  whom  she  conceives,  or  both  herself  and  that  person.  The  reason 
of  this  resemblance  is  the  predominance  of  the  elements  derived  by  the 


7o6 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


appertaining  to  the  food  and  movements  of  the  mother  during 
the  period  of  gestation,  cause  diverse  kinds  of  defects  of  body, 
complexion,  and  organs  (of  both  sense  and  action).*28 

As  trunks  (or  timber),  rocks  and  stones,  clouds  (including 
thunder-storms  and  rain  and  hail),  and  the  force  of  the  current, 
in  the  season  of  rains,  cause  injuries  to  a  tree  standing  by  the 
bank  (or  in  the  bed)  of  a  river,  even  after  the  same  manner  the 
vitiated  faults  cause  defects  in  the  foetus  placed  in  the  womb,  f 

With  the  four  primordial  elements  in  their  subtile  forms,  the 
Soul  (or  Self)  gets  into  one  body  from  another. 

In  consequence  of  its  vest  being  (then)  only  acts,  it  has,  unless 
one  has  spiritul  vision,  no  visible  form.J 


foetus  from  the  mother,  the  father,  and  the  acts  of  previous  states  of  existence. 

Having  stated  the  reason  of  the  resemblance,  the  Rishi  refers  to  the 
origin  of  the  mind.  The  mind  of  the  foetus  is  ‘  yathanukam,’  that  is,  agree¬ 
able  to  previous  states  of  birth.  The  ‘  chit  ’  that  had  been  formerly  encased 
in  the  form  of  a  man  and  that  would  gravitate,  through  good  acts,  towards 
the  attributes  of  humanity,  would  again  be  encased  in  the  form  of  a  man. 

*  Time  means  both  the  season  of  insumination  and  gestation  and  the 
age  of  the  parents.  The  first  has  reference  also  to  the  state  of  the  bodies, 
or  tempers  of  the  parents. — T. 

t  The  comparison  is  scarcely  happy.  Of  course,  the  foetus  in  the  womb, 
is  compared  to  the  tree  in  the  bed  or  bank  of  a  river,  and  the  vitiated 
faults  to  the  fallen  and  floating  trunks,  etc.,  etc.  ‘  Kashata  ’  is  word',  mean¬ 
ing  trunks  of  fallen  trees  carried  away  by  the  swallen  river.  ‘  A?ma  ’ 
implies  boulders  or  stones.  In  certain  well  streams,  boulders  and  stones 
are  washed  down  with  such  force  after  a  heavy  shower  that  elephants  refuse 
to  cross  them  at  such  times  even  if  the  water  be  no  higher  than  their  knees. — T. 

J  The  word  ‘  Manajava  ’  is  explained  variously.  Chakrapani  takes  it 
as  implying  tendency  or  a  an  inclination  of  the  mind.  ’  This,  however 
can  hardly  be  the  meaning.  The  question  asked  by  Agniveca,  is — how 
does  the  Soul  or  Self  get  into  one  body  from  another  ?  The  Rishi  in  answering 
it  should  speak  of  the  soul  or  self  and  not  of  the  mind  or  any  tendency  or 
inclination  of  it.  In  Hindu  philosophy,  the  soul  is  distinct  from  the  mind. 
The  mind  is  a  possession  of  the  soul  generally  speaking,  the  mind  is  regarded 
as  only  a  sixth  sense  ;  the  intellect  ( budhi )  being  .considered  as  above  it. 
The  function  of  the  mind  is  to  doubt.  It  is,  in  the  usual  phraselogy,  San- 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


70 7 

The  Soul  (or  Self)  is  all-pervadifig.  He  is  the  sustainer 
t>f  all  bodies.  He  is  the  creator  of  the  universe.  He  has  the 
universe  for  his  form.  He  is  the  source  (or  origin)  of  conscious¬ 
ness.  He  is  beyond  the  ken  of  the  senses.  He  is  (till  Eman¬ 
cipation)  always  united  (with  mind  and  primordial  matter). 
He  is  always  (till  Emancipation)  united  with  desire.*51 

It  should  be  understood  that  in  the  body  are  the  six  and 
ten  elements  derived  from  juices  and  the  Soul  and  the  mother 
and  the  father. 

Four  (of  these)  are  attached  to  the  Soul,  and  in  those  four 
is  the  Soul3af 


kalpavikalpatmika.  The  function  of  the  Intellect  is  to  ascertain  or  determine, 
for  it  is  said  to  be  1  nicchaylltmika  ’.  Here  ‘  manas,’  or  mind,  is  used  as 
including  ‘  buddhi  ’  or  intellect.  Gangadhara’s  interpretation  seems  to  be 
correct.  He  explains  that  the  Soul  or  Self  not  having  any  inclination  of  its 
own,  the  inclinations  of  the  mind  are  spoken  of  as  those  of  the  Soul. 

The  theory  is  that  the  primordial  elements  have  two  forms,  the  gross  and 
the  subtile.  The  latter  are  called  tanmalras.  When  the  gross  body  is 
destroyed,  the  subtile  body,  or  ‘  linga  carira,’  consisting  of  only  the  ‘  bhuta- 
tanmatfels,’  remains.  In  consequence  of  these,  the  Soul  as  invested  with  the 
tanmatras,  gravitates  towards  congenial  tanmatras  and  thus  comes  to  be 
invested  with  an  equine,- a  bovine,  a  porcine,  or  a  human  body.  The  vestment 
of  the  Soul  (before  entrance  into  the  womb)  is  spoken  of  as  *  karmStmaka,  ’ 
that  is,  having  karma  or  acts  for  its  aliitan  or  body  or  material.  Being 
such,  it  is  invisible  to  all  save  those  who  have  that  spriritual  vision  which 
*  yoga  ’  bestows. — T. 

*  *  Sarvacarirabhrit,  ’  as  applied  to  the  Soul  or  Self,  implies  that  the 
Soul  sustains  all  bodies  into  which  he  enters  or  witnin  which  he  dwells. 
The  theory  is  that  it  is  the  Soul  that  sustains,  or  keeps  together,  the  particles 
composing,  the  body.  Even  in  sleep  or  in  swoons,  the  Soul  is  awake  and 
discharges  this  function.  When  death  ensues,  that  is,  when  the  Soul  abandons 
his  tenement,  the  particles  of  the  body  fall  off.  The  Soul  is  the  source  or 
origin  of  consciousness.  If  the  Soul  were  not,  there  could  not  be  self-con¬ 
sciousness. — T. 

t  The  six  and  ten  elements  of  the  body  are  1.  the  form  derivable  from 
1  rasa  ’  or  the  juice  into  which  food  is  resolved  ;  it  is  this  juice  that  develops 
into,  or  rather,  enters  into,  the  composition  of  blood  and  flesh  and  bones 
and  marrow,  &c.  These  have  elsewhere  been  called  ‘  aparaja  bhutani  ;  2. 
the  four  derivable  from  the  soul  ;  these  have  elsewhere  been  called:*  karmajaui 

90 


708 


CHARAKA  SAMH1TA. 


The  elements  derived  from  the  mother  and  the  father,  viz., 
blood  and  semen,  they  say,  are  in  the  foetus. 

Those  elements  by  which  blood  and  semen  are  made  to 
.grow  are  born  of  the  juice  (into  which  food  is  developed)." 

Those  four  (primordial)  elements  which  are  derived  from 
the  acts  (of  previous  births)  and  which  adhere  to  the  Self, 
enter  into  the  foetus ;  since  the  case  consisting  of  the  four 
elements  (in  their  subtile  form)  is  endued  with  the  virtues  of 
a  (vegetable)  seed.  The  Self  going,  the  subtile  case  also  goes 
into  diverse  bodies.'4*  H 


bhutani  ;  ’  3.  those  derived  from  the  mother  ;  and  4.  those  derived  from  the 
sire  ( vide  verse  25  of  this  lesson).  These  four  sets  of  four  make  up  six  and  ten. 
Of  course,  the  four  of  which  each  set  consists  are  earth,  water,  light  or  heat, 
and  air.  Space  or  either  is  excluded  by  the  Rishi  for,  as  already  explained, 
it  is  untransmutable  and  occurs  in  all  substances.  Gangadhara  and  the 
vernacular  translators  have  made  a  mess  of  this  verse.  One  of  the  latter 
mentions  the  two  and  twenty  tatwas  in  detail,  which,  he  thinks,  are  implied 
but  counts  them  as  twenty.  His  list  is  juice,  soul,  the  four  derived  from 
mother  and  father,  the  ten  organs  of  sense  and  action,  and  the  six  dhatus  of 
the  body.  Another  gives  one  and  twenty  tatwas ,  which  he  . thinks  are  implied, 
but  counts  them  as  twenty.  His  list  is  juice,  soul,  the  four  derived  from  mother 
and  father,  the  ten  organs  of  sense  and  action,  and  the  five  attributes  of 
of  sound  and  the  rest.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  same  sixteen 
elements  are  referred  to  in  this  verse  which  have  been  referred  to  in 
verse  25  ante, — T. 

*  The  original  is  very  abstruse  and  no  wonder  that  it  has  been  in¬ 
terpreted  differently  by  different  commentators  and  translators. 

The  first  difficulty  is  about  the  masculine  pronoun  ‘  sa.’  To  what  does 
it  refer  ?  Gangadhara  takes  it  as  'implying  the  Self  cased  in  the  four 
elements  in  their  subtile  forms.  This  can  scarcely  be  correct  ;  for  the 
statement  that  the  Self  cased  in  the  elements  in  their  subtile  form  goes 
into  diverse  bodies  upon  the  Self  going  into  them  ’  would  be  tautoligical. 
Hence,  ‘  sa  ’  should  be  taken  as  standing  for  1  the  case  consisting  of  the 
four  elements  in  their  subtile  .form,’  or  what  is  called  ‘  the  lingacarira.’ 
The  meaning  then  becomes  clear,  (atmani  yati  sati,  sa  aparaparani  &c.( 
yati).  The  words  ‘  5tmani  yati  sati  '■  may  also  be  taken  as  implying  1  upon 
the  body  being  dissolved.’  ‘  Atman  ’  is  frequently  used  to  signify  the 
body.— T. 


CHARAKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


709 

It  Is  well-known  that  the  form  of  the  four  elements  whichi 
have  acts  for  their  origin  is  the  especial  form  (of  the  foetus). 
From  the  mind  (of  the  being  as  existing  in  a  previous  life)  is 
the  especial  form  of  the  mind.  Those  distinctions  which  occur 
as  regards  features  and  the  understanding,  have  Rajas  (Passion) 
Tamas  (Darkness),  and  acts  as  their  cause.*56 

The  Self  is  never  dissociated  from  those  subtile  elements 
which  transcend  the  senses.  Nor  is  it  dissociated  from  acts, 
or  mind  and  understanding,  or  Consciousness  and  the  mani¬ 
festations  of  consciousness.-)-56 


*  What  is  said  here  is  that  the:  four  elements  which  are  derived  from 
the  acts  of  previous  lives  give  form  to  the  foetus,  the  earth  (in  its  subtile; 
form)  creating  the  gross  earth  that  clothes  it,  the  water  (in  its  subtile  form>) 
creating  the  gross  water  in  it,  etc.,  etc.  Having  accounted  for  the 
material  case,  the  Rishi  explains  that  the  mind  is  derived  from  the  mind 
of  the  being  as  it  was  in  the  previous  state  of  existence.  The  theory  is 
that  after  the  dissolution  of  the  gross  body,  the  subtile  body  remains  with 
the  mind,  etc.  This  subtile  case,  with  the  self,  enters  into  the  womb 
and  penetrates  the  seed  which  is  a  mixture  of  blood  and  semen.  The 
subtile  elements  develop  their  grosser  forms  ;  the  mind  develops  the 
mind  of  the  being  that  is  reborn. 

The  distinctions  in  features  and  understanding  are  due  to  the  attributes 
of  Rajas  and  Tamas  and  acts.  As  long  as  there  is  Rajas  (passion)  and 
Ta?nas  (darkness),  there  must  be  acts.  Acts,  again,  develop  Rajas  and 
Tamas.  The  attribute  of  Sattwa  leads  to  Emancipation  from  rebirth. 
It  is  true,  there  is  no  man  without  some  measure  of  Sattwa,  but  then  the 
tendency  of  Sattwa  is  always  to  diminish  acts  and  lead  towards  Emanci¬ 
pation.  Hence,  Sattwa  is  really  not  an  agent  in  rebirth  or  in  determining 
the  features,  etc.,  of  a  being  that  takes  birth. — T. 

+  1  Acts  ’  imply  the  unexhausted  acts  of  previous  births.  Besides  the 
four  elements  in  their  subtile  form,  the  other  things  that  are  always 
(meaning  till  Emancipation)  attached  to  the  Self  are  Consciousness  and 
those  which  are  the  modifications  of  Consciousness,  viz.,  the  five  organs 
of  knowledge,  the  five  organs  of  action,  and  the  five  objects  of  the  organs 
of  knowledge.  The  last  five  are  sabda  (sound),  sparca  (touch),  rupa  (light), 
rasa  (juice  or  water),  and  gandha  (scent).  According  to  the  Sankhya 
philosophy,  the  three  sets  of  five  or  fifteen,  mentioned  last,  all  spring  from 
‘  AhankHra  1  or  Consciousness,  which  itself  springs  from  ‘  M.ahattattwa  ' 
or  Intelligence. — T. 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A 


The  mind  is  always  associated  with  Rajas  and  Tamas.  In 
the  absence  of  Knowledge,  all  the  faults  are  there.  The  Mind 
with  the  faults,  and  acts  endued  with  strength  (to  produce 
fruits),  are  causes  of  (the  Selfs)  goings  out  and  comings  in.87* 

Agnivega  asked, — Whence  are  diseases  ? 

What  is  their  alleviative  ? 

What  is  the  cause  of  joy,  as  also  of  grief  ? 

By  what  means  can  the  ailments  of  the  body  and  the  mind 
be  so  cured  as  not  to  re-appear  ?38 

Punarvasu  said, — The  causes  from  which  all  ailments  spring 
are  three.  Faults  of  judgment,  absence  of  harmony  between 
the  senses  and  their  objects  ;  and  the  effects  of  time,  numbering 
the  third. 

There  are  three  means  of  alleviation  also,  viz.,  harmony 
(propriety)  of  judgment,  harmony  between  the  senses  and  their 


*  The  mind  is  always  associated  with  the  attributes  of  Rajas  and  Tamas. 
Unless  and  until  these  two  attributes  fall  off,  and  Sattwa  (goodness) 

comes  in,  Emancipation  cannot  be  achieved.  1  All  the  faults  ’  implies 

not  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  which  are  technically  called  faults  in  Hindu 
medical  lliterature,  but  the  fruits  of  Rajas  and  Tamas  which  are  really 
faults  or  defects  inasmuch  as  they  stand  in  the  way  of  Emancipation 
which  is  really  a  return  of  the  Self  to  its  own  true  nature.  Without 

‘  knowledge  ’  the  faults  cannot  be  avoided.  ‘  Knowledge,’  as  used  in 

such  connection,  implies  ‘  a  knowledge  of  the  Self,  that  is,  of  its  own 
true  nature.’  Such  knowledge  leads  to  Renunciation,  or  abstention  from 


Gangadhara  takes  *  valavat  ’  as  qualifying  both  ‘  manas  ’  and  ‘  karma.’ 
This  can  scarcely  be  correct.  ‘  Manas  ’  is  qualified  by  ‘  sadosham  ’  and 
*  karma  ’  by  ‘  valavat.’  ‘  Valavat  ’  literally  means  ‘  strong,’  or  ‘  endued 
with  strength  ;’  hence,  as  qualifying  ‘  karma,’  it  implies  such  acts  as  have 
the  capacity  to  produce  fruits.  All  acts  have  not  the  capacity  to  produce 
fruits,  such  as  mere  movements  of  she  body,  breathing,  etc.  Then,  again, 
acts  whose  fruits  have  been  exhausted  by  enjoyment  or  endurance,  cannot 
be  spoken  of  as  ‘  valvat.’ — T. 


CHARAICA  SAMHITA. 


7 1 


objects,  and  harmony  of  time.**9 

It  has  been  said  that  righteous  deeds  are  causes  of  joy,  and 
the  reverse  of  these  subject  one  to  grief. 

Ailments  spring  from  body  and  mind. 

These  cease  when  body  and  mind  cease  to  exist.40 

The  beginning  is  never  asserted  of  the™  continued  course  of 
the  body  and  of  the  mind,  since  beginning  there  is  none'  of  this. 

The  cessasion  of  these  two  is  brought  about  by  superior 
apprehension  and  memory,  and  by  superior  intelligence.!41 

Even  when  the  two  seats,  as  already  explained,  of  disease 
exist,  (viz.,  the  body  and  mind),  diseases  never  afflict  the  person 
who  has  recourse  to  alleviatives  before  the  ailments  manifest 
themselves  and  who  has  his  senses  under  complete  control,  unless, 
of  course,  there  is  evil  destiny  ripe  for  fruition.42 

The  acts  done  in  former  lives  are  known  by  the  name  of 
Destiny.  Those,  however,  which  are  done  in  this  life  are"  called 
Exertion. 

The  improper  correlation  of  acts  of  both  this  and  previous  [jlives 
is  the  cause  whence  disease  springs  ;  while  their  proper  correlation 
is  the  cause  of  the  absence  of  disease.43! 


*  *  Effects  of  Time  ’  include  the  effects  of  the  seasons,  of  the  day  and 
night,  and  of  the  acts  of  previous  births.  ‘  Absence  of  harmony  between 
the  senses  and  their  objects,’  means  absence  of  correlation,  excess  of 
correlation,  and  false  or  improper  correlation.  Corresponding  to  three 
causes  of  ailments  are  the  three  means  of  alleviation. — T. 

+  ‘  Rupa  ’  here  is  used  for  body.  ‘  Santati  ’  implies  continuous  ex¬ 
tension,  that  is,  current,  stream,  or  flow  of  body  from  body  in  succession 
to  one  another.  The  cessation  of  this  current  is  called  Emancipation, 
which  is  effected  by  superior  intelligence  and  wisdom. — T. 

X  ‘  Daiva  ’  and  ‘  Purusha  ’  are  two  words  that  have  been  explained 
before  in  Sutrasthana  in  more  than  one  passage.  They  are  explained  once 
more  here.  The  unexhausted  acts  of  previous  lives,  by  which  is  meant 


712 


CHARAKA  samhita. 


By 'removing  effectively  and  without  delay,  in  the  spring, 
the^faults  accumulated  in  winter,  in  the  ante-rainy  season  the 
faults  accumulated  in  summer,  and  in  the  autumn  the  faults 
accumulated  in  the  rainy  season,  one  never  gets  the  diseases 
that  are  especial  to  the  several  seasons.44* 

One  who  is  accustomed  to  beneficial  diet  and  movements, 
who  acts  after  reflection,  who  is  unattached  to  the  objects  of 
the  senses,  who  makes  gifts,  who  behaves  equally  towards  all, 
who  is  devoted  to  truth,  who  is  forgiving,  and  who  serves  with, 
humility  all  those  who  are  inspired,  is  never  attacked  by 
ailmeuts.4S 

Diseases  never  assail  him  who  has  knowledge,  and  penances,, 
and  devotion  to  yoga.  Hence  the  will,  speech,  acts,  and  mind 
should  directed  to  the  acquisition  of  happiness.  The  understand¬ 
ing  also  should  be  made  clear.4f 


their  residue, — that  is,  those  acts  whose  fruits  have  not  yet  been  enjoyed 
or  endured,  constitute  ‘  Daiva,’  which  is  generally  rendered  1  destiny.’ 
The  acts,  again,  which  one  does  in  this  life,  constitute  what  is  called 
‘  Paurusha,’  which  is  generally  rendered  ‘  exertion.’  Destiny  and  exertion 
are  important  factors  in  determining  the  tenour  of  one’s  life. 

The  two  word  ‘  Pravritti  ’  and  ‘  Nivritti  ’  used  in  the  second  half  of 
the  verse,  imply  the  setting  in  and  the  absence  or  cessation  of  disease. 
It  has  been  previously  explained  that  all  inharmonious  or  improper  corre¬ 
lations  of  the  senses  with_their  respective  objects,  meaning  ‘  Atiyoga,’  1  Ayoga,’ 
and  ‘  Mithyagoga,’  are  the  causes  of  ailments.  As  regards  the  acts  of 
previous  lives,  their  improper  correlation  also  leads  to  what  are  called 
‘  Samskaras  ’  in  this  life,  meaning  ‘  tendencies  ’  or  ‘  inclinations.’  These 
tendencies  lead  to  new  acts,  which  can  never  be  good.  Hence,  disease 
springs  from  acts  of  both  this  life  and  previous  ones.  When  those  acts  are 
of  an  opposite  character,  i.  e.,  when  there  is  harmony  or  propriety  of 
correlation,  absence  or  cessation  of  disease  is  the  result. — T. 

*  The  Rishi  divides  the  year  into  six  seasons.  There  are  three 
principal  ones,  and  three  intermediate  ones.  The  three  principal  ones 
are  winter,  summer,  and  the  rainy.  Between  winter  and  summer  is  the 
spring  ;  between  summer  and  the  rainy  is  that  called  ‘  Pravish  ’  or  ante- 
rainy,  called  ‘  abhrakala  ’  in  this  verse,  meaning  1  the  season  of  clouds,’ 
that  is,  the  season  when  the  clouds  begin  to  gather.  Between  the  rainy 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


713 


f  Here  is  a  verse  containing  a  summary.  ) 

In  this  Lesson  on  disparity  of  race,  the  illustrious  and  great 
Rishi  (Atri’s  son  Punarvasu)  solved,  agreeably  to  the  truth,  the 
the  six  and  twenty  questions  of  grave  import,  of  Agnive5a, 
for  the  increase  of  knowledge.1* 

Thus  ends  the  second  Lesson,  called  disparity  of  race, 
In  the  Division  called  Qarira  in  the  treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised 
by  Charaka. 


and  the  winter  is  that  called  autumn  or  ‘  carat  this  is  called  (in  this 
verse)  ‘  Ghanatyaya,’  meaning  the  season  whence  the  clouds  disappear. 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  course  of  treatment  called  4  corrective,’ 
which  consists  of  the  administration,  mainly,  of  purgatives  and  emetics, 
including  errhines,  that  is  laid  down  in  this  verse,  constitutes  what  has  been 
called  ‘  Pratikarma  ’  or  the  administration  of  alleviatives,  in  verse  41  above. 
The  subject  has  already  been  treated  of  in  ‘  Vimanasthana  ’  ante. — T. 

*  The  six  and  twenty  questions  asked  by  Agnive?a  are  counted  as 
six  and  thirty  by  Gangadhara,  although  he  actually  mentions  only  four 
and  thirty  in  detail.  The  fact  is,  there  are  really,  as  Charaka  sums  up, 
cnly  six  and  twenty  questions  put  by  Agnivega.  These  are, — one  in 
verse  2  ;  three  in  verse  4  (and  not  six  as  counted  by  Gangadhara)  ;  six 
in  verse  10  (and  not  nine  as  counted  by  Gangadhara  ;  the  fact  being  that 
each  of  the  four  questions  that  come  first  is  followed  by  the  disjunctive 
particle  1  va  >  meaning  1  or  ’)  ;  seven  in  verse  16  (and  not  eight  as  counted 
by  Gangadhara,  the  fact  being  that  ‘  naranari  :shanda  ’  is:  to  be  counted 
as  one  and  not  two  ;  two  in  verse  21  (and  not  three  as  counted  by  Ganga¬ 
dhara)  ;  three  in  verse  27  ;:and  four  in  verse  37. 

Unless  the  questions  are  counted  properly,  the  answers  cannot  be 
intelligible.  Some  of  the  blunders  committed  by  Gangadhara  in  explaining 
the  answers,  have  arisen  from  his  miscounting  the  questions.  Indeed, 
.when  Charaka,  Jin  the  verse  that  embodies  the  summary,  expressly  says 
that  the  .'number  of  Agnive9a’s  questions  is  six  and  twenty,  it  would  be 
impertinent  for  an  annotator  to  reckon  them  as  six  and  thirty. 

A  careful  perusal  of  this  Lesson  will  show  that  the  questions  put  by 
the  pupil  are  of  every  great  importance.  Unfortunately,  the  answers  for  the 
most  part  show  that  imagination,  instead  of  observation,  was  accepted  as 
the  guide.— T. 


LESSON  III. 


After  this,  we  shall  expound  the  Lesson  in  brief  on  (the 
subject  of)  Garbhavakranti  (the  descent  into  the  womb)  in  the 
Division  called  Qarira. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.*1 

When  congress  occurs,  during  the  menstrual  period,  of  a 
person  whose  semen  is  not  affected  by  any  disease,  with  a  woman 
whose  generative  organ,  blood,  and  uterus,  have  no  defects,  and 
when  in.  ^  course  _of  such  congress  between  a  male  aup 
a  female., both  of  whom  are  possessed  of  such  attributes,  the 
semen  and  the  blood^combined  finds  its  way  into  the  uterus 
and  Jiva  enters  into  it  in  consequence  of  the  mind’s  attachment 
with  acts,  then  (what  is  called)  Conception  takes  place.f* 


*  ‘  Khuddika  ’  or  1  Khuddaka  ’  (the  masculine  form  of  the  former), 
means  small  or  brief.  It  is  opposed  to  ‘  Mahat.’  In  the  Sutrasthana  occur 
two  Lessons  which  are  called  (i)  ‘  Khuddaka  chatuspada  ’  and  (2)  ‘  Maha- 
chatuspada.’  In  this  Division  also  (viz.,  Carira),  this  Lesson  is  called 
1  Khuddika  garbhavakranti,’  and  it  is  followed  by  the  Lesson  called 
‘  Mahat  Garbhavakranti.’  The  feminine  forms  of  the  adjective  have  been 
used  because  the  substantive  ‘  Garbhavakranti  1  is  a  feminine  one. 
‘  Avakranti,’  literally,  means  ‘  a  descent  (from  the  other  world).’  Hence, 
‘  Garbhavakranti  ’  implies  ‘  the  descent  of  Self  in  its  linga  or  subtile  form 
into  the  womb.’  According  to  both  Hindu  philosophy  and  medicine,  that 
which  is  called  birth  is  really  the  entry  of  Self  into  the  seed  that  helps 
the  growth  of  the  body  and  that  consists  of  a  mixture  of  semen  and  blood. 

It  should  be  observed  also  that  the  words  1  Khudda  ’  and  ‘  Khuddi  ’ 
exist  in  Bengali  in  the  forms  ‘  Khulla  ’  and  1  Khulli,’  as  also  ‘  Khura  ’  and 
‘  Khuri  ’  which  are  correct. — T. 

t  ‘  Anupahataretas  ’  implies  a  male  whose  semen  is  unaffected  by  the 
eight  rkinds  of  defects  or  diseases  named  hereafter;  in  other  words,  the 
productivity  of  whose  semen  has  not  been  impaired. 


CHAR-AKA  SAMHITA 


7  IS 


The  fetus,  furnished  with  juices  agreeable  to  it,  and  nour¬ 
ished  by  proper  nourishment,  freed  from  diseases,  begins  to  grow. 

Then  when  mature,  it  becomes  equipt  with  all  the  organs  of 
sense,  and  its  whole  body  becomes  fully  formed  ;  then,  endued 
with  wealth  of  strength,  of  complexion,  of  vigour  in  respect  of 
some  particular  element,  and  of  compactness,  it  easily  issues  out 
(of  the  uterus)  through  manifestation  of  the  following  conditions.8 

The  fetus  is  born-  of  the  mother,  the  father,  the  Self,  and 
the  juice  (which  enters  into  it  from  the-  body  of  the  mother). 
That  which  is  called  Sattwa  (or  Mind)  brings  about  a  union 
of  these  (four),4 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri,4 

Bharadwaja  said — This  is  not  so.  What  is  the  reason  (for 
my  assertion)  ?  Since  neither  mother,  nor  father,  nor  Self,  nor 
the  capacity  of  the  fetus  to  assimilate  (juice  From  the  mother) 
nor  the  supply  of  food  and  drink  and  edibles  and  lickables, 
begets  conception.  Nor  is  it  true  that  that  which  is  called  Sattwa 
(mind)  coming  from  the  next  world  descends  into  the  germ 
in  the  uterus. 

Since  if  mother  and  father  could  beget  conception,  there  are 
many  women  and  many  men  who  are  desious  of  offspring.  All 
of  them,  purposing  to  have  sons,  would  betake  themselves  to 


*  Yoni  ’  is  the  generative  organ.  It  sometimes  includes  the  uterus.  Here, 
as  the  uterus  is  separately  mentioned,  it  does  not  include  it. 

*  RitukSla  ’  means  the  menstrual  period.  Manu  as  also  the  medical  sages 
limit  this  period  to  sixteen  days  after  the  first  appearance  of  blood.  The 
first  three  days  are  laid  down  as  improper  for  sexual  congress.  The 
several  diseases  of  ‘  yoni’,  blood,  and  ‘  garbha^aya  ’  or  the  region  where 
the  foetus  lies  and  grows,  i.  e.,  the  uterus  or  womb,  have  been  separately 
laid  down  hereafter. 

‘  Sattwasampraysga  ’  means  the  urion  of  the  mind  with,  or  its  attachment 
to,  the  acts  of  previous  lives.  These  acts  impart  to  the  mind  a  distinct  force 
or  tendency  in  consequence  of  which  the  mind  is  impelled  to  enter  a  particular 
womb.  In  fact,  it  is  that  force  which  actermines  the  order  or  kind  of  body 
which  the  being  assumes — T. 

91 


6 1 7 


CHAR  A  KA  SA  M  V/  TA. 


sexual  congress  and  actually  beget  sons  ;  those  amongst  them 
that  are  desirous  of  having  daughters  would  beget  daughters. 
There  would  then  be  no  women,  and  no  men,  entirely  childless. 
In  fact,  no  women  and  men  woul  indulged  in  sorrow  for  non- 
fulfilment  of  their  desise  for  offspring. 

Nor  does  Self  beget  Self,  since  if  Self  begets  Self,  the 
question  arises, — whether  the  Self  that  is  already  born  begets 
Self  or  the  Self  that  is  unborn  begets  Self. 

Each  of  these  views  would  be  erroneous. 

That  which  is  born  cannot  beget  (itself',  for  it  is  already 
in  enistence. 

Nor  can  that  which  is  not  born  beget  (itself),  for  it  is  not 
existent. 

Hence  neither  view  is  logical. 

Leave  this  for  the  present.  (There  is  another  consideration 
which  comes  in). 

If,  indeed,  Self  be  really  capable  of  begetting  Self,  why  is 
it  that  it  does  not  beget  itself  in  an  auspicious  order  of  being, 
since  Self  desires  itself  to  be  Ruler  of  uncontrolled  motion,  capable 
of  assuming  any  form  at  will,  shining  with  energy  and  strength 
and  (fair)  complexion  and  (superior)  mind  and  body,  without 
decrepitude,  without  disease,  and  deathless,  and  endued  with 
other  attributes  of  a  similar  or  superior  kind.  6* 


*  Punarvasu  says  (in  aphorism  4)  that  the  foetus  is  born  of  mother, 
father,  Self,  assimilation  (by  mother  and  father)  of  proper  or  suitable  food 
and  drink,  and  the  juices  derived  from  the  food  taken  by  the  mother  and 
communicated  to  it,  the  mind  being  the  uniting  agent.  The  theory  is  that 
there  is  a  tendency  in  every  mind,  caused  by  the  acts  of  previous  lives,  to 
take,  after  the  dissolution  of  the  body,  a  particular  form  or  admission  into 
a  particular  order  of  being.  Hence  the  mind  is  spoken  of  as  the  uniting 
agency  with  respect  to  the  constituents  of  a  re-born  being,  which,  as  already 
said,  are  derived  from  mother,  father  Self,  and  the  juices. 

Bharadwaja  impeaches  this  theory.  His  arguments  are  simple.  The 
mother,  the  father,  the  Self,  assimilation  of  simple  food,  and  the  juices 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


7'7 


Conception  is  also  not  due  to  assimilation  (by  mother  and 
father)  of  proper  (or  suitable)  food  and  drink.  For  if  it  were  so, 
it  is  evident  that  only  those  who  take  such  food  and  drink 
would  have  offspring  ;  while  all  those  who  do  not  take  such 
food  and  drink  would  be  childless.  The  fact,  however,  is  that 
the  reverse  is  seen  of  both  these  propositions.*. 

Conception,  again,  is  not  born  of  the  juices.  If  it  were 
born  of  the  juices,  there  would  be  none  among  men  and  women 
that  would  be  childless,  since  there  is  none  among  them  that 
does  not  take  (what  produces)  the  juices. 

If  it  be  intended  to  affim  that  oniy  those  who  take  food 
that  is  of  superior  quality  hare  conceptions,  in  that  case  only 
those  would  have  conceptions  who-  subsist  upon  the  meat  of 
goat,  of  shup  of  deer,  and  of  peacocks,  as  also  the  milk  of  the 
cow,  curds  ghee,  honey,  oils,  and  rock-salt,  the  juice  of  the 
sugarcane,  Phoseolus  Mungo  and  Qili-rice.  On  the  other  hand, 


cannot  be  causes  of  birth.  Nor  does  the  mind,  after  the  dissolution  of  the 
body,  enter  into  the  womb.  First,  the  mother  and  the  father  are  not 
agents  in  production,  for  there  are  many  women  and  men  who  are  childless 
although  they  long  for  children.  Nor  can  they  beget  either  sons  or  daughters 
according  to  their  desire.  Birth  is,  therefore,  independent  of  their  will  or 
desire.  Secondly,  the  Self  cannot  beget  Self.  This  is  made  out  as  follows  : 
a  Self  already  born  cannot  beget  itself,  for  it  is  already  in  existence  ;  a  Self, 
again,  that  is  not  born,  cannot  beget  itself,  for  one  that  is  unborn  has  no 
existence.  The  argument  seems  to  be  like  a  verbal  quibble. 

If,  again,  the  Self  can  beget  itself,  why  does  it  not  beget  itself  in  an 
auspicious  order  of  being  ?  Why  does  it  take  birth  in  undesirable  orders  ? 

It  cannot  be  that  it  does  not  desire  to  have  a  superior  order  of  existence. 
If,  in  spite  of  a  desire  for  a  superior  order  of  existence,  it  takes  birth  in 
inferior  orders,  it  follows  that  birth  is  independent  of  the  inclinations  of  the 
Self. 

The  other  assertions  of  Punarvasu  are  taken  up  by  Bharadwaja  in  the 
subsequent  portions  of  the  Lesson. — T, 

*  “The  reverse  fs  seen  of  both  those  propositions.”  This  implies  that 
amongst  those  who  take  proper  food  and  drink,  people  are  seen  that  lave 
no  children,  and  amongst  those  who  do  not  take'  proper  food  and  drink, 
people  are  seen  that  have  children. — T. 


718 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


those  who  live  upon  grains  such  as  Qyamd,  Kovara,  KockMlaka  and 
Koradushaka,  as  also  bulbous  roots  and  such  other  roots  as 
garden  radishes,  would  all  be  childless. 

The  fact,  however,  is  that  the  reverse  is  seen  of  both  these.7 

Nor  is  it  true  that  the  Mind,  coming  from  the  next  world, 
descends  into  the  foetus.  If,  indeed,  it  really  came  from  the 
other  world  and"  descended  into  the  foetus,  nothing  relating 
to  its  former  body  (or  existence)  would  remain  unknown,  unheard, 
or  unseen.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  mind  remembers  nothing 
(of  its  former  existence). 

Hence  we  would  say  that  conception  is  derived  neither  from 
mother,  nor  from  father,  nor  from  Self,  nor  from  assimilation 
of  agreeable  food  and  drink,  nor  from  the  juices.  Nor  is  the 
mind  the  uniting  agent. 

Thus  said  Bharadwaja. 

The  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said — No,  conception  sets  in  from 
all  these  existent  conditions  united  together  and  in  a  state  of 
maturity.  The  conception  is,  verily,  born  of  the  mother  ; 
since,  without  a  mother,  there  can  be  no  occurrence  of  conception  ; 
no  birth  of  viviparous  animals. 

Those  which  the  foetus  has  from  the  mother, — those  which 
are  derived  by  it  from  the  mother, — we  shall  now  lay  down. 

They  are  : — skin,  blood,  flesh,  adeps,  navel,  heart,  lungs, 
liver,  spleen,  the  two  breasts,  pelvis,  the  intestines  which  hold 
the  stools,  the  upper  stomach  which  holds  the  food  after  deglu¬ 
tition,  the  lower  stomach  where  digestion  goes  on,  the  upper 
rectum,  and  the  lower  rectum,  the  finer  and  the  grosser  entrails, 
marrow,  and  the  ducts  which  bear  the  marrow. 

These  are  born  of  the  mother.  9 

This  conception  is,  verily,  born  of  the  father  ;  since  there  can 
be  no  occurrence  of  conception  without  the  father.  Indeed,  no 
viviparous  animal  can  take  birth  without  a  father. 

Those  possessions  of  the  foetus  which  are  verily  born  of  the 
father, — those  which  are  probably  derived  from  the  father, — 


CIIARAKA  SAMHITA 


719 


we  shall  lay  down  below.  These  are — hair. (of  the  head),  nails, 
bristles  of  the  body,  teeth,  bones,  nerves,  sinews,  arteries,  and 
semen. 

These  are  derived  from  the  father10 

This  conception  is  born  of  Self;  for  the  Self  that  attaches  to 
the  foetus  is  the  Inner  Self  (of  ours).  That  Inner  self  is  called  Jiva 

That  Inner  Self  is  Eternal,  free  from  disease,  above  decrepi- 
tide  ;  immortal,  above  decay,  incapable  of  being  pierced, 
incapable  of  being  cut  (into  pieces) ;  incapable  of  being  burnt,* 
having  the  universe  for  its  form,  creator  of  the  universe,  unmani¬ 
fest,'  having-  no  begining,  having  no  end  (or  indestructible), 
and  immutable. 

He,  entering  into  the  uterus  and  coming  into  union  with  the 
semon  (of  the  father)  and  the  blood  (of  the  mother)  begets  his 
own  Self  for  purposes  of  conception. 

The  conceived  foetus,  in  the  uterus,  receives  the  name  of  Self. 
Otherwise,  in  consequence  of  its  existence  being  without  beginning, 
the  Self  cannot  properly  be  said  to  have  birth. 

Hence,  though  he  is  himself  unborn,  he  begets  the  conceived 
foetus  that  is  born.  Then,  again,  taking  birth  (in  this  way)  he 
begets  that  which  was  before  unborn. 

That  conceived  foetus,  according  to  the  c&urse  of  time,  assumes 
the  conditions  of  infancy,  youth,  and  advanced  age.11f 


*  The  correct  reading  seems  to  be  ‘  ad&hyam  ’  and  not  ‘  alehyam.’ — T. 

t  Bharadwaja’s  objection  was  this  :  if  the  Self  begets  Self,  how  does  it 
do  so  ?  Does  the  Self  that  is  born  beget  Self  ?  Or,  does  the  Self  that  is 
not  born  beget  Self?  If  the  first  be  the  case,  then  being  itself  born,  it  cannot 
beget  itself.  If  the  second  be  the  case,  being  itself  unborn,  it  cannot  beget 
Itself. 

Punarvasus’s  answer  is  that  the  Self  is  really  unborn,  being  without 
beginning.  What  is  meant  by  the  unborn  Self  begetting  itself,  or  the 
born-self  begetting  itself,  requires  to  be  first  understood  before  the  assertions 
are  quibbled  away.  The  Self  pervades  the  conceived  fcetus.  Even  this  is  the 
birth  of  the  Self  or  the  Self  begetting  itself.  Its  ow.t  condition'd  being  net  born 


720 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


The  Self  is  said  to  be  born  in  those  (successive)  conditions 
in  which  he  (successively)  exists.  He  is  said  to  be  would-be 
born  (or  unborn)  in  that  condition  which  is  as  yet  before  him. 
Hence,  he  is  both  born  and  unborn  at  the  same  time.* 

In  the  Self,  therefore,  both  the  states  are  possible,  vis.,  the 
state  of  being  born,  and  that  of  being  to-be  born  (i.  e.,  unborn). 

Being  born,  he  continues  to  take  birth.  In  those  changed 
conditions,  again,  that  have  not  yet  come  in,  he,  being  unborn, 
begets  himself  by  himself. 

The  very  passing  of  an  existent  being  into  a  different  con¬ 
dition  is  cailed  the  birth  of  that  existent  being- 'in  that  condition, 
be  that  condition  one  of  time  or  age,  or  of  other  circumstances, f 

These  are  examples  : 


or  born,  therefore,  makes  no  difference.  Itself  unborn,  it  begets  the  born 
foetus,  that  is,  it  enters  into  the  born  foetus.  Itself  born,  it.-begets  the  unborn 
foetus,  that  is,  the  foetus  which  was  not,  or  non-existent,  is  pervaded  or 
entered  into  by  the  Self.  As  soon  as  it  enters  it,  is  said  to  be  born.  Being  it 
born  in  this  sense,  it  quickens  the  foetus.  It  should  be  remembered,  again, 
that  the  foetus  itself,  when  it  comes  into  being,  is  a  combination  of  Self 
and  the  other  ingredients.  Punarvasu  explains  his  meaning  more  clearly 
in  the  passage  that  follows. — T. 

*  Born,  that  is,  in  relation  to  the  condition  in  which  he  actually  is  or 
exists  ;  and  unborn  in  relation  to  the  condition  which  is  before  him  ;  that 
is,  in  which  he  is  to  be,  or  to  which  he  is  to  go.  In  other  words,  he  is  born 
with  regard  to  the  condition  that  is  present  ;  and  unborn  with  regard  to 
the  condition  which  is  future.  Thus  when  an  infant,  he  is  born  with  regard 
to  infancy  and  unborn  with  regard  to  youth  and  old  age,  and  so  on. — T. 

t  The  author  of  Gita  says,— 

Dehinoasmin  yathS  dehe  kaumaram  yauvanam  jar5, 

Tatha  dehSntarapraptih  etc. 

The  sense  is  that  as  boyhood,  youth,  and  decreptitude  are  changed  conditions 
of  an  embodied  being,  eVen  so  is  the  attainment  of  a  different  (or  new)  body, 
etc.  The  attainment  of  a  new  body  is,  of  course,  called  birth.  Hence, 
boyhood,  youth,  and  decrepitude  are  also  each  so  many  births,  birth,  as 
explained  by  Punarvasu.  being  nothing  else  than  the  passing  into,  or  attain- 
mentof,  a  different  condition.— T. 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HU  A. 


7  21 


Of  existing  beings  made  up  of  semen  and  blood,  the  con¬ 
dition  of  conceived  foetus  cannot  be  affirmed  before  the  union 
of  their  constituent  parts.  When,  however,  the  parts  have  united 
or  come  together,  the  condition  of  conceived  foetus  attaches  to 
them.* 

Of  the  same  existing  being,  before  he  gets  a  son,  the  con¬ 
dition  of  fatherhood  cannot  be  affirmed.  That  condition  attaches 
to  him  only  after  the  birth  of  a  son.f 

Afte?  the  above  manner,  the  status  of  being  born  as  also 
that  of  not  being  born,  is  said  to  attach  to  the  existent  foetus 
according  as  it  remains  in  and  passes  into  this  or  that  condition 
of  existence.1® 

Verily,  in  all  the  conditions  connected  with  conception,  neither 
mother,  nor  father,  nor  Self,  has  perfect  freedom  of  action. 

They  achieve  something  of  their  own  will,  and  something 
through  the  sway  of  the  acts  of  previous  lives.  Something,  again, 
results  from  the  power  (or  capacity)  residing  in  their  ‘  Karanas  ’ 
(or  faculties  both  external  and  internal).! 


*  The  meaning  is  this  :  what  is  a  foetus  already  conceived  ?  It  is  really 
semen  and  blood,  etc.,  combined.  The  constituent  elements  had  all  existed 
before  the  formation  of  the  foetus  in  the  womb.  The  condition,  however, 
of  foetus  did  not  attach  to  them  ;  that  condition  attaches  to  them  only  after 
their  union  or  combination  :  that  is,  he  speaks  of  these  ingredients  as  foetus 
only  often  they  have  combined,  and  not  before. — T. 

t  The  sense  seems  to  be  this  :  a  person  gets  a  son  and  becomes  a  father. 
The  condition  of  fatherhood  did  not  belong  to  him  before  the  birth  of  his 
son.  It  belongs  to  him  only  after  the  birth  of  the  son.  The  man  himself 
remains  unaltered.  The  same  man  who  was  not  called  a  father  the  day 
before  comes  to  be  called  as  such  the  day  after.  The  accident  that  deter¬ 
mines  this  is  the  birth  of  a  son. — T. 

{  Like  1  Swavasat  ’  and  ‘  Karmavasat,’  ‘  Karana?akteh  ’  is  in  the'  abla¬ 
tive.  ‘  Karanas  1  are  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  internal  and  external.  The  internal 
*  Karanas  '  are  ‘  buddhi  ’  (understanding)  and  the  rest.  Among  the  ex¬ 
ternal  ‘  Karanas  ’  are  included  the  various  organs  of  sense  and  action.  Here, 
of  course,  by  external  ‘  Karanas  ’  would  be  meant  the  organs  of  generation 
in  particular,  although  the  others  also  come  in  as  subsidiary  T. 


722 


CHAR  AKA  SAMIHTA 


In  cases  in  which  there  is  a  wealth  of‘  Karanas  ’  such  as  mind 
and  the  rest,  proportionate  to  the  strength  of  those  ‘  Karanas  ’ 
is  freedom  of  action.* 

It  is  seen  that  acts,  womb  (in  which  birth  takes  place),  affluence, 
a  id  Emancipation  are  all  under  the  own  control  of  persons  that 
ar  conversant  with  the  Self. 

None  else  (than  the  Self)  is  the  author  of  one’s  pleasure  and 
pain. 

As  regards  conception  also,  it  arises  from  none  else  (than 
Self) 

Also,  none  else  (than  the  Self)  grows. 

No  sprout  can  grow  without  seed.  *  14 


*  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  in  conception,  something  resultts  from 
mother,  father,  and  Self,  of  their  own  will  ;  something  from  the  influence 
of  previous  acts  ;  and  something  from  the  power  or  capacity  of  the  organs 
both  external  and  internal.  With  reference  to  the  last,  the  measure  of 
control  depends  upon  the  measure  of  power  or  capacity  of  the  organs 
themselves  ;  that  is,  if  the  ‘  Karanas  ’  or  organs  are  endued  with  unrestricted 
power,  mother,  father,  and  Self  have  unrestricted  control  over  the  kind  of 
being  that  takes  birth.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  a  father  like  the  Rishi,  Vibhan- 
daka,  who  was  endued  with  yoga  puissance,  the  traditional  account  is  that 
he  begat  the  celebrated  Rishi,  Rishyasringa,  upon  a  she-deer.  Here  the 
superiority  of  the  ‘  Karanas  ’  enabled  the  father  to  beget  a  superior  child. 
So  also  in  the  case  of  the  Rishi,  Bharadwaja,  a  son  like  Drona  was  created 
without  the  intervention  of  an  womb.  Apart,  again,  from  such  instances 
furnished  by  mythology,  it  stands  to  reason  that  the  superiority  of  the 
‘  Karanas  ’  in  either  of  or  both  the  parents,  certainly  tells  upon  the  concep¬ 
tion.  In  the  case  of  the  Self  also  that  takes  birth,  the  superiority  of  his 
*  Karanas  ’  (as  belonging  to  the  linga  carira  or  subtile  body  which  succeeds 
the  dissolution  of  the  gross  body)  certainly  enables  it  to  take  birth  as  a 
superior  being.  Such  superiority  is,  as  is  evident,  determined  by  the  Self 
alone. — T 

*  What  the  Rishi  wishes  to  inculcate  in  this  passage  is  that  they  who  are 
conversant  with  the  Self  have  their  acts,  the  wotnb  in  which  they  take  birth, 
wealth,  and  emancipation,  under  their  own  control.  They  even  select  the 
womb  in  which  they  are  to  take  birth.  They  can  earn  what  affluence  they 
desire.  Birth,  therefore,  and  condition  in  life,  are  not,  in  the  case  of  all  per¬ 
sons,  matters  over  which  there  is  no  control. 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A 


72  3 


Verily,  those  possessions  of  the  foetus  which  are  derived  from 
the  Self  and  which  grow  from  the  growing  Self  we  shall  expound 
below. 

They  are  as  follows  : 

Birth  in  this  or  that  womb,  the  period  of  life,  knowledge  of 
of  Self,  mind,  organs  of  sense,  the  life-breaths  called  Prana  and 
(and  Apana  and  the  rest,  viz,  Samana,  Udana,  and  Vyana),  voli- 
tons  (in  respect  of  acts),  holding  together  the  constituent  elements, 
physical  and  mental,  of  the  body,  distinctions  in  respect  of  features, 
voice,  and  complexion,  pleasure  and  pain,  desire  and  aversion, 
animation,  apprehension,  understanding,  memory,  consciousness, 
and  will, — these  are  derived  from  the  Self*  15 


Persons  conversant  with  the  Self  are,  of  course,  yogins. 

As  regards  the  being  that  takes  birth  and  that  grows,  it  is  none  else  than 
the  Self.  The  Self,  it  should  be  said,  is  eternal.  What  is  meant  by  birth  is 
only  an  investment  of  the  Self  by  a  material  case.  The  case  is  destructible  ; 
not  so  the  Self.  It  is  the  Self  that  enters  the  womb  and  that  begins  to  grow. 
This  growth  means  the  increase  of  the  material  case.  The  semen  and 
the  blood  constitute  the  seed  from  which  the  material  case,  like  a  sprout,, 
begins  to  grow.  It  is  pervaded  or  quickened  by  the  Self. — T. 

*  ‘  Atmajani  ’  and  ‘  yani  sambhatah  atmatah  sambhabanti  ’  are,  in  reality, 

identical  ;  the  first  implies  ‘born  of  or  derived  from  the  Self ’  ;  the  second, 
‘  those  which  grow  from  the  growing  Self.’  Amongst  those  things  which  are 
mentioned  by  the  Rishi,  there  are  some  which  spring  directly  from  the  Self 
and  some  which  grow  as  the  Self  grows  in  the  womb  and  after  coming 
out  of  the  womb. 

Take,  for  example,  the  senses.  Though  born  of  the  Self,  these  do  not 
appear  till  the  Self  actually  takes  birth,  that  is,  enters  into  the  foetus. 

Although  ‘Prana’  and  ‘Apana’  only  are  named,  yet  all  the  five  life- 
breaths  are  implied. 

By  ‘  Preranam  ’  is  meant  the  power  of  impelling  the  organs  of  knowledge 
and  action. 

‘  Dharanam  ’  implies  the  power  of  holding  together  the  constituent  parts 
of  the  body.  The  Self  possesses  such  a  power  ;  it  is  in  operation  when  the 
body  is  asleep.  When,  however,  the  Self  leaves  the  body,  the  constituent 
parts,  no  longer  held  together,  begin  to  decay  and  dissolve  away.— T. 

92 


724 


CHARAICA  SAMHITA. 


Conception  is,  again,  born  of  assimilation  of  proper  food, 
since  without  addiction  to  food  and  drink,  that  are  not  assimil¬ 
able  there  cannot  be  sterility  in  man  and  woman,  or  mishaps  to 
foetuses  in  the  womb.  As  regards  even  men  and  women  that 
are  addicted  to  unassimilable  food  and  drink,  they  are  capable  of 
bringing  about  conception  as  long  as  the  three  faults,  becoming 
excited  and  pervading  the  body,  do  not  injuriously  affect  the 
semen  and  blood  and  womb. 

As  regards  men  and  women,  again,  that  are  habituated  to 
assimilate  food  and  drink,  that  have  semen  and  blood 
and  womb  unaffected  by  impediments  of  any  kind,  and  that 
unite  in  sexual  congress  at  the  proper  season,  conceptions  do  not 
take  place  in  consequence  of  Jiva’s  not  falling  (into  the  uterus). 

Hence,  conception  is  not  born  ©f  only  assimilable  food  and 
drink. 

In  this,  all  (these)  are  said  to  be  causes.1'* 

Those  incedents  of  the  foetus  which  are  born  of  assimilable 
food  and  drink,  and  those  which  it  obtains,  in  course  of  its 
development  in  the  womb,  from  assimilable  food  and  drink 
we  shall  expound  below.  These  are  health  (freedom  from 
disease),  activity  (freedom  from  sloth  or  idleness),  freedom  from 
cupidity,  cheerfulness  of  the  organs  (of  both  knowledge  and 
action),  wealth  of  voice,  of  complexion,  and  of  blood  and 
semen,  and  excess  of  gladness. 


*  Having  said  that  conception  is  due  to  congenial  food  and  drink,  and 
that  sterility  is  the  effect  of  addiction  to  uncongenial  food  and  drink,  the 
Rishi  takes  care  to  qualify  the  assertion  by  explaining  that  it  is  not  true 
that  they  who  are  addicted  to  uncongenial  food  and  drink  prove  sterile. 
Such  addiction  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  conditions  of  sterility  ;  but  then 
it  does  not  bring  about  sterility  unless  the  three  faults,  becoming  excited, 
injuriously  affect  the  semen,  the  blood,  and  the  womb.  It  is  seen,  again', 
that  men  and  women  who  are  habituated  to  congenial  food  and  drink! 
whose  semen  and  blood  and  womb  are  all  healthy,  and  who  unite  in  sexual 
congress  at  the  proper  time,  do  not  bring  about  conception  ;  the  reason, 
in  such  cases,  being  the  absence  of  Jiva  or  Self  ready  to  fall  into  the  womb. 
It  is  Jiva  or  Self  that  falls  into  the  womb  when  the  time  comes  for  it  to 
take  birth.  Hence,  in  the  presence  of  all  other  conditions  but  the  absence 
of  a  Jiva  or  Self  ready  to  be  reborn,  there  can  be  no  conception.  The  fact 
is,  all  the  conditions  are  necessary  before  conception  can  possibly  occur.— T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


7  25 


These  are  born  of  food  and  drink  properly  assimilated.17* 

Conception  is  born  of  the  juices  also.  Without  the  juices  the 
very  life  of  the  mother  cannot  be  sustained  ;  what  then  about 
the  origin  of  conception  ? 

It  is  not,  again,  seen  that  the  juices,  imbibed  in  insufficient 
measure,  bring  about  conception. 

Nor  is  it  seen  that  the  juices  imbibed  in  sufficient  measure, 
bring  about  conception. 

In  this  matter  (of  conception)  even  the  sum  total  of  the 
circumstances  is  said  to  be  the  cause.>8 

Those  incidents  of  the  foetus  which  are  born  of  the  juices, 
and  those  which  it  obtains  from  the  juices  in  course  of  its  growth 
in  the  womb,  we  shall  expound  below.  They  are  as  follows  : 

The  birth  of  the  body  and  its  growth  and  development  ; 
union  with  the  life-breaths  ;  gratification  ;  nourishment ;  and 
activity. 

These  are  born  of  the  juices.15f 


*  ‘  Yani  satmajani  ’  and  ‘  Yani  satmatah  sambhavatah  sambhavanti  ’ 

are  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  follows  :  the  first  implies  those  incidents 
which  appertain  to  the  foetus  after  its  birth,  (understanding  by  birth,  deli¬ 
very  from  the  womb  in  a  developed  state).  The  second  refers  to  those 
incidents  which  the  fcetus  derives  from  the  assimilation  of  proper  food 
and  drink  by  the  parents,  in  course  of  its  development  in  the  womb.  The 
fact  is,  ‘Satmatah’  is  an  ablative  ;  ‘  Sambhavatah  ’  is  a  genetive.  The 
incidents  set  forth  are  ‘  Jatsya  Garbhasya  ’  as  also  ‘  Jayamanasya  Garbhasya,’ 
that  is,  of  the  foetus  as  born  and  developed  after  delivery,  and  of  the  fcetus 
as  developing  or  growing  in  the  womb.  ‘  Praharsha  bhuyastam,'  meaning 
‘  excess  of  gladness,’  is  exlained  by  Gangadhara  as  implying  the  pleasure 
that  results  from  sexual  congress. — T. 

+  In  this  aphorism  also,  ‘  Yani  rasajani  ’  and  ‘  Yani  rasatah  sambhavatah 
sambhavanti  ’  refer  to  two  classes  of  incidents  derived  from  ‘  Rasa  ’  or  the 
juices  into  which  food  and  drink  are  developed.  The  first  refers  to  ‘  Jatasya 
Garbhasya,’  and  the  second  to  1  Jayamanasya  Garbhasya,’  that  is  to  the 
fcetus  as  born  or  delivered  from  the  womb  in  a  developed  state,  and  to  the 
fcetus  as  growing  in  the  womb.  Here  also  1  rasatoh  ’  is  an  ablative  and 
‘  sambhavatah  ’  is  a  genetive.  ‘  Prananubandha  ’  implies  the  union  of  the 
fcetus  with  the  life-breaths.  These  penetrate  it  while  it  is  in  the  womb.— T. 


726  CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  mind  is  the  uniting  agent,  which, 
touching  Jiva,  binds  it  to  the  body.  Upon  its  - flight  (from  the 
body)  being  near,  the  very  character  of  Jiva  becomes  altered ; 
its  devotion  (to  piety,  etc.,)  falls  off ;  all  the  organs  (of  both 
action  and  knowledge)  become  afflicted  ;  the  strength  of  the 
body  decreases  ;  and  ailments  increase. 

Divested  of  it  (wholly),  Jiva  casts  off  the  life-breaths.  It  is, 
again,  that  which  causes  the  senses  to  seize  their  respective 
objects. 

It  is  called  Manas. 

It  is  of  three  kinds  :  I.  Pure  ;  2.  pervaded  by  Rajas  (passion)  ; 
and  3.  pervaded  by  Tamas  (darkness).  Even  so.*  40 


*  ‘  Aupapadikam,’  or,  as  some  texts  read,  ‘  upapadukam,’  implies  ‘  a 

uniting  agent.’  Tho  Rishi,  Punarvasu,  repeats  the  assertion  about  Mind 
being  the  uniting  agent  as  regards  all  incidents  derived  from  the  other 
sources,  viz.,  'Self,  father,  mother,  etc.  The  repetition  becomes 
necessary  in  view  of  the  emphatic  contradiction  by  Bharadwaja. 

‘  Jivasprik  ’  signifies  ‘  that  which  touches  Jiva  or  Self.’  The  idea  is 
that  Manas  (Mind),  as.  it  were,  touching  Jiva  with  one  hand,  extends  the 
other  for  touching  all  the  incidents  of  the  body  derived  from  the  sources 
indicated.  In  other  words,  Manas  binds  Jiva  to  the  body. 

‘  Yasmin  etc.’  introduces  what  Jiva  is  commonly  regarded  as  losing  when 
Manas  is  about  to  depart.  If  Jiva  were  unconnected  with  Manas,  it  would 
not  then  undergo  such  changes  for  the  worse  when  Manas  would  be  on 
the  point  of  departing. 

‘  Apagamanapuraskriti  ’  implies  ‘  having  Apagamanam,  that  is,  flight  or 
departure,  before  it.’  Hence,  the  compound  means  the  nearness  or  approach 
of  dissolution  of  the  body,  or  death. 

When  the  flight  of  Manas  from  the  body  or  the  dissolution  of  the  latter 
is  at  hand,  Jiva  is  seen  to  undergo  extensive  changes  for  the  worse  ;  first, 
its  ‘  cila,’  meaning  character  or  disposition  as  dependant  on  or  evidenced  by 
external  acts,  becomes  altered  for  the  worse. 

‘  Bhakti  ’  also,  at  such  a  time,  falls  off,  meaning  that  Jiva  no  longer 
displays  ‘  Bhakti  ’  or  devotion  to  piety,  etc.  Indeed,  when  the  Mind  is  about 
to  take  leave  of  the  body,  Jiva  no  longer  performs  his  usual  duties  of  worship 
and  homa,  etc.  He  abstains  from  the  usual  rites  of  cleanliness  and  purity  ; 
and  is  not  circumspect  about  clean  or  unclean  food.  Generally  speaking,  he 
no  longer  attends  to  those  acts  and  exercises  of  piety  upon  which  his  religion 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


727 

'Without  doubt,  with  that  particular  Manas  with  which  this 
one  (i.  e.,  Jiva)  owns  a  predominance  of  connection,  the 
connection  continues  throught  the  second  (or  next)  life. 

When  Jiva  becomes  united  with  that  pure  Manas,  he  taking 
his  next  birth,  remembers  the  acts  and  incidents  of  the  pre¬ 
vious  life. 

Verily,  all  remembered  knowledge  belongs  to  Jiva  (or  Self). 
In  consequence  of  the  connection  with  that  Manas,  it  (z.  e., 
such  knowledge,)  follows  (in  the  wake  of  Manas). 

Aided  by  this  knowledge  which  always  follows  in  the  wake 
of  Manas,  Jiva  may  become  a  Jatismara  (rememberer  of  the  acts 
and  incidents  of  previous  lives). 

Thus  ends  the  exposition  of  Sattwa  or  Manas.21* 


‘  Indriyani  upatapyante  :  ’  this  implies  that  the  senses  are  afflicted  ;  Manas 
it  is  that  makes  the  senses  seize  their  respective  objects.  Accordingly, 
when  Manas  is  about  to  depart  from  the  body,  the  senses  begin  to  fail  in 
respect  of  their  duties  or  functions.  The  eye  sees  not,  or  sees  wrongly  ; 
the  ears  hear  not,  or  hears  what  is  not  ;  etc.  These  instances  of  errors 
and  incapacity  are  called  ‘  Arishtas  ’  or  omens  indicating  dissolution  of  the 
body  at  no  distant  period. — T. 

*  •  Yena  ’  has  reference  to  ‘  Manasa,’  and  not  to  ‘  gunena  ’  as  Gangadhara 
explains.  The  fact  is,  the  mind  has  been  described  as  of  three  kinds,  viz., 
pure,  pervaded  by  passion,  and  pervaded  by  darkness.  What  the  Rishi 
says  here  is  that  the  particular  mind  by  which  Jiva  happens  to  be  dominated 
in  one  life  comes  back  to  him  in  the  next  life.  If  it  is  a  pure  mind  by  which 
Jiva  happens  to  be  dominated  in  one  life,  he  is  sure  to  have  a  pure  mind 
in  his  next  life.  The  same  is  the  case  with  minds  of  the  two  other 
descriptions. 

‘  Prayatobhuishtham  ’  implies  predominance  of  connection.  ‘  Ajatau,’ 
qualifying  ‘  dwitiyayam,’  means  ‘  from  the  moment  of  birth,  and  necessarily 
to  the  time  of  death. 

As  a  consequence  of  Jiva’s  having  a  pure  mind,  he  is  able  to  recollect 
the  acts  and  incidents  of  his  previous  life  or  lives. 

‘  Smartam  hi  jnanam  atmanah  Gangadhara  has  totally  misunderstood 
this  and  the  succeeding  part  of  the  aphorism.  Having  said  that  Jiva 
remembers  the  acts  and  incidents  of  a  previous  life  in  consequence  of 
obtaining  again  a  pure  mind,  the  Rishi  explains  that  the  remembered  know¬ 
ledge  belongs  to  Jiva  or  Self.  It  does  not  belong  to  Manas  or  Mind. 
(Other  knowledge  also  belongs  to  Self  and  not  to  Mind  ;  but  as  remembered 


728 


CHAR  AKA  SAMHI1A. 


Those  incidents  of  the  foetus  which  are  derived  from  Sattwa 
(Mind),  and  those  which  it  derives  from  the  Mind  while  it  is  in 
course  of  growth  (within  the  womb),  we  shall  now  expound. 

They  are, — 

Devotion  (to  piety,  etc.,)  ;  conduct  (as  dependant  on 
external  acts)  ;  purity  (both  external  and  internal)  ;  aversion  ; 
memory ;  heedlessness  (or  stupefaction  of  judgment) ;  renun¬ 
ciation  ;  misery  at  the  sight  of  other  people’s  happiness  or  good 
fortune  ;  courage ;  energy  ;  fear  (or  timidity)  ;  wrath  ;  pro¬ 
crastination  ;  alacrity  (or  promptness  inaction)  •  keenness  ; 
mildness  ;  gravity  ;  fickleness  ;  and  such  others  like  these. 

These  are  modifications  derivable  from  Mind. 

We  shall  explain  them  hereafter  while  treating  of  differences 
between  Mind  and  Mind. 

Thus  ends  those  which  are  derived  from  the  Mind.22 

Verily,  there  are  diverse  kinds  of  Mind.  All  these  may  belong 
to  the  same  person.  They  cannot,  however,  appear  at  the  same 
time. 

knowledge  only  is  spoken  of,  the  proposition  is  not  asserted  in  the  general 
form,  viz.,  that  all  knowledge  belongs  to  Self). 

Remembered  knowledge  (or,  rather,  knowledge)  being  a  possession  of 
Self,  it  is  further  explained  that  such  knowledge  comes  in  consequence  of 
Jiva’s  union  with  that  particular  kind  of  Manas  which  is  called  Pure. 

‘  Jatismara  ’  implies  one  who  remembers  the  acts  and  incidents  of 
previous  lives.  The  Rishi’s  explanation  of  the  cause  of  one’s  being  a 
Jatismara  is  union  with  a  Pure  Manas.  In  consequence  of  such  union, 
remembered  knowledge,  that  is,  knowledge  of  the  acts  and  incidents  of  a 
previous  life,  comes  in.  Whether  there  are  Jatismaras  or  not,  it  is  extremely 
difficult  to  decide.  But  the  belief  is  common  among  Hindus  that  yogins 
are  more  or  less  Jatismaras.  In  the  Yoga-sutras  of  Patanjali,  elaborate 
instructions  are  laid  down  for  observance  or  practice  by  persons  desirous 
of  becoming  Jatismaras.  One  should,  it  is  said,  recollect,  when  one  retires 
to  bed,  all  the  acts  and  incidents  of  the  day  from  the  moment  of  awaking 
to  the  moment  of  going  to  bed.  When  one  goes  on  in  this  way,  day  by 
day,  for  a  certain  number  of  years,  at  the  end  one  will,  it  is  said,  find  one’s 
memory  sufficiently  strengthened  to  bring  back  the  acts  and  incidents  of 
one’s  past  life.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  memory  is  capable  of  being 
greatly  strengthened  by  this  sort  of  exercise  or  practice.  But  whether  it  can  be 
so  strengthened  as  to  go  back  to  a  former  state  of  existence,  cannot,  accord¬ 
ing  to  those  who  believe  in  yoga-sutras,  be  denied  by  any  sort  of  a  priori 
reasoning,  their  own  experience  having  been  otherwise. — T, 


CHARAKA  SAMIHTA 


729 


(Notwithstanding  the  fact  of  the  diversity  of  the  Mind),  it 
is  said  to  be  of  only  one  kind,  following  the  predominent  trait.*23 

Thus,  Conception  results  from  the  totality  of  all  those  causal 
conditions  of  diverse  kinds.24 

As  a  house  is  the  result  of  various  kinds  of  articles,  as  a 
car  is  made  up  of  various  limbs,  after  the  same  manner  we  have 
said  that  this  Conception  is  born  of  mother,  of  father,  of  Self, 
of  assimilated  food  and  drink,  and  of  the  juices.  There  is,  again, 
the  Mind,  which  unites  the  others  together. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.f25 

Bharadwaja  said, — If  this  Conception  results  from  a  totality 
of  these  causal  conditions  of  diverse  kinds,  how  is  it  that  those 
conditions  combine  together  for  forming  the  foetus  ? 

If  for  any  reason  these  combine  together,  how  is  it  that 
the  foetus,  which  is  born  of  a  totality  of  those  conditions, 
takes  a  human  form  ?  Why  is  it  said  that  man  has  man  for 
his  progenitor  ? 

If  it  be  granted  that  since  man  has  man  for  his  progenitor, 
therefore  the  foetus  takes  the  form  of  man,  even  as  a  cow  is  born 
of  a  cow,  a  horse  of  a  horse,  etc.,  then  that  which  has  been  said 
before,  viz.,  that  Conception  or  the  foetus  results  from  all  the 
conditions,  must  be  ill-founded. 


*  What  is  meant  by  there  being  different  kinds  of  mind  is  that  there 
are  minds  of  different  characteristics*.  Taking  the  attributes  of  Sattwa,  Rajas, 
and  Tamas,  we  say  that  such  a  one  has  a  ‘  Sattwika,’  a  ‘  Rajasika,’  or  a 
‘  Tamasika  ’  mind.  It  cannot,  however,  be  true  that  one  having  a  Sattwika 
mind  is  possessed  of  the  attribute  of  Sattwa  alone  ;  or,  in  other  words, 
that  he  has  no  grain  or  admixture  of  Rajas  and  Tamas.  Nor  can  it  be 
true  that  a  Tamasika  mind  has  Tamas  alone  for  its  characteristic  to  the 
total  exclusion  of  the  two  other  attributes  in  any  measure.  When,  however,  we 
say  that  one  has  a  Sattwika  mind,  all  that  we  intend  by  it  is  that  the  attribute 
of  Sattwa  predominates  in  his  mind. — T. 

f  ‘  Kuta  1  is  any  kind  of  house,  particularly,  one  built  of  bamboos  and 
seeds  and  grass  and  earth.  By  ‘  Kuta,’  or  rather  ‘  Kutagaram,’  Gangadhara 
understands  1  a  Jen  taka  shed,’  that  is  a  close  house  made  of  earth  and  wood, 
and  used  for  the  vapour  bath  called  Jentaka.  (  Vide  p.  153,  Sutrasthana,  ante). 


730 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


If,  again,  man  be  taken  as  born  of  man,  why  then  do 
not  the  offspring  of  idiots;  of  those  that  are  blind,  or  hump¬ 
backed,  or  dumb,  of  dwarfs,,  of  those  that  speak  with  a  nasal 
twang,  of  those  that  are  deformed,  of  those  that  are  insane, 
of  those  that  are  lepers,  and  of  those  that  suffer  from  the 
disease  called  Kilasa,  resemble  their  progenitors  ? 

Again,  if  for  meeting  this  argument  it  be  held  that  this  Self 
knows  forms  by  his  own  eyes,  sounds  by  his  own  ears,  scents 
by  his  own  nose,  tastes  by  his  own  tongue,  sensation  of  touch 
by  his  own  organ  of  touch,  and  all  ideas  apprehensible  by  the 
understanding  by  means  of  his  own  understanding,  and,  there¬ 
fore,  children  born  of  idiots  and  the  others  do  not  resemble  their 
progenitors,  then,  even  in  this  there  would  be  an  abandonment 
of  the  original  poroposition.  Since,  by  holding  this,  the  Self 
becomes  Knower  only  when  there  are  organs  of  knowledge. 
In  such  a  case,  where  both  become  possible,  viz.,  power  of  know¬ 
ing  and  powerlessness  of  knowing,  the  Self  becomes  a  modifi¬ 
cation  and  of  the  nature  of  Prakriti,  whereas  the  Self  is  truly 
unmodified  and  unmodifiable,  and  Knower  too. 

If,  again,  it  be  said  that  the  Self  knows  objects  by  the  organs 
of  vision  and'  the  rest,  then,  the  Self  who  is  truly  divested  of 
the  organs  of  sense,  becomes  powerless  to  know  owing  to  the 
absence  of  the  organs  of  sense. 

In  consequence  of  his  powerlessness  to  know  (or  ignorance) 
he  ceases  to  be  the  Cause. 

Through  the  inability  of  becoming  Cause,  he  becomes  Not- 
Self.  He  really  becomes  somethirfg  existing  in  speech  only. 
Hence  what  has  been  asserted  as  the  cause  of  conception  or  the 
foetus  becomes  truly  meaningless. 

Even  this  was  said  by  Bharadwaja.®* 


*  It  will  be  remembered  that  Punarvasu’s  assertion  is  that  Concep¬ 
tion  or  the  fcetus  is  the  result  of  the  sum  total  of  all  the  causes  mentioned, 
viz..  Self,  father’s  semen,  mother’s  blood,  proper  food  and  drink  assimi¬ 
lated  by  the  parents,  and  food-juices.  Bharadwaja’s  objection  to  this  is 
— What  is  that  which  combines  these  causes  ?  Behind  them  all,  there  must 
be  a  potent  cause  capable  of  combining  or  uniting  them  together,  if  it  is 
their  union  that  produces  Conception  or  the  loetus.  Having  asked  this 


[  2  ] 


Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.A.,  C.  I.  E.  Director  of  Public  Instruction.  Bengal : — 
I  have  been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination  in  part 
IV  of  all  the  things  which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  unde  rstand 
the  precepts,  and  such  a  guide  to  life  cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 

James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister,  Maryland,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  have 
undertaken  agreat  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves 
the  approbation  and  encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise 
men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and  taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the 
preservation  of  health  and  the  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California.—*  *  * 

As  each  successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is 
apparent.  *  *  *  There  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the 

Western  mind,  occidental  medical  science,  therapeutic.  American  and  Europe¬ 
an  medical  science  has  much  to  learn.  *  *  * 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  You  are  entitled  to 
the  greatest  praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my 
editorial  management — will  begin  to  review  books,  etc.,  and  one  of  the  first 
to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Court-man  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Ohio  U.  S.  A.  The  work  interests 
me  very  highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night,  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of 
one  of  our  medical  societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively 
curiosity  and  expressions  of  interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical 
journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical  monthly. 

Professor  E.  B  Co-well,  Cambridge:.. .A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient 
work  will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in 
translating  the^entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  Or-  Eccless,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York  :...The  matter  is  certainly 
of  great  interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis,  Esq-,  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences, 
Philadelphia  :  Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the 
Medical  literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., •••Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with 
its  importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an'early  opportunity  for  bringing  it 
to  the  attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academ  of  Medicine. 

Dr.-  H-  c.  Wood,  Philadelphia:... I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interestnig  and 
sincerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be 
one  of  the  happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  quite  a  long 
notice  of  it  which  I  expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the 
de  mi-official  organ  of  the  greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mittra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  of  Cashmere  :...No  medical  man’s  library 
should  be  without  Charaka  ;  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has 
studied  this  great  work  of  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldsberg.  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North- 
Western  University  ;  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exhibition 
:...I  am  already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take 
occasion  to  speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  ...Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking. 
1  regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H-  Buck,  Esq.,  19  East  38th  Street,  New  York  :... Wish  you  a  success 
in  your  praiseworthy  undertaking.  ■ 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard-,  Derselhofber  Traise  Dramstadt  ::..The  difficulties  you 
speak  of  in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb 
says,  what  takes  much  time,  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Pbd.,  G.M.D  ,  F.R.MS.  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A.  Editor 
Meyer  Brothers  Druggist  :...I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  it  in  our  colu  mns 
and  advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire 


[  3  ] 


English  writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  thi*j  matter 
at  their  disposal.  The  work  is  certainly  highly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  general 

Mons  H-  Le.  Soudor-  Librarie  Etrangere  174.  Boulevaise.  Saint  Germain:... 
Beg  to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of 
Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  :...Wish  you  every  sue  cess  that  can  recompense 
you  for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review 
which  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.A.,  M.D.,  PHILADELPHIA  As  I  go  over  each 
fasciculus  I  always  arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians 
of  the  present  day  would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopia '  all  the  modern  Drugs 
and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients  according  to  the  method  of  Char 
aka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and  fewer  chronic 
invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  com  pie t ion  of 
the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C,  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6.  Park  street,  Calcutta  :... My  dear  Pundit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya,...I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen 
of  whom  I  spoke ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise 
to  you  [about  drawing  their  attention  to]  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again, 
sometime  after,. ..An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note  *  *  ’considerable  praise  is  due 
to  you  for  your  efforts  to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholom,  M.D.  Philadelphia  :...I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with 
the  profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anythinS  that 
I  have  ever  met  before  in  Medical  literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord 
Bacon's  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq..,  C  S-  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Maimensing  :...The 
translation  would  be  most  useful.  The  con tents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  c.  Dutt,  Esq.  C-  S  ,  0.1.  E.  Magistrate  and  Collector  :...Your  patriotic 
labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun,  *  *  * 
You  deserve  the  especial  acknowledgements  of  the  medical  profession. 

F  H.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I-  C-  S  I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest. 
It  is  marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonder¬ 
ful  to  note  the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the.  sage  s  of  your 
country  and  how  completely  they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we 
moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the  enlightment  of  this  age. 

G  A-  Grierson-  Esq-  C-  S-,  Gya  : ...  It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall 
be  obliged  by  yourgetting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr-  Griffith  Evans,  M.D  .,  Brynkynall,  Bangor  North  Wales.. ..The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the 
origin,  growth  and  development  of  medical  science,  also  illustrates  some  ancient 
social  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohan  Mukerji.  C  S.  I.  Your  English 
translation  of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures 
of  a  great  work  before  a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevit¬ 
able  dfficulty  of  identifying  a  large  number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the 
Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as  possibly  the  best  that  could 
be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning  to  find  th  it  a 
knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka- 
Samhita  It  is  a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or 
young. 

The  Hon'ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerjee.  The  work  is  not  only  of 
value  to  the  physician  and  the  antiquarian,  be  of  but  will  be  of  great  interest 
to  the  general  reader  as  well.  Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and 
support.  I  wish  ybu  all  success . 


PART  XXIV. 


CH&RAKA-SAMHITA 


(TRAN SLA  TED  INTO  ENGLISH ). 


AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita 
(in  original)  WITH  COMMENTARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND 
Hindi  Translator  of  Charaka-Samhita 
and  of  Susruta-Samhita;  Editor  of 
Chikitsa-Sammilani  (Medical  Journal 

in  Bengali)  ;  PRACTITIONER  OF  THE 

Hindu  System  of  Medicine, 

&c.,  &c.,  &c.,  &c., 


Printed  by  B.  C.  SANIAL, 


the  Herald  Printing.Works, 


(  The  Right  cf  Translation  is  Reserved ). 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 


(Extract  from  their  Letters.) 

Prossor  Max  Muller  I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English 
translationof  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very 
glad  to  help  you  in 'any  way  you  may  wish — Writing  again  in  November 
1893.  he  says — *  *  *  I  am  surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful 
translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention  *  *  *  Our  Regius  Pro¬ 
fessor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested  in'  it. 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C-I-E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of 
ihe  successive  parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susrata  Samhitas.  I  regard  them 
as  a  valuable  addition  to  my  library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would 
be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office —  *  *  * 
Your  excellent. translation  *  *  *  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work 
which  will  not  "fail 'to  make  ancient  Hindu  Medicine  better  understood  and 
Appreciated  .'ini  - the  West  '*  *  *  I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental 
scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work  *  *  *  Many  important 
additions  to  our  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from  your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.-,  New  York  U.  S.  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure 
the  first  fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very 
glad  to  receive'  the  rest  of  the  work,  it  Cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest 
to  the  medical  profession,  .  which  will  be  under  great  obligation  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren  Esq.,  Gothenburgh ,  Sweden-. — I  am  deeply  interested  in 
anything  Indian,  p>  hd  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to 
obtain  whatever  'nsight  I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable 
translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College ,  New  York , 

U.  S.  A.— I  must  congratalat^you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts. 

I  should  very  much  like  to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the 
praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing.  Be  assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and 
apprec:ation  and  oi  my  deep  interest  in  India  and  antique  lore. 

Mons  A.  Birth.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within'  reach  of  the 
'readers  of  ancient  literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the 
Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men  of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and 
;I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice  of  the  French  public,  * 
Or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hilaire  ,  Paris  I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and 
:wish  you  all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to 
medical  men  and  the  commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility. 

I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the  Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  caii. 
land  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

!  Professor  H>  Jacobi,'  Bonn  University ,  Germany  The  work  you  have 
undertaken  will  interest  Saiiskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for 
Ihe  History  of  their  science.  I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of 
some.^eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally,  to  the  ancient  work  of 
Charaka.  '  -  1 

■},  Hefrr-. Gl-arbe,  Prinsenstram  Keningsbutg,  Germany  : — The  English  !, 
"tr’ansktibn'of  Charaka  Samhita  is  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  " 
of  view,  the  most  important  work  of  the  medicinal  literature  of  your 
country. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS. 

The  contents  of  this  Part  are  extremely  interesting,  as  will 
appear  from  a  bare  enumeration  of  the  topics  discussed. 

The  Third  Lesson  is  concluded  in  this  Part. 

The  topics  explained  in  it  are  the  cause  of  the  setting  in  of 
conception,  the  cause  of  the  growth  of  the  foetus,  as  also  of  its 
birth  (meaning  delivery'  from  the  womb),  the  opinions  of  Punar- 
vasu,  the  objections  of  Bharadwaja,  &c. 

An  answer  is  given  of  the  question  why  does  Jiva-soul,  when 
born  in  the  human  womb,  take  the  human  form,  and  why  the 
children  of  the  blind  and  the  deaf,  of  idiots  and  the  rest,  do  not 
become  blind  and  deaf,  &c. 

Certain  observations  occur  on  the  importance  of  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  Self.  Knowledge  of  Self  constitutes  a  power  that  is 
infinite. 

Then  comes  Lesson  IV.  The  topics  explained  are,  (i)  that 
from  which  Conception  springs,  (2)  that  to  which  the  word  foetus 
is  applied,  (3)  those  things  whose  modifications  compose  the 
foetus,  (4)  the  manner  in  which  the  several  limbs  of  the  foetus 
grow,  one  after  another,  in  the  womb,  (5)  that  which  is  the  cause 
of  the  growth  of  the  foetus,  (6)  that  which  is  the  cause  of  its 
non-growth,  (7)  that  in  consequence  of  which  it  meets  with 
destruction  while  growing  in  the  womb,  and  (8)  those  causes 
through  which  the  foetus  instead  of  being  destroyed  outright, 
becomes  subject  to  malformations. 

In  course  of  the  explanations  of  these  topics,  many  observ¬ 
ations  occur  which  are  fraught  with  great  interest.  Many  of 
the  aphorisms  are  extremely  terse.  Their  sense,  however  has 
been  explained  clearly  in  the  foot-notes  to  which  the  reader’s 
attention  is  particularly  invited. 


/#w%, 

CHAXAkA.'SAM^TA  £$*» 

Atri’s  son  said, — It  has  been  ;l^veh(ctt|Xvn  before  that  the  mind, 
touching  Jiva  (or  Self),  uniteS^'4't^0r  the  body.  We  shall  pre¬ 


question  and  suggested  an  answer  about  the  existence  of  some  cause  behind 
the  five  which  is  capable  of  combining  them,  Bharadwaja  proceeds  to  say  that 
if  the  union  is  the  result  of  something  about  which  one  may  not  care,  why 
is  it  that  the  foetus,  which  is  stated  to  be  the  result  of  all  the  causes  united 
together,  takes  the  form  of  a  human  being  in  the  case  of  a  human  concep¬ 
tion  ?  Why  also  is  it  said  that  man  has  man  for  his  progenitor  ?  Indeed,  if 
the  answer  be  that  because  man  has  man  for  his  progenitor,  even  as  a  horse 
has  a  horse  and  a  cow  has  a  cow  for  its  progenitor,  then  the  original  pro- 
position,  viz.,  that  conception  is  the  result  of  a  union  of  the  five  causes, 
becomes  no  longer  justifiable.  If,  again,  Bharadwaja  asks,  the  common 
saying,  viz.,  man  is  born. of  man,  be  accepted  as  true,  then  why  is  it  that 
men  born  of  progenitors  that  are  blind,  deaf,  or  dumb,  or  totally  bereft 
of  intelligence,  do  not  resemble  their  progenitors  in  respect  of  those  defects  ? 
If  the  answer  to  this  be  that  the  Self  or  Soul  sees  with  his  own  eye,  hears 
with  his  own  ear,  etc.,  i.e.,  with  eye  or  ear  derived  by  him  from  the  eye  or 
ear  he  had  in  a  previous  state  of  existence,  and  not  with  eye  or  ear,  etc., 
derived  from  the  progenitor,  it  can  scarcely  be  tenable.  For,  if  such  an  answer 
be  accepted  as  correct,  the  conclusion  becomes  inevit  able  that  the  Self  be¬ 
comes  knower  only  when  he  happens  to  have  the  senses,  and  he  does  not 
become  knower  when  he  does  not  happen  to  have  the  senses.  Such  aconclusion 
is  diametically  opposed  to  what  is  universally  accepted  regarding  the  Self, 
and  what  has  been  asserted  by  Punarvasu  himself,  viz.,  that  the  Self  in  its 
natural  or  unmodified  condition,  is  knower.  Indeed,  it  is  only  the  attribute 
of  knowledge  that  distinguishes  Self  from  Not-Self.  Such  knowledge  is 
independent  of  the  senses,  the  mind,  and  the  understanding,  for  Self  exists, 
when  emancipated,  freed  from  these.  He  is  ‘  Sarvendriyavivarjjitah.’  Even 
then  he  is  knower,  for,  as  has  been  said  in  several  Upanishads,  {vide.,  Cweta- 
cwatara,  19,)  “  though  without  hands  and  feet,  he  is  endued  with  great  speed 
and  capable  of  seizing  all  things  ;  though  without  eyes,  he  sees  everything  ; 
though  without  ears,  he  hears  everything,  etc.,  etc.”  Relying  upon  the 
widely  accepted  nature  of  the  Self,  viz.,  the  possession  of  knowledge  inde¬ 
pendent  of  the  senses,  Bharadwaja  shows  the  untenable  character  of  the  hypo¬ 
thesis  that  the  Self  becomes  knower  only  when  he  has  the  senses  and  does 
not  become  knower  when  he  does  not  happen  to  have  them.  Besides  this, 
another  objection  is  capable  of  being  preferred  against  that  hypothesis.  It 
is  this  :  if  both  conditions  can  be  posited  of  the  Self,  viz.,  knowledge  and 
absence  of  knowledge,  depending  on  the  presence  and  absence  of  the  senses, 
the  Self  then  ceases  to  be  immutable.  In  fact,  it  becomes  mutable  and, 
therefore,  ‘  Prakritika,’  i.e.,  of  the  nature  of  Prakriti  which  is  always  mutable 
or  subject  to  modifications.  The  Self,  however,  is  universally  regarded  as 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


73* 

sently  explain  why  the  foetus,  which  results  from  all  the  causes 
united  together,  takes  birth  in  a  human  shape,  and  why  man 
is  said  to  have  man  for  his  progenitor.27 

Living  creatures  have  four  kinds  of  origin,  viz.,  uterus,  eggs, 
filth,  and  germination  (upwards  through  the  soil).* 

Each  of  these  four  orders  has  innumerable  interdistinctions, 
in  consequence  of  the  infinity  of  distinctions  between  creature 
and  creature  as  regards  form. 

Amongst  them,  as  regards  viviparous  and  oviparous  creatures, 
the  entities  that  create  conception  take  the  form  of  that  particular 
species  into  whose  womb  they  enter,  even  as  gold  and  silver  and 
copper  and  tin  and  lead,  when  cast  (in  a  liquified  form)  into  a 
waxrmould,  take  the  form  of  the  mould  itself. 

After  this  manner,  when  the  causal  entities  already  mentioned 
enter  into  a  human  mould,  they  take  birth  in  a  human  shape. 

Hence,  the  foetus,  though  it  has  all  the  entities  (mentioned) 
for  its  constituent  causes,  takes  birth  in  a  human  shape. 


immutable  and  as  knower.  Punarvasu  has  assented  to  it.  The  hypothesis, 
therefore,  of  the  Selfs  being  knower  when  the  senses  are  present,  and  not- 
knower  when  the  senses  are  absent,  is  untenable.  Then,  again,  if  the  Self 
ceases  to  be  knower  when  he  does  not  happen  to  have  senses,  it  follows  from 
his  condition  of  ignorance  that  he  cannot  be  the  cause  of  all  things.  The 
accepted  theory  is  that  the  universe  consists  of  two  things,  viz..  Self  and 
Not-Self.  The  latter  is  otherwise  called  ‘Prakriti.’  Divested,  of  ‘  chetana  ’ 
or  consciousness,  Prakriti,  which  is  highly  plastic,  is  moulded  or  modified 
by  Self  who  is  endued  with  ‘  chetana.’  The  result  of  the  action  of  Self  on 
‘  Prakriti  ’  is  the  universe  in  all  its  infinity  of  forms  or  things  falling  under 
the  class  called  Not-Self.  If,  therefore,  Self  ceases,  however  temporarily, 
to  be  knower,  he  becomes  incapable  of  acting  upon  1  Prakriti  ’  and  moulding 
and  modifying  it  into  those  infinite  forms  which  constitute  the  universe  of 
Not-Self 

If  Self  ceases  to  be  the  Cause  (of  the  universe)  the  distinction  between 
Self  and  Not-Self  vanishes,  and  Self,  therefore,  becomes  Not-Self. — T. 

*  The  word  1  yoni  7  implies  species  as  also  the  womb  in  which  a  creature 
is  born.  Here,  following  the  usual  Hindu  classification,  the  Rishi  names  four 
orders  of  creatures,  viz.,  viviparous,  oviparous,  filth-born,  aud  vegetables. 
The  classification  is  defective  ;  for  all  that,  it  was  accepted  by  the  Rishis 
generally.  They  did  not  know  that  insects  and  worms  born  in  filthy  places 
are  really  egg-born  or  oviparous. — T, 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


m 

Again,  man,  it  is  aaid,  has  man  for  his  progenitor,  because 
man  takes  birth  in  the  human  species.*28 

It  has  been  asked  that  if  man  is  to  be  regarded  as  having 
man  for  his  progenitor,  why  then  do  not  the  children  born  of 
idiots  and  others  resemble  their  parents  ?  The  answer  to  this  is 
as  follows  :  verily,  in  the  seed  from  which  the  body  springs,  there 
are  particular  portions  from  which  particular  limbs  grow.  When 
a  particular  portion  of  the  seed,  therefore,  is  burnt  up  or  consumed, 
the  particular  limb  which  would  have  grown  out  of  it  becomes 
deformed.  No  deformities,  again,  occur  if  no  portion  of  the  seed 
becomes  burnt  up  or  consumed. 

This  answers  both  the  questions  (viz.,  about  the  presence  or 
absence  of  deformities  in  the  human  body)fM 

The  senses,  again,  of  all  persons  are  derived  from  the  Self. 
The  reason  of  their  presence  or  absence  is  dependent  on  the  acts 
of  previous  births. 

Hence,  the  children  born  of  idiots  and  the  rest  need  not  neces¬ 
sarily  resemble  their  progenitors.^80 


*  In  spite  of  the  air  of  learning  with  which  this  passage  has  deen  invested, 
it  does  not  require  any  penetration  to  see  that  as  an  answer;  to  BharadwHja’s 
objections,  it  has  no  value.  Divested  of  surplusage,  the  answer  is  that  the 
foetus  takes  a  human  shape  because  it  is  born  of  a  human  womb.  The  analogy, 
again,  between  a  wax-mould  and  the  human  womb  is  scarcely  correct.  By  wax- 
mould  is  meant  a  mould  of  clay  prepared  with  the  aid  of  wax.  First  a  wax 
figure  is  made.  It  is  then  covered  up  with  clay.  The  clay  is  exposed  to 
the  heat  of  the  sun.  When  dry  and  hard,  it  is  placed  upon  a  fire  so  that  the 
wax  comes  out  through  holes  and  leaves  a  hollow  mould  within. — T. 

j-  The  original  is  so  terse  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  render  it  as  it  is. 
I,  therefore,  expand  it  a  little  and  give  the  sense  in  an  intelligible  form. 
What  is  said  is  this  :  the  father’s  semen,  mixing  with  the  mother’s  blood, 
forms  what  is  called  the  seed.  In  this  seed  are  portions  adapted  to  produce 
particular  parts  of  the  body.  Thus  there  is  a  portion  from  which  the  eyes 
would  grow  ;  another  from  which  tho  ears  would  grow  ;  etc.  What  the 
Bisbi  asserts  is  that  if  particular  portions  of  the  seed  become  diseased  or  lose 
their  power,  those  particular  limbs  which  would  have  grown  from  them  be¬ 
come  necessarily  ill-formed  or  uuformed.  The  seed  of  blind  parents  may  in 
itself  be  perfect,  and  hence  the  children  of  blind  parents  may  have  eyes. — T. 

J  Of  the  five  entities  which  have  been  mentioned  as  the  cause  ol  con¬ 
ception  or  the  foetus,  the  Self '  is  one.  From  the  Self,  it  has  already  been 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


m 


It  is  not  true  that  the  Self  is  knower  only  when  the  senses  are 
present,  and  that  he  is  not  knower  when  these  are  absent.  The 
fact  is,  the  Self  is  never  dissociated  from  Mind.  Agreeably  to 
the  character  of  the  Mind  w:th  which  the  Self  is  associated,  the 
Self  derives  the  kind  of  knowledge  he  has.*1 

( Here  are  some  verses.) 

In  the  absence  of  the  senses  the  Actor  cannot  have  any  know¬ 
ledge  of  acts.  That  act  can  never  be  accomplished  in  the  absence 
of  those  senses  with  which  it  is  accomplished.32 

With  even  the  knowledge  of  how  to  make  it,  the  potter,  in 
the  absence  of  clay,  never  sets  himself  to  make  a  pot. 

Listen  now  to  this  Science  of  Self :  knowledge  of  Self  consti¬ 
tutes  a  Power  that  is  infinite  (in  strength).38 

Withdrawing  the  corporal  senses,  and  restraining  the  mind  also 
that  is  (naturally)  restless,  and  entering  into  the  sphere  of  Self,  he 
that  has  knowledge  of  Self,  completely  resting  on  his  own  know¬ 
ledge  ,  and  expanding  his  ken  over  all,  knows  completely  all 
entities.*84 


said  {vide  this-  Lesson  ante )  one  derives'  one’s  period  of  life,  knowledge 
of  Self,  mind,  the  senses,  the  life-breaths,  will,  apprehension,  the  incidents 
of  form  or  features,  voice,  complexion,  pleasure  and  pain,  desire  and  aversion, 
etc. 

By  *  Baiva  ’  is  meant  the  unexhausted  acts  of  previous  lives. — T. 

*  What  Punarvasu  says  in  these  verses  is  this  :  there  are  two  sources 
of  knowledge:  1st,  the  senses,  and  2nd,  the  Self  as  existing  in  his  true  or 
unmodified  nature.  Without  the  senses,  the  knowledge  which  is  derived 
through  the  senses  cannot  be  acquired.  But  this  knowledge  is  not  the  whole 
complement  of  knowledge  which  the  Self  has  or  may  acquire.  By  yoga  or 
samadhi,  the  Self,  restraining  the  seuses  aud  the  miud,  can  withdraw  into 
his  own  proper  or  true  sphere.  Iu  this  state,  he  becomes  omniscient.  The 
Self,  as  the  object  of  ordinary  observation,  is  always  seen  to  exist  in  a  state 
of  union  with  the  senses  and  the  mind.  Hindu  philosophy  recognises  the 
existence  of  Self  as  dissociated  from  the  senses  and;  the  mind.  That  is  his 
true  and  unmodified  state.  Indeed,  the  Self  is  then  said  to  exist  in  swarupa. 
While  existing  in  swarupa,  he  becomes  infinite  and  identifiable  with  [Brahman. 
He  then  possesses  all  the  attributes  which  characterise  Brahman,  vis.,  omnis- 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA.  735 

(If  this  does  not  satisfy  thee)  thou  mayst  accept,  O  Bhara¬ 
dwaja,  another  notion  which  is  a  well-settled  conclusion. 

When  the  Self  apprehends  objects  as  also  pleasure  and  pain 
at  the  time  he  is  asleep  or  dreaming,  with  the  senses  and 
speech  and  movements  all  suspended,  he  is  not  regarded  as 
unknowing.11 

Without  knowledge,  the  Self,  standing  alone,  is  not  competent 
to  know  anything. 

Since  no  entity,  again,  (save  the  Self),  can  exist  as  one  (i.  g., 
unchanged)  and  (since  no  entity)  can  be  without  a  cause,  there¬ 
fore,  the  Self  is  Knower,  immutable,  Witness,  and  Cause. 

All  this,  O  Bharadwaja,  is  settled.  Do  thou  kill  thy  doubts 

( Here  are  two  verses  containing  a  summary.) 

The  cause  of  the  setting  in  of  Conception,  of  the  growth  of 
the  foetus,  and  of  its  birth  (meaning  delivery  from  the  womb), 
the  sentiments  of  Punarvasu,  as  also  the  sentiments  of  Bharadwaja, 
enunciation  of  the  proposition  (to  be  proved),  the  objections 
(.urged  against  it),  and  the  clear  conclusion  arrived  at, — these 
have  been  expounded  in  connection  with  this  brief  Lesson  about 
the  entry  of  the  Self  into  the  womb.1-4 

Thus  ends  the  third  Lesson,  called  “  Kshuddika-Garbhava- 
kranti,”  in  the  Division  called  Qarira,  of  Agnivega’s  treatise  as 
revised  by  Charaka.* 


cienee,  omnipotence,  etc.  The  aim  of  yoga  is  to  cause  the  Self  to  return  to 
his  own  true  condition  or  swarupa. — T. 

*  Verses  35  to  37  are  exceedingly  difficult  to  understand.  The  fact  is, 
they  represent  a  summary  of  arguments  and  considerations  instead  of  being 
a  clear  and  full  exposition  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Soul  being  knower  and 
witness,  etc.— T. 


LESSON  IV. 


We  shall  next  expound  the  Lesson  called  ‘  Mahatl-Garbhl» 
vakranti”*  in  the  Division  called  Qarira.* 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.1 

That  from  which  conception  springs,  that  to  which  the  word 
foetus  is  applied,  those  things  whose  modifications  compose  the 
foetus,  the  manner  in  which  the  several  limbs  of  the  foetus  grow, 
one  after  another,  in  the  womb,  that  which  is  the  cause  of  the 
growth  of  the  foetus,  that  which  is  the  cause  of  its  non-growth, 
that  in  consequence  of  which  it  meets  with  destruction  while 
growing  in  the  womb,  and  those  causes  through  which  the  foetus, 
instead  of  being  destroyed  outright,  becomes  subject  to  malforma¬ 
tions,— all  these  I  shall  explain.® 


*  ‘GarbhSvakianti,*  as  lias  already  been  explained,  means  ‘descent  of 
a  being  into  the  womb.'  Lesson  III  is  called  1  KhtiddikX-Garbbavakranti,' 
a  brief  Lesson  on  the  subject  of  the  descent  of  a  bein-r  iuto  a  womb.  The 
preseut  Lesson  is  called  ‘  Mahati-Garbbavakranti,'  «>.,  a  treatment  of  the 
same  subject  more  elaborately. 

Most  aiicient  treatises  contain  such  Lessons  or  chapters,  vis.,  one  giving 
a  brief  exposition  and  the  other  a  more  elaborate  one  of  the  same  subject. 
In  the  SutrasthXua,  there  are  two  such  Lessons,  one  called  ‘  Khuddaka-Chatnsh- 
pSda  ’  and  the  other  called  ‘  MaliJ-ChatushpSda.'  The  fact  is,  these  Lessons 
really  represent  the  prelections  or  discourses  of  preceptors  delivered  in  the 
Lecture  hall  crowded  with  pupils.  Hence,  a  subject  that  is  treated  in  brief, 
may,  again,  be  treated  more  elaborately  by  the  preceptor  at  the  request  of 
the  pupils. — T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


ni 

From  the  mother,  from  the  father,  from  the  Self,  from  the 
food  and  drink  that  are  assimilated,  from  the  juices,  from  the 
mind, — indeed,  from  all  these  entities  combined  together,  con¬ 
ception  sets  in. 

Distributing  them  under  proper  heads,  the  several  limbs,  born 
of  the  mother  and  the  rest,  of  the  growing  foetus,  with  the  several 
sources  from  which  these  grow,  have  already  been  severally 
spoken  of.5 

When  the  semen,  the  blood,  and  Jiva,  combined  together,  enter 
the  womb,  the  combination  receives  the  name  of  Conception  (or 
foetus).4 

Verily,  the  foetus  is  a  modification  of  Ether,  Air,  Fire,  Water, 
Earth.  Such  modification  becomes  the  seat  (or  abode)  .of  >  the 
Chetana  (or  Self). 

Agreeably  to  this-  consideration,  the  foetus  has  for  its  essence 
an  aggregate  that  consists  of  a  modification  of  all  the  five 
great  elements.  That  aggregate  is  the  seat  (or  abode)  of  another 
element,  viz.,  'Chetana  (or  Self).  This  Chetana  (or  Self}  is  said 
to  be  the  sixth  element  (of  the  foetus).*5 

The  manner  in  which  the  several  limbs  of  the  foetus  grow 
one  after  another,  in  the  womb,  we  shall  now  expound. 

When  upon  the  entire  stoppage  of  the  previous  menstrual 
flow,  a  new  flow  has  commenced,  and  the  woman  has  cleansed 
herself  (after  three  days)  by  a  bath,  she  is  said  to  be  in  her 


*  The  first  three  questions  indicated  in  aphorism  2  above  are  :  (1)  whence 
does  Conception  (or  the  foetus)  spring  1  (2)  what  is  that  to  which  the  name 
Conception  (or  foetus)  applies  ?  (3)  what  are  those  whose ,  modification  is  the 
foetus?  The  (3)  is  answered  here  (in  aphorism  5).  The  second  part  of  5 
seems  to  be  a  tautological  repetition  of  the  first  part.  Having  said  at  the 
outset  that  the  foetus  is  a  modification  of  Ether,  etc  ,  and  that  that  modification 
is  the  seat  or  abode  of  the  Self,  nothing  new  is  said  in  the  following  part  of 
the  aphorism  unless  ‘  Samudayatraakah  ’  is  taken  as  such,  as  also  the  state¬ 
ment  about  Chetana  being  regarded  as  one  of  the  additional  elements  or 
ingredients  of  the  foetus.  ‘  Samudayaunaka  ’  means  ‘  liaviug  the  aggregate 
of  all  the  five  for  its  essence/ — T . 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


738 

season,  if,  of  course,  she  is  free  from  every  -disease  afflicting  the 
genital  organs,  the  (menstrual)  blood,  and  the  womb.* 

When  a  man  of  faultless  semen  holds  sexual  congress  with 
such  a  woman,  that  which  is  the  foremost  essence  of  all  the 
ingredients  composing  the  body,  urged  by  the  rapturous  pleasure 
he  feels,  issues  out  of  every  part  of  his  body.f 

That  ingredient  in  the  form  of  Seed,  thus  urged  out  by  the 
gladdened  Self,  issues  out  of  the  body  of  the  male,  and  entering 
the  womb  by  the  passage  already  indicated,  mingles  with  the 
menstrual  blood  of  the  mother. 


*  Among  Hindus  the  custom  is  that  no  woman  approaches  her  husband 
till  after  a  bath  on  the  third  day  of  the  appearance  of  the  menses.  She 
is  regarded  impure  till  the  bath  on  the  third  day.  Absolute  cessation  of 
work  for  three  days  is  the  rule.  Among  certain  wild  tribes,  the  purificatory 
bath  is  delayed  till  the  seventh,  or  even  the  tenth  day.  For  the  whole  of 
this  period  the  woman  is  regarded  impure.  She  is  permitted  to  have  absolute 
rest.  The  Hindu  scriptures  forbid  the  very  touch  of  a  woman  who  is  in  her 
period  of  impurity.  Sexual  congress  with  such  a  woman  is  regarded  as  fully 
capable  of  shortening  one’s  period  of  life. — T. 

t  According  to  Hindu  physicians,  the  semen  does  not  reside  in  any  par¬ 
ticular  locality  or  limb  of  the  body.  The  testicles,  without  which  there  can 
be  no  manifestation  of  the  virile  power,  are  supposed  to  be  the  receptacles 
in  which  the  semen  resides.  Actual  dissection,  however,  of  the  testes,  does 
not  show  a  drop  of  semen.  Hindu  physicians  take  it  for  granted  that  the 
semen  is  generated  for  the  time  being,  and  that  it  is  generated  by  the 
whole  body.  It  represents,  according  to  them,  the  foremost  essence  of  every 
ingredient  of  the  body  In  the  Upanishads  occurs  a  verse  which  runs  as 
follows  : 

Angadangat  sambhavasi  hridayatabhijayase, 

Atma  vai  putranamasi  sajiva  caradah  catam.  ” 

The  meaning  is,  — ‘  Thou  takest  thy  birth  from  (my)  limb  and  limb  ;  thdu 
springest  from  the  core  of  (my)  heart ;  thou  art  my  own  self,  known  by  the  name 
of  son:  do  thou  live  a  hundred  years!’  The  limbs  of  the  offspring  are  be¬ 
gotten  from  those  of  the  sire.  The  eye  is  generated  by  the  eye ;  the  ear 
by  the  ear  ;  the  nose  by  the  nose  ;  &c.  &c.  It  is  the  sire’s  own  Self  that 
takes  birth  as  the  son.  The  son  springs  from  the  very  core  of  the  sire’s 
heart.  The  foremost  of  all  dhatus  (ingredients  of  the  body)  is  the  ojas. 
The  semen  is  the  essence  of  even  the  ‘  ojas.’  It  is  generated  and  comes  out 
only  when  the  acme  of  pleasure  attaching  to  sexual  congress  is  felt. — T. 


739; 


CHAR  AKA  SAMHITA. 

■  In  that  (mixture),  the  ingredient  called  Chetana  (Self),  which 
has  Mind  for  its  (chief)  organ,  begins  to  attract  the  (several) 
attributes. 

That  Chetana  (or  Self)  is  (otherwise)  called  Hetii,  (antecedent 
cause).  Kdranam  (that  which  compels  others  to  achieve  its  own 
ends),  Nimittam  (that  through  which  effects  are  produced),  Aksha- 
ram  (unfading  or  indestructible),  Kartri  (actor),  Mantri  (thinker), 
Vodhayitri  (that  which  causes  apprehension),  Vodhri  (knower), 
Drashtri  (beholder),  Dhdtri  (ordainer),  Brahman  ( Great  or.  Vast), 
Vigwakarman  (the  creator  of  the  universe),  Vicwarupa  (that 
which  has  the  universe  for  its  form),  Pmusha  (that  which  lies  or 
resides  in  the  body),  Prabhava  (that  from  which  everything  has 
its  origin),  Avyaya  (Immutable),  Nitya  (eternal),  Gunin  (that 
to  which  all  the  attributes  co-inhere),  Grahanam  (that  which 
attracts  everything)  Pradhdnam  (the  foremost  of  all  things), 
Avyaktain  (unmanifest)  Jiva  (endued  with  life),  Jna  (the  cons¬ 
cious  one),  Prakula  (the  highest  of  born  things),  Chetanavat  (en¬ 
dued  with  consciousness)  Vibhu  (all-pervading),  Bliutdtman  (the 
soul  of  all  beings),  Indriyatman  (the  soul  of  the  senses)  and 
Antardtman  (the  inner  Self  of  things).*8 

He  ( viz ,  Jiva),  when  the  time  comes  for  his  attracting  (material) 
attributes,  attracts  Ether  (or  Space)  before  attracting  the  others, 
even  as,  when  the  end  comes  of  the  period  of  Dissolution,  the  in¬ 
destructible  Being,  desirous  of  creating  beings  (anew),  creates  Ether 
(or  Space),  which  is  the  ingredient  of  all  existing  entities,  before 
creating  the  other  elements  :  after  this,  in  due  order,  the  four  other 
elements  beginning  with  Air,  which  happen  to  have  attributes 
more  and  more  gross.  Similarly,  when  engaged  in  taking  a 
(material)  body,  Jiva  takes  Ether  (or  Space)  first  or  before  the 
others  ;  after  this,  in  due  order,  the  four  other  elements  beginning 
with  Air,  which  happen  to  have  attributes  more  and  more  gross. 
Verily,  the  entire  process  of  this  acceptance  of  (material  attributes) 
is  completed  within  a  very  brief  space  of  time  f' 


*  All  these  terms  are  applied  to  Brahman  or  the  Universal  Self.  The 
identity  of  Jiva  with  the  universal  or  highest  Self  is  one  of  the  first  axioms 
;of  the  Vedanta  philosophy. — T. 

.  t  Hindu  philosophers  .explain  the  cosmogony  in  this  way  :  creation  ( or  the 
universe  of  Being)  is-  without  beginning  ;  i.  e,  the  beginning  of  creation 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


U° 

He,  having  attracted  (or  become  invested  with)  all  the  attri¬ 
butes,  and  (thus)  constituting  the  foetus,  in  the  first  month  (of  his 
existence)  remains  in  a  state  of  syncope.  He  is  then  a  turbid 
compound  of  all  the  dhdtus  (or  ingredients),  and  looks  like  a 
semi-solid  slimy  mass,  without  any  distinct  or  definite  shape,  and 
his  limbs  (so  called)  are  really  made  of  materials  some  of  which 
are  subtile  and  some  gross.8 

In  the  second  month,  the  foetus  becomes  thicker.  It  may  take 
the  form  of  a  roundish  lump,  or  of  a  long  and  flat  piece  of  flesh, 
or  of  a  ball.  Amongst  these,  if  it  becomes  a  thick  roundish  lump, 
it  developes  into  a  male  ;  if  a  long  and  flat  piece  of  flesh,  it  deve- 
lopes  into  a  female  ;  and  if  a  ball,  one  of  the  neuter  sex. *9 

In  the  third  month,  all  the  organs  of  sense  as  also  the  forms 
of  all  the  limbs  simultaneously  manifest  themselves.10 


cannot  be  conceived  by  the  human  intellect.  The  fact  is,  the  universe, having 
existed  for  a  period,  becomes  dissolved  again  into  nothingness  or  Brahman. 
After  the  period  of  dissolution  is  over,  the  Supreme  Being  creates  the  universe 
again.  Thus  creation  and  dissolution  are  going  on  and  on,  and  will. go  on 
for  ever  and  ever,  eternity  having  neither  beginning  nor  end.  During  the 
period  of  dissolution  what  remains  is  Kama  or  the  acts  of  iva  unexhausted 
by  enjoyment  or  endurance  o f  their  fruits.  As  long  as  the  acts  of  even  a 
single  individual  Jiva  will  exist,  so  long  will  there  be  creation  and  dissolution. 
(Srishti  and  Pralaya ).  ‘Mal  apralaya’ or  the  utter  extinction  of  the  universe 
is  improbable,  for  it  will  not  take  place  unless  the  sum  total  of  all  acts 
becomes  exhausted.  Then,  again,  one  becomes  a  snake  ;  another  a  toad  ; 
a  third,  a  tiger  or  a  lion  ;  a  fourth,  a  human  being— a  prince  or  a  beggar  ; 
This  inequality  of  condition  is  not  the  result  of  the  partiality  of  the  Creator 
but  is  due  to  the  unexhausted  acts  of  the  respective  beings  so  born. 

The  five  primal  elements  which  enter  into  the  composition  of  every 
creature  or  being  differ  in  their  measure  of  grossness  ;  Ether  or  Space 
being  less  gross  than  air  and  the  rest.  When  Jiva  attracts  the  material 
elements  for  forming  his  case,  the  order  is  from  the  less  gross  to  the 
grosser  ones.  Even  this  is  the  order  in  which,  after  the  period  of  universal 
dissolution,  the  Supreme  Being  evolves  out  the  creation  or  the  universe.  First 
comes  Ether  and  then  the  others  in  the  order  of  their  grossness. 

*  The  three  words  used  in  the  original  are  Pinda,  Pad ,  and  Arvuda 
The  Commentators  do  not  explain  them  clearly.  Pinda  is  certainly  a 
roundish  lump,  but  how  does  it  differ  from  Arvuda,  unless  the  latter  be 
taken  as  rounder,  say,  like  a  ball  ?  Gangadhara,  in  commenting  upon  the 
word  Pinda  uses  the  compound  Granthyakara,  i.  e.,  of  the  form  of  a  Grantki 
or  knot.  He  does  not  indicate  his  authority.— T. 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A.  ;4l 

Amongst  these,  some  of  the  organs  and  limbs  have  been  duly 
spoken  of  before,  distributing  them  under  (the  heads  of)  Mother- 
born  and  the  rest.  At  present,  however,  we  shall  treat  of  those 
very  limbs  and  some  others  according  to  another  principle  of 
classification  i.  e.,  the  distribution  according  to  the  modifications 
of  the  (five)  primal  essences.*11 

The  organs  and  limbs  of  the  foetus  which  are  derived  from 
riiother  and  the  rest  are  as  well  modifications  of  the  (five)  primal 
essences.  Amongst  them  those  having  Ether  (or  Space)  for  their 
essence  are  sound,  the  organ  of  hearing,  lightness,  subtility,  and 
hollows  (or  all  empty  or  vacant  places  in  or  within  the  body). f 2 

Having  the  Air  for  their  essence  are  touch,  the  organ  of  touch, 
roughness,  respiration,  the  growth  of  the  ingredients  (of  the  body), 
and  all  exertions  or  movements  of  the  body.18 

Those  which  have  Fire  (or  Light)  for  their  essence  are  form, 
the  sense  of  vision,  visibility,  digestion,  and  heat.14 

Those  which  have  Water  for  their  essence  are  the  juices,  the 
organ  of  taste,  coolness,  softness,  oiliness,  and  all  liquid  (and  semi¬ 
liquid)  secretions.15 

Those  which  have  Earth  for  their  essence  are  scent,  the  organ 
of  scent,  weight  (or  heaviness),  consistency  (or  compactness),  and 
bulk.1'! 


c  In  the  previous  Lesson,  the  organs  and  limbs  of  the  fcetus  have  been 
treated  of  as  mother-born,  father-born,  self-or  soul-born ,  juice-born,  and 
assimilation-born.  Here  the  Rishi  proposes  to  treat  of  the  same  and  some 
other  organs  and  limbs  according  to  a  different  principle  of  classification, 
viz.,  that  dependant  on  the  five  primal  essences.  Some  organs  and  limbs  are 
modifications  of  Ether  or  Space  ;  some  are  modifications  of  Air,  &c.  Vide 
the  aphorisms  that  follow  — T 

t  The  mother-born  limbs,  as  laid  down  in  the  previous  Lesson,  are  skin, 
blood,  flesh,  fat,  navel,  heart,  &c,  The  father-born  are  hair,  beard,  nails, 
bristles,  teeth,  bones,  ducts,  sinews,  nerves,  etc.  The  self-or  soul-born  are 
tbe  organs  of  sense,  &c  In  every  set  of  these,  occur  the  attributes  of  sound 
lightness,  and  subtility.  Wnen  struck,  skin  and  the  rest  yield  a  noise  or  sound, 
Sound  is  the  attribute  of  Ether  or  Space,  so  is  lightness  ;  and  so  subtility, 
and  so  are  the  pores  and  all  hollows  or  vacaut  places  iu  them. — T. 

J  It  is  difficult  to  understand  what  these  aphorisms  mean.  Having  said 
in  the  previous  Lesson  that  sonu  of  the  organs  and  limbs  are  derived  from 


743 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


Thus,  this  one,  i.  e.  Purusha  (or  Jiva),  has  the  external  world 
for  his  prototype.  All  those  entities  which  are.  in  the  external 
world  occur  also  in  Purusha.  All  those  which  are  in  Purusha  occur 
in  the  external  world. 

They  that  are  wise  wish  to  regard  Purusha  and  the  external 
world  in  this  light.17* 

Even  thus  all  the  organs  and  limbs  of  the  Jiva  bom  in  the 
womb  simultaneouely  develop  themselves. 

The  other  organs  and  limbs,  besides  these,  which  Jiva  obtains 
subsequently  to  birth  (delivery  from  the  womb)  are  these  : 

Teeth,  breasts  and  hirsute  appendages  (such  as  hair,  beard,  mus¬ 
tache,  &c.),  all  those  which  develope  themselves  gradually  (such  as 
understanding,  form  or  shape,  speech,  vital  seed,  &c.),  and  other 
incidents  of  a  like  kind,  (such  as  walking,  running,  &c.) 

Even  this  (i.  e.,  the  appearance  of  these)  is  Jiva’s  Nature. 

The  reverse  of  this  is  regarded  as  Abnormal. 

In  the  foetus  there  are  some  incidents  which  are  permanent. 
There  are  others  that  are  not  so,  being  transitory. 


the  mother,  some  from  the  father,  &o.,  the  Rishi,  in  the  present  Lesson'  (vide 
aphorisms  11  and  12  above),  says  that  those  very  organs  and  limbs  ate  modifica¬ 
tions  of  the  five  primal  elements.  In  stating,  however,  the  actual  modifioa- 
tions,  entities  are  introduced  which  are  not  organs  or  limbs  of  the  body.  Thus 
in  12,  sound  is  mentioned  as  an  eutity  which  Jus  E'her  or  Space  for  its  essjnce  . 
But  is  sound  an  organ  or  limb  of  the  body  ?  Similarly,  (in  connection  with 
the  four  other  primal  elements,  things  are  mentioned  that  are  by  no  meaus 
organs  or  limbs,  such  as  touch,  roughness  respiration,  and  exertions  (in  13), 
form,  visibility,  digestion,  and  heat  (in  14),  juices,  coolness, 'softness,  oiliness, 
liquid  and  semi-liquid  secretions  (in  15),  and  scent,  heaviness  or  weight,  con¬ 
sistency  (or  compactness),  and  bulk  (in  16;.  The  Commentators  do  not  clear 
the  difficulty.  All  that  they  state  is  that  these  attributes,  which  have  the 
several  primal  elements  for  their  essences,  belong  to  the  organs  and  limbs 
mentioned  before  as  mother-born,  father-bom,  &c. — T. 

*  This  has  been  expanded  in  the  next  Lesson  of  this  very  Division.  The 
fact  is,  Purusha  is  the  result  of  the  five  primal  elements  modified  in  certain 
measures,  even  as  the  external  world  is,  in  the  same  way,  the  result  of  the 
modifications  of  the  same  five  primal  elements.— T. 


cnaraka  samhita. 


743 


Those  limbs  which  are  permanently  attached  to  the  body  bear 
the  indications  of  the  male,  or  the  female,  or  the  neuter  sex *i8 

Those  characteristics  which  are  especial  to  males  and  females 
are  of  two  kinds  :  they  are  (i)  dependent  on  Pradclhna  (or  Self), 
and  (2)  dependent  on  Gunns  (matter). 

Amongst  these,  that  from  which  is  a  preponderance  determines 
the  sex  of  the  offspring.! 

Thus,— 

Weakness  of  virile  power,  timidity,  unskilfulness  in  respect  of  sexual 
congress,  stupefaction,  pause  in  the  midst  of  the  act  of  congress, 
heaviness  of  the  lower  part  of  the  body,  absence  of  compactness 
of  limbs,  absence  of  turgidity  in  the  organ  of  generation,  langour, 


*  The  words  used  in  tlie  original  for  differentiating  the  character  of  the 
limbs  are  nitya  and  anitya.  By  the  former  is  evi  iently  meant  such  limbs  as 
are  ;permauently  attached  to  the  body,  i.  e.,  as  do  not  fall  off  through  sick¬ 
ness  or  age.  By  anitya  is  meant  limbs  of  the  opposite  kind,  such  as  hair,  &c. 
They  come  and  go  without  the  body  being  much  affected  by  them.  What  the 
Kishi  says  in  the  concluding  portion  of  the  aphorism  is  that  the  limbs  which 
are  nitya  bear  the  indications  of  sex  which  must  be  either  masculine  or  feminine 
or  neuter. — T. 

t  The  original  is  very  terse.  1  have  endeavoured  to  preserve'that  terseness. 
What  is  stated  by  the  Rishi  is  this  ;  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  the 
mother  and  father  are  dependant  on  ‘  PradhXna,  •  that  is  Self  meaning 
1  ChetauS,  ’  nud  ‘  Guna,  ’  meaning  ‘  Prakriti  ’  or  matter.  In  other  words, 
those  characteristics  have  reference  to  mind  and  matter.  Amongst  them, 
‘  Yatobhuyastam,  ’  i.  ‘  that  from  which  there  is  preponderance,  ’  ‘  tatoguya- 
tarabhgvah,  '  i.  e.,  ‘  from^it  is  the  characteristic  of  bone  that,  >  being  this  or 
meauing  mas-  culinity  or  femininity  of  the  offspring. 

Among  the  characteristics  laid  down  below,  some  are  mental  ;  others  ar* 
material,  such  as  the  qualities  of  tne  womb,  the  seed,  &c.  If  1  Pradhgna  ’  or 
1  Purusha  1  predominates,  masculinity  of  the  offspring  is  the  result  j  if  ‘  Guna  » 
or  ‘  Prakriti  *  predominates,  feminiuity  of  the  offspring  is  the  result. 

It  should  be  noted  here  that  the  characteristics  of  the  father  are  both 
mental  and  material  us,  indeed,  those  of  the  mother  also  are.  It  is  not  intended 
to  be  said  that  the  characteristics^  only  the  father  are  mental,  while  those  of 
the  mother  are  material. 

Ganggdhara’s  comments  are  more  different  to  understand  than  the  text. 
The  Bengali  translator*  have  made  a  me**  of  the  pawige. _ T. 


744 


CHAR  AKA  SAMHITA 


the  particular  side  {viz.,  the  left)  of  the  womb  (in  which  the  semen 
falls),  preponderance  of  blood  in  the  seed, — these  and  other  inci¬ 
dents  of  a  similar  nature  combined  together,  determine  the  femi¬ 
ninity  of  the  offspring. 

The  reverse  of  these  determine  the  opposite  sex. 

When  the  incidents  are  of  a  mixed  character  (2.  e.,  when  they 
are  present  in  equal  proportions  ,  the  offspring  becomes  of  the 
neuter  sex.’19 

Each  foetus  obtains  in  its  mind  the  capacity  for  pleasure  and 
pain  just  when  its  senses  appear.  Hence,  it  is  from  such  a  time 
that  the  foetus  begins  to  move  and  to  wish  for  the  pleasures  felt 
in  the  previous  life  and  the  very  few  ones  in  this. 

The  ancients  say  that  the  foetus  is  double-hearted. 

The  heart  of  the  foetus  is  mother-born.  It  is  united  with  the 
mother’s  heart  by  means  of  many  juice-bearing  ducts.  Hence,  it 
is  by  those  ducts  that  the  alimentation  is  achieved  of  the  foetus,]: 

Beholding  this  to  be  the  cause  (of  the  nourishment  of  the 
foetus),  physicians  never  wish  the  mother  to  disregard  the  foetus, 
whose  heart  depends  upon  her  heart,  (in  the  matter  of  food 
and  drink).§ 


*  Iu  reading  the  words  “  Klaivyam,  ”  &c.,  I  follow  Gauga  Ilia ra.  Some  of 
these  words  seem  to  be  technical. — T. 

f  The  Hindu  scriptures  regard  that  residence  iu  the  womb  is  fraught  with 
very  great  pain.  The  child  has  the  capacity  to  feel  it,  although  it  forgets  all 
about  it  as  soon  as  it  comes  out  of  the  womb.  As  every  being  has  to  take 
birth  repeatedly,  hence  Emancipation  from  rebirth  is  the  highest  felicity. — T. 

J  Some  texts  read  ‘  tasmattayoh.  ’  This  seems  to  be  incorrect.  I  read 
‘  tasmattasya  ;  ’  the  meaning  being  that  it  is  by  these  juice-bearing  ducts 
that  the  eating  of  the  foetus  is  done.  The  heart  of  the  foetus  is  born  of  the 
mother.  Whatever  the  mother  takes  as  food  and  drink  is  borne  by  her  juice- 
beariug  ducts  to  the  fcetus  in  her  womb.  ‘Tasya’  has  reference  to  the  foetus, 
‘Tayoh’  would  mean  ‘of  both  foetus  and  mother.’  As  there  is  no  need,  however, 
of  explaining  how  the  mother  derives  her  nourishment,  the  reading  ‘  tayoh  ’ 
would  seem  to  be  incoriect.— T. 

§  As  the  foetus  delives  its  nourishment  from  the  mother,  the  latter  should 
never  disregard  the  fcetus  iu  the  matter  of  her  food  and  drink';  i.  e.,  she 
should  never  take  what  may  be  deleterious  to  the  foetus  in  her  womb.  As 


CHARAKA  SAMIHTA 


745' 

From  the  mother’s  disregard  (of  the  foetus  in  matter  of  feed 
and  drink),  the  destruction  is  caused  of  the  foetus  or  various 
defects  (both  physical  and  mental)**1 

During  the  period  of  pregnancy  when  the  hearts  of  the  mother 
and  the  foetus  become  united  and  dependant  upon  each  other,  the 
mother,  in  certain  matters,  becomes  accordant  with  the  foetus 
as  regards  the  acquisition  of  what  is  unacquired  and  the  preserva¬ 
tion  of  what  has  been  acquired. 

Hence,  they  that  are  skilled  (in  medical  science)  treat  the 
mother  during  such  a  period  with  all  that  is  agreeable  and  benefi- 
cialfM 


regards  acts  and  practices  also,  she  should  not-  indulge  in  those  which  may 
injure  the  foetus.  On  the  other  hand,  she  should  always  take  such  food  and 
drink  and  indulge  in  such  acts  and  practices  as  ore  calculated  to  properly 
nourish  the  foetus  and  give  it  health  as  long  as  it  remains  in  the  womb, 
and  heal  th  and  intelligence  to  it  after  birth,  that  is,  delivery. — T. 

*  The^mother’s  disregard  of  the  :fcetus  in  matters  of  food  and  drink 
and  indulgence  in  acts  ai  d  practices,  lead  to  the  destruction  of  the  foetus 
or  to  the  appearance  of  diverse  defects  both  physical  and  mental,  in  the 
child  after  birth.  Similarly,  her  regard  for  it  as  evidenced  by  the  food  and 
drink  she  takes  and  the  acts  and  practices  in  which  she  indulges,  serves  to 
nourish  the  child  and  give  it  beauty  of  form  and  even  complexion,  as  also 
health  and  intelligence.  Some  of  the  acts  in  which  she  may  not  indulge, 
as  indicated  by  Gangadhara  in  his  comment  upon  this  passage,  are  the 
sight  of  ugly  or  hateful  or  disgusting  or  terrible  objects,  or  the  hearing  of 
unpleasant  and  disgusting  and  fright- causing  sounds.  The  sight  of  such 
objects  may  lead  to  various  defects  in  the  child,  such  as  paleness  of  com¬ 
plexion,  lameness,  blindness,  idiotcy,  dei  fness,  dumbness.  On  the  other  hand, 
by  contemplating  on  beautiful  scenes  of  nature,  beautiful  pictures,  gods  and 
goddesses,  pious  and  amiable  men,  &Jc.,  the  mother  may  serve  to  make 
her  .child  beautiful  and  virtuous  and  possessed  of  various  other  desirable 
qualities. — T. 

t  ‘Yogakshema’  is  a  well-known  technical  word.  Gangadhara  explains 
it  here  in  a  novel  way.  There  is,  however,  no  need  of  understanding  it  in 
a  sense  different  from  that  which  is  generally  attached  to  it.  It  means  the 
acquisition  of  what  is  unacquired  and  the  preservation  of  what  has  been  ac- 
puired. 

Here  ‘  Yogakshema,  ’  in  this  sense,  as  applied  to  the  mother  and  the  child 
in  the  womb,  would  imply  the  acquirement  and  retention  of  nourishment. 
It  is  easy  to  see  that  such  acquirement  and  retention  are  for  both  herself  and 
the  child  in  her  womb,— T. 


74$ 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


We  shall  now  lay  down  in  brief,  for  the  knowledge  of  all,  the 
indications  of  a  woman  who  has  conceived  and  of  the  foetus  in 
the  womb:”* 

Since,  from  a  conversance  with  the  indications  (of  the  existence) 
of  the  foetus  (in  the  womb),  the  physician  will  understand  what 
course  of  treatment,  as  regards  food  and  drink,  would  be  proper 
(for  both  the  mother  and  the  foetus)  and  what  would  be  harmful. 

Hence,  instructions  as  regards  those  indications,  are  beneficial. 

They  viz.,  (those  indications)  are  as  follows : — 

Disappearance  of  the  menstrual  flow  ; 

Constant  salivation  in  the  mouth  ; 

Disgust  for  food  ; 

Nausea  ; 

Disrelish  for  food  and  drink  ; 

Longing  for  all  sour  things  in  especial ; 

Regard  for  and  gratification  in  things  both  high  and  low  ;f 
:  Heaviness  of  all  the  limbs  ; 

Languidness  of  the  eyes  ; 

Appearance  of  milk  in  the  breasts 

Blackness  of  the  lips  and  about  the  nipples  of  the  breast ; 

Dropsical  swellings  of  the  dorsa  of  the  feet ; 

Slight  erection  of  the  bristles  of  the  body  ;  and 


•Some  taxts  read  ‘  Garbhapatteh  '  after  ‘  tasyjt,  ’  and  some  omit  it.  The 
meaning  is  <  Garbhapannayah. '  and,  as  such,  the  word  ought  to  be  retained.  T. 

t  It  is  difficult  to  understand  what  is  meant  by  this.  The  Commentators 
avoid  it  altogether.  Gangadhara  explains  only  the  word  •  ucchavacha,  ’ 
as  if  there  were  any  difficulty  in  understannding  its  meaning.  I  think  what 
the  Rishi  means  is  an  indifference  to  all  things  high  and  low,  t.  e.,  good  and 
bad.  For  example,  a  good  bed  and  a  bad  bed,  a  good  dinner  and  a  bad 
dinner,  a  good  dress  and  a  bad  dress,  are  equal  in  the  estimation  of  the  mother 
at  such  a  time. — T. 

J  ‘  Stanayohstanyam  ’  is  certainly  the  correct  reading.  Gangadhara  drops 
u*e  first  word,  thinking  it  unnecessary. — T. 


.  CHARAKA  SAMtflfA. 


r>V 

'  '  Flatness  of  the  genital  organ  ;* 

These  symptoms  manifest  themselves  upon  the  conception 
being  developed.24 

Whatever  things  she  may  desire  should  be  given  to  her,  with 
the  exception  of  those  that  are  injurious  to  the  foetus  in  the-wonSb. 

These  are  the  things  that  are  injurious  to  the  foetus,  in  the 
'  womb.  ' '  ’  . . 

All  things  that  are  very  heavy  (in  respect  of  digestion)  • 
All  things  that  are  very  hot ; 

All  things  that  are  very  keen  (in  respect  of  energy)  ; 

All  movements  and  exertions  that  involve,  the  exercise  of 
great  strength  or  that  involve  danger  to  life  and  limb  ; 

'  The  ancients  lay  down  these  other,  instructions :  fpr.  protecting 
herself  from  the  dieties  and  Rakshasas  and  the  followers 'of  both, 
she  should  not  wear  crimson  robes  ;  she  should  not  take  any  food 
:  or  drink,  that  is  intoxicating  ;  she  should  not  mount  -any  vehicle 
,  (for  going  from  one  place  to  another)  ;  she  should  not  eat  meat 
lastly,  she  should,  from  a  distance,  avoid  all  such  things  cas- are 
hostile  to  every  one  of  her  senses,  as  also  everything  which  matrons 
.  regard-as  destructive  of  or  injurious'to  the  child  in  the  womb.*Ef  * 


*  1  Yonyaijchatalatwam  ’  and  ‘  Yatiyacchajalatwam  ’  are  the  two  read¬ 
ings.  If  the  first  be  preferred,  the  sense  would  be  ‘flatness  of  thegenifal 
organ  and. if  the  .  second,  the  meaning  would  be  ‘  slight- opening  of  the 
mouth  of  the"  genital  organ.  ’ — T. 

*  The  prohibition  in  respect  of  the  wearing  of-re'd -apparel  has  been  ex¬ 
plained  by  Gangadhara  incorrectly.  Indeed,  his  explanation  is:a  libel  tiptin 
the  dieties.  He  thinks  that  by  wearing  red  apparel  a  woman  becomes  very 

.  attractive.  The  very  gods  may  be  tempted  to  woo  her  to  her  ruin,  br  pursue 
..her  like  Apollo  chasing  Daphne,  The  truth  is,  red  is  a  colour  which -the 
;  deities  like.  A  woman  who  in  consequence  of  her  condition  most-needs  the 
■  protection  .of  the  gods  should  avoid  red  robes  as  the  wearing  of  such  robes  is 
capable  of  being  construed  into  an  act  of  contempt  for  the  gods.  As  regards 
the  Rakshasas,  as  they  also  Jove  that  colour ;  a  woman  should  -have  respect 
for  them  by  not  wearing  vestihents red  rh  hue.— T,  •  ;--3 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


748 

If  the  mother  ardently  longs  for  anything  that  is  injurious,  it 
should  be  given  her,  along  with  something  that  is  beneficial,  for 
fulfilling  that  longing ;  since  if  an  ardent  longing  be  restrained, 
the  wind  becomes  vitiated.  Such  vitiated  wind,  travelling  through 
the  inner  parts  of  the  body,  may  cause  the  destruction  of  the 
■  fcetus  in  the  womb,  or  lead  to  diverse  deformities  of  limb.16  * 

In  the  fourth  month,  the  fcetus  becomes  consistent  or  compact. 
Hence,  the  mother,  at  this  stage  of  her  pregnancy,  feels  a  sensation 
ofheaviness  all  over  the  body.1' 

In  the  fifth  month,  the  growth  becomes  greater  than  in  the 
previous  months,  of  both  flesh  and  blood  of  the  fcetus.  Hence  the 
mother  at  that  stage  becomes  lean  herself.18 

In  the  sixth  month,  the  growth  becomes  greater  than  in  the 
previous  months  of  both  strength  and  complexion  of  the  foetus. 
Hence,  the  mother  sustains  a  diminution  of  both  strength  and 
complexion  at  this  stage  of  her  pregnancy.18 

In  the  seventh  month  the  fcetus  is  all  at  once  equipt  with  all 
characteristics  (of  a  human  being).  Hence,  the  mother,  at  that 
stage  of  her  pregnancy,  becomes  exceedingly  pale  and  languid.,ct 


*  If  she  ardently  longs  for  anything  that  is  injurious,  even  an  injurious 
thing  may  be  given  to  her  by  neutralising  its  virtue  or  virtues,  such  neutrali¬ 
sation  to  be  effected  by  uniting  some  beneficial  object  with  the  injurious 
object.  For  example,  if  the  mother  longs  for  ghee,  it  may  be  given  to  her. 
-  although  ghee  is  heavy  to  digest,  mixing  with  it  salt  and  lemon  juice. — T. 

tGangSdhara  reads  ‘  kSntatama  ’  instead  of  ‘  klantatama.  ’  If  his 
reading  be  adopted,  the  meaning  would  be  that  the  mother  becomes  very 
handsome  in  the  seventh  month.  From  what  has  been  said,  however,  in 
the  previous  aphorisms  it  would  appear  that  the  growth  of  the  fcetus  in  a 
,  particnlar  direction  leads  to  the  attenuation  of  the  mother  in  that  direction. 
,  Hence,  if  the  foetus  receives  in  the  seventh  month  an  accession  of  all  the 
.  characteristics,  the  mother  cannot  but  lose  at  that  period  in  all  directions. 
■On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  period  during  pregnancy  when  the  mother 
becomes  exceedingly  handsome.  The  seventh  is  the  month  which  is  gener¬ 
ally  regarded  as  most  favourable  to  the  growth  of  the  mother’s  beauty.— T. 


CHARAKA.  SAMHITA. 


In  the  eighth  month  the  foetus  draws  from  the  mother,  and  the 
mother  draws  from  the  foetus,  through  the  juice-bearing  ducts, 
again  and  again,  that  ingredient  ( dhatu )  which  is  called 
ojas.  Indeed,  each  takes  it  from  the  other  (at  successive  moments 
of  time). 

This  takes  place  in  consequence  of  the  fulness  of  the  child  in 
the  womb. 

Hence  is  it  that  the  mother,  at  this  stage  of  her  pregnancy, 
frequently  becomes  filled  with  joy  and  as  frequently  with  grief. 
The  same  becomes  the  condition  of  the  child  in  the  womb.  Hence, 
at  this  stage  of  pregnancy,  the  life  of  the  child  in  the  womb 
becomes  fraught  with  danger  in  consequence  of  the  inconstancy - 
of  the  ojas. 

Beholding  this,  the  eighth  month  is  not  counted  by  those 
who  are  skilled  (in  the  science  of  obstetrics).31* 

When  the  eighth  month  has  elapsed  by  even  one  day,— when,, 
indeed,  the  ninth  month  has  been  attained,  they  say  that  from 
this  to  the  tenth  month  is  the  time  for  delivery. 

This  is  the  time  for  delivery. 


*  Many  errors  occur  in  this  passage,  as  printed  in  most  editions.  GangS- 
dhara  reproduces  it  correctly.  After  1  Rasavahinibhih  ’  in  the  first  clause, 
some  texts  read  ‘  samvahinibhih. 1  This  is  scarcely  necessary.  After  the 
Word  ‘glana  1  in  the  third  clause,  occur  the  words  ‘  tatha  cha  garbhah.  ’ 
These  are  wrongiy  omitted  in  many  editions.  Again,  for  ‘  Janmavyapattimat  ’ 
some  editions  read  ‘  Janmavyapat.  ’  The  sense  remains  unaltered  what¬ 
ever  reading  is  preferred,  although  the  former  seems  to  assist  the  cause  of 
perspicacity. 

What  the  Rishi  says  here  is  this  :  in  the  eighth  month,  the  mother  sucks 
the  ojas  of  the  child,  and  the  child  also  sucks  the  ojas  of  the  mother.  They 
go  on  doing  this  at  successive  moments  of  time.  As  the. ojas  is  the  most 
substantial  of  all  the  dhatus  or  ingredients  of  the  body,  when  the  mother 
draws  the  ojas  of  the  child,  she  becomes  cheerful  in  consequence  of  an 
accession  to  her  body  of  this  material.  The  child,  at  such  a  time,  losing 
'.his  ojas,  becomes  languid,  and  drooping.  Similarly,  when  the  child  sucks  in 
:the  ojas  of  the  mother,  the  effects  are  reversed . 

The  eighth  month  is  “  not  counted  :  ”  this  means  that  in  consequence 
of  the  very  great  danger  there  is  to  both  mother  and  childj  physicians  do 
.not  hope  for. the  birth  of  the  child  unless  and  until  the  eighth  month  is 
past.— T, 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


750 

After  this,  delivery  would  be  regarded  abnormal.*84 

The  womb  is  the  place  of  the  foetus. 

It  is  in  this  way  (viz.,  as  described  above)  that  it  grows  suc¬ 
cessively  in  the  womb.88 

.  Through  the  worth  of  the  several  entities  and  incidents, 
beginning  with  mother,  which  cause  conception,  as  also  through 
the  faultlessness  of  (the  mother’s  conduct),  through  ripeness  of 
time  and  the  development  which  Nature  brings,  the  foetus  grows 
in  the  Womb,  aided  by  the  oily  substances  secreted  by  the  mother’s 
internal  organism  and  the  vapours  generated  therefrom  by  heat 


♦The  rending  ‘adacamanmasat  ’  is  preferable  to  *  5dwadacamas5t.  ’ 
The  first  means — ‘  till  the  tenth  month  the  second, — ‘  till  the  twelfth 
month.  1  Gangadhara  adheres  to  the  second  reading  and  quotes  Sucruta 
in  support.  The  fact,  however,  is  that  by  accepting  the  first  reading 
one  makes  Charaka  agree  with  the  judgment  of  the  House  of  Lords  in 
what  is  known  as  the  Gardiner  Peerage  case.  That  judgment  has 
been  accepted  throughout  the  civilised  world  It .  should  be  known  that 
in  the  Gardiner  Peerage  case  medical  experts  from  almost  evey  European 
country  were  examined  by  both  parties.  As  might  be  expected,  there 
was  considerable  difference  of  opinion.  Each  witness  spoke  from  his 
own  experience.  Some  set  down  the  limit  of  gestation  as  even  48  weeks. 
These  cases,  however,  were  admitted  to  be  exceptional.  The  result  of  the 
medical  testimony,  as  analysed  by  the  aid  of  legal  acumen,  was  though  40 
weeks  were  generally  said  to  be  the  period  of  gestation,  yet  44  weeks  were 
declared  to  be  the  longest  limit.  The  infant  having  been  born  more  than 
44  weeks  after  the  date  on  which  its  parents  had  separated,  was  declared 
illegitimate.  Conception  is  generally  counted  from  the  last  appearance  of 
the  menses.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  conception  may  arise  from  insemination 
immediately  before  the  date  of  the  next  menstrual  flow,  viz.,  that  whose  non- 
appearance  first  leads  to  the  supposition  that  there  has  been  conception. 
Hence,  to  40, weeks  calculated  from  the  last  menses,  4  weeks  fairly  admit'  of 
being  added,  as  pointed  out  by  the  attorney-general  and  as  admitted  by  all 
the  medical  witnesses  in  the  Gardiner  Peerage  case. 

Chakrapani  adopts  the  reading  which  gives  10  months  as  the  limit  of 
gestation.  He  admits  that  Sucruta  assigns  12  months  as  the  limit,  but  he 
regards  the  experience  of  Sucruta  to  have  been  very  exceptional. 

There  is  a  popular  addage  in  India  which  assigns  10  months  and  10  days 
as  the  usual  period  of  gestation.  This  comes  up  to  44  weeks,  taking  a 
month  to  consist  of  only  30  days.  i 


charaka  samhita. 


7m 

In  consequence,  however,  of  the  demerits  of  the  several  incidents 
and  circumstances,  beginning  with  mother,  which  cause  conception* 
conception  does  not  arise.34* 

If  those  circumstances  which  have  been  laid  down  as  the 
cause  of  the  growth  of  the  foetus  in  the  womb  be  otherwise,  the 
foetus  meets  with  destruction  or  a  premature  birth  takes  place.33 

We  shall  now  expound  the  causes  in  consequence  of  which 
the  child  in  the  womb,  instead  of  being  wholly  destroyed,  becomes 
subject  to  deformities.36 

Either  one  or  more  than  one  limb,  among  those  that  are  mother- 
bom,  becomes  subject  to  deformity,  of  that  embryo  which  a  woman  . 
gets,  at  a  time  when  her  faults,  becoming  excited  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  her  indulgence  in  such  food  and  drink  and  practices 


Gangadhara  adopts  the  reading  which  assigns  12  months  as  the  period  of 
gestation.  He  is  blinded  by  the  authority  of  Sucruta  Having  been  a  very 
modern  physician,  he  ought  to  have  known  better.  It  is  curious  to  see  how 
Mahomedan  legists  have  settled  the  question  I  quote  from  a  hand-book 
of  Mahomedan  Law  by  Mr.  Justice  Ameer  Ali  of  the  Bengal  High  Court. 
“  There  is  great  difference  as  to  the  maximum  (of  the  period  of  gestation)  The 
Sunni  legists  hold  two  years  to  be  the  longest  period.  The  Shiahs  consider, 
ten  months  as  the  maximim  limit,  which  in  exceptional  cases  may  extend  to 
twelve  months. 

“  In  Algeria,  the  Sunni  doctors  have  adopted  ten  months  as  the  longest 
period  of  gestation  and  it  may  be  regarded  as  furnishing  the  modern  rule.  ”  ; 

.  *  Some  texts  read  ativrittasaushthavat’  for  *  vrittasaushthathavat.  ■  The; 
word  '  ati 1  is  surplusage.  It  is  not  necessary.  ‘  Samp  it  ’  (the  base  of  the; 
ablative  ‘  Sampadah,  ’),  literally,  means  *  wealth  ’  or  1  affluence.  ’  Gangadhara 
explains  it  as  ‘  avaigunyat,  ’  meaning  faultlessiiess  or  the  absence  of  demerits. 
What  is  meant  is  worth,  or  excellence,  or  merits.  It  is  through  the  worth  or 
excellence'  of  those  entities  or  incidents  which  cause  conception,  viz.,  mother* 
lather,  and;the  rest,  that  the  foetus  grows  in  the  womb. 

‘  Vrittasaushthavat  ’  means,  the  propriety  or  excellence  of  the  mother’s 
conduct  after,  of  course,  conception  has  set  in.  If  she.  conducts  herself  pro¬ 
perly  in  everything,  that  is,  observes  such  practices  as  are  beneficial  and 
abstains  from  such  as  are  injurious,  it  is  then  only  that  the  foetus  can  grow. 


75?; 


CHARAKA.  SAM  HIT  A, 


as  have  been  declared  to  b3  capable  of  exciting  them,  and  coursing 
through  her  body,  vitiate  both  her  blood  and  the  womb.3'* 

Verily,  deformity  invades  those  limbs  in  whose  seed,  or  in 
any  portion,  of  whose  seed,  the  faults  become  excited.?7! 

:  When  that  particular  portion  of  the  seed  (in  the  mother’s  ; 
womb)  from  which  the  (child’s)  blood  and  the  (child’s')  womb 
grow,  become  vitiated,  the  consequence  is  that  the  mother 
begets  a  barren  child  (daughter).’8 


Kalaparinama  ’  is  effect  or  ripeness  of  time.  It  will  be  noted  that 
Hindu  physicians  always  count  time  as  a  distinct  factor  in  the  development; 
of  everything.  Thus,  in  the  development  of  disease  as  also  in  its  cure,  time 
is  as  powerful  an  agent  as  any  other. 

‘  Swabbavasiddhi,  ’  which  I  render  1  development  of  Nature  ’  has  refer¬ 
ence,  as  Chakrapani  explains,  to  the  effect  of  the  unexhausted  acts  of  previ¬ 
ous  lives. 

so  <  Upasucha  ’•  and  ‘  upasweda  ’  are  technical  words.  The  first  means  the 
oily  substances  secreted  by  the  womb  or  the  internal  organism  of  the  mother, 
By  the  second  is  implied  the  vapours  generated  from  these  oily  substances 
by  the  action  of  heat.— T. 

*  This,  which  is  as  literal  a  version  of  the  original  as  possible,  will  give  the 
reader  some  idea  of  the  construction  or  collocation  of  the  original.  In  the 
first  place,  the  passage  is  variously  read,  though  the  differences  of  reading 
do  not  much  affect  the  meaning  I  reject  all  the  words-  which  occur  iff 
Gangadhara’s  text  between  ‘  upasarpantah  *  and  1  panitagarbhacayam  •’  (the 
accusative  of  ‘  dushyanti.  ’)  ‘  Tadeyam  garbham  ’  is  incorrect  j  it  should  be 
‘  tada  yam  garbham.  1 

Then  ‘ tada  garbhasya  ’  should  be  ‘  tadgarbhasya.  ’  In  brief,  what  is  said 
here  is  this  :  if  a  woman  indulges  in  such  food  and  drink  and  practices  as 
have  been  declared  to  be  provocative  of  the  faults:  («>.,  wind,  bile  and  phlegm), 
then  her  faults  become  excited.  These,  coursing  through  her  body,  vitiate 
both  her  blood  and  womb.  The  consequence  of  this  is  that  if  she  conceives 
at  such  a  time,  some  one  or  more  limbs,  among  those  that  are  mother-born, 
of  the  embryo  become  subject  to  deformities.— T. 

t  ‘  Seed’  it  will  be  remembered,  is  the  mother’s  blood  mixed  with  the 
father’s  semen.  It  is  from  this  seed  that  the  embryo  or  foetus  or  the  child 
grows.  Particular  limbs  grow  from  particular  portions  of  the  seed.  The  theory 
is  that  the  blood  which  the  mother 'contributes  consists  not  of  homogeneous 
but  of  different  kinds  of  matter!  The  same  is  the  case  with  the  semen  which 
the  father  contributes.  Particular  parts  or1  elefnetfts  of  the  seed  generate 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


'  753 


When,  again,  in  her  menstrual  blood  (that  forms  a  component 
part  of  the  seed  in  her  womb)  that  portion  or  element  from  which 
'  the  (child’s)  womb  is  generated  becomes  vitiated,  then  she  begets 
a  child  (daughter)  who  is  sure  to  bring  forth  dead  children. *!9 

When,  however,  that  portion  of  the  seed  from  which  the 
child’s  blood  and  the  womb  are  generated  is  partially  vitiated, 
and  when  a  portion  only  of  that  part  of  the  seed  from  which  the 
distinguishing  organs  of  femininity  grow  becomes  vitiated,  then 
she  begets  a  child  in  which  the  features  of  femininity  predominate 
but  which,  in  reality,  is  not  a  female  but  only  a  hermaphrodite, 
called  “  Wrtta.  ”  Such  a  child  is  called  “  Strivyapat  ”  (*.  e.}  a 
break-down  of  femininity).^ 

Similarly,  in  consequence  of  defects  in  the  father’s  semen, 
deformities  appear  in  those  limbs  of  the  child  which  are  father-born. 
•  fWhehj  again,  that  portion  of  the  father’s  semen  from  which  the 
(child's)  semen  is  generated,  becomes  vitiated,  then  he  begets  a 
"  child'  (son)  who  becomes  incapable  of  begetting  living  children.41  tE 

.  When  that  portion,  which  generates  semen  in  the  child,  of  the 
father’s  semen  occurring  in  the  seed,  as  also  that  portion  of  the  seed 
;  which  generates  the  signs  ’  of  masculinity,  both  become  vitiated, 


i  particular  limbs  of  the  foetus  or  the  child.  What  is  stated  here  is  that  if  the 
.  faults,  vie.,  wind,  bile  and  phlegm,  becoming  excited,  vitiate  the  blood, pr 
the  semen,  wholly  or  in  part,  then  those  limbs  which  grow  from  the  blood 
or  the  semen,  or  from  the  particular  part  or  element  of  the  blood  or  of  the 
,  semen  which  has  been  affected,  become  subject  to  deformity.  The  skin, 
the  heart,  the  blood,  the  flesh,  the  adeps,  the  navel,  the  womb,  6-'c.,grow  from 
the  blood  which  the  mother  contributes.  The  father:born  limbs  are  hair, 
^.teeth,  bones,  sinews  &c.  If  the  faults  vitiate,  .that  portion  of  the  mother’s 
,  blood  in  the  seed  from  which  the  skin  grows,  or  that  portion  of  the  father’s 
.  semen:  in-  the  seed  from  which  the  bones  grow,  the  consequence  .will  be  that 
.  the  skin  and  the  bones  will  become  subject  to  deformity, — T.  .  .  ... 

!  *  By  the  words  inserted  within  the  parantlieses  I  have  •endeavoured’ to 

hake  the  sense  clearer  without  interfering  with  the  literal  character  of ‘the 
version.  The  aphorism  consists  of  two  parts  :  the:  first  explains  the  circums¬ 
tances  under  which  a  barren  daughter  is  brought  forth  ;  the  second  explains 
i,  the  circumstances, .  under  which  a  daughter;  called  ‘  Putipraja,  ’  is  brought 
r.iorth,.  that :  is,,  .a.  d.aughtet  who  does  not  succeed  in  brii  ging  .'forth-diving 
children.— T.  ;  ...  ; 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


C<7S4 

-  then  the  father  begets  a  child  who  without  being 'of  the  masculine 
sex  has  the  signs  of  masculinity  predominating  in  him.  Such  a 
child  is  called  by  the  name  of  ‘  Trinapulika.  ’  He  is  regarded  as 
a  caricature  of  masculinity.*42 

By  this  exposition  of  the  defects  of  mother-born  and  father- 
born  limbs,  the  defects  also  of  limbs  that  grow  from  assimilation 
,  (of  food  and  drink),  from  the  juices,  and  from  the  mind,  are 
explained.-)-43 

As  regards  the  soul  (or  Self),  it  is  immutable  (i.  e ,  incapable 
of  modification.  It  is  the  highest  (of  all  entities).  It  exists  in 
all  beings  without  marks  of  differentiation.  In  consequence 
of  the  differences  of  mind  as  also  of  body  (in  different  beings), 
differences  are  observable  in  the  soul  (o-  Self)444 


•  Like  the  word  1  femininity,  ’  the  word  ‘  masculinity  ’  is  needed  for  pur¬ 
poses  of  brevity,  that  ia,  for  avoiding  periphrasis.  Such  a  derivative  connot 
be  regarded  as  wrong.  ‘Femininity,  has  been  adopted  long  ago.  Why  not 
*  mascniinity,  ’  especially  wheu  the  need  for  such  a  word  is  distinctly  felt  ?  By 
‘  Tirnapulika  ’  is  meant  a  male  hermaphrodite,  that  is,  one  with  the  signs  or 
indications  of  masculinity  prevailing  or  predominating  in  tim. — T. 

f  It  has  been  explained  in  the  previous  Lesson  that  of  the  diverse  limbs 
and  organs  of  the  foetus  or  child  some  are  mother-born  ;  some  are  father-born  ; 
some  have  their  origin  in  the  food  and  drink  assimilated  by  the  parents  ;  some 
in  the  juices  ;  and  some  in  the  mind.  The  fact  is,  the  classes  are  not  exclu- 

■  sive  of  each  other  or  One  another.  Accordingly,  when  the  defects  are  explained 
-  of  limbs  that  are  born  of  the  mother  and  of  the  father,  those  of  the  other 
‘  kinds  do  not  require  further  explanation.— T. 

J  It  will  be  remembered  that  amoag  the  possessions  of  the  foetus  or  child, 

■  some  have  been  declared  to  be  soul-born.  These  are  birth  in  particular 
orders  of  Being,  knowledge  of  Self,  mind,  the  organs  of  sense,  respiratiou  t>r 

■life, -features  or  shape,  voice,  complexion,  pleasure  and  pain,  desire  and  aversion, 
&c.  As  regards  its  own  nature,  the  Soul  or  Self  is  incapable  of  any  change 
or  modification.  It  is  immutable  and  is,  again,  the  highest  of  all  thingB.  As 
‘-existing  in  this  being  and  that,  there  is  in  reality  no  difference  in  it.  The 
difference,  or- rather,  differences,  which  are  observable  in  the  Soul  as  residing 
,  in  different  beings,  are  entirely  due  to  the  differences  between  mind  and 
,  mind  and  betweeu  body  and  body.  In  reality,  it  ia  the  same  Soul  or  Self  that 
.  pervades  the  whole  universe  of  Being. 

In  explaining  the  defects  of  mother-born  and  father-born  limbs,  &c.,  of  the 
.  foetus  or  the  child,  the  Rielii  observes  that  the  Soul  or  Self,  bring  the  same  in 
4(1  Beings,  there  is  no  change  in.it  however  . much  may  the  minds  and  bodies 
which  spring  from  it  differ  from  one  another.— T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


755 


In  this  connection  it  should  be  stated  that  there  are  three 
faults  of  the  body.  They  are  Wind,  Bile,  and  Phlegm.  (When 
excited)  they  vitiate  the  body  *4S 

Again,  the  faults  of  the  mind  are  two.  These  are  Rajas  (Pas¬ 
sion)  and  Tamas  (Darkness).  These  two  vitiate  the  mind. 

From  mind  and  body,  when  they  are  vitiated,  defects  (and 
malformations)  occur  (in  the  foetus  or  child  in  the  womb). 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  two  ( viz .,  mind  and  body)  be  not 
vitiated,  (that  is,  if  they  remain  sound,)  no  defect  or  malformation 
occurs  (in  the  foetus  or  child).4” 

It  has  been  said  before  that  the  body  is  of  four  kinds,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  order  (or  class)  in  which  it  is  born  (viz.,  viviparous, 
oviparous,  filth-born  and  vegetables). 

The  mind,  verily,  is  of  three  kinds,  viz.,  I.  pure,  2.  predomi¬ 
nated  by  passion,  and  3.  predominated  by  darkness.  Amongst 
these,  that  (mind)  which  is  pure,  is  (otherwise)  called  faultless, 
because  of  its  being  made  up  of  Goodness. 

That  which  is  predominated  by  Passion  is  regarded  as  faulty, 
because  of  its  being  made  up  of  wrath  (or  passion).  So,  that 
which  is  predominated  by  Darkness  is  also  regarded  as  faulty, 
because  of  its  being  made  up  of  stupefaction  (or  heed  less  ness).!4' 


*  This  part  of  the  lesson  is  devoted  to  the  explanation  of  those  causes 
which  lead  to  defects  and  malformations  in  the  embryo,  the  foetus,  or  the 
phjld.  Accordingly,  the  mention  of  wiud,  bile,  and  phlegm,  which  when  ex¬ 
cited  vitiate  the  body,  is  apposite.  These  are  called  faults ,  because  (when 
excited)  they  lead  tu  the  appearance  of  faults  or  defects,  i.  e.  ailmentsj'iu  the 
physical  organism. — T. 

t  Seme  texts  read  ‘  Kalyanancatwat,  ’  ‘  roshancatwat,  ’  and  ‘  niohancatwat  * 
instead  of  ‘  Kalyangatwat,  ’  ‘  roshSngatwat  1  and  ‘  mohangatnat.  ’  The  fact 

is  •»!(§»>  for'  atica’  it*  the  eorre  t  mujirg-,— T, 


756 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


Of  these  three  kinds  of' mind,  the  points  of  difference  are 
innumerable  in  consequence  of  the  degrees  (of  Goodness  and 
Passion  and  Darkness  which  characterise  them),  as  also  of  the 
differences  in  respect  of  bodies,  the  differences,  too,  of  the  orders 
of  Being  to  which  those  bodies  belong,  and  (lastly)  the  union 
of  all  these  with  one  another.* 

The  body  follows  the  mind,  and  the  mind  follows  the  body.f 

Hence,  a  few  only  of  the  different  varieties  of  mind,  we  shall, 
for  the  sake  of  illustration,  expound,  by  referring  to  families  or 
groups.*8t 

Thus  one  that  is  pure  (in  body  and  mind ),  that  is  devoted  to 
truth,  that  has  subjugated  his  soul,  that  gives  unto  all  their  dues, 


*  ‘  Bhedagram  ’  means  points  or  measure  of  difference ‘  agram  ’  implies 
points  ;  also  measure  according  to  Medini.  Chakrapani  takes  it  as1,  equiva¬ 
lent  to  measure.  What  is  stated  here  is  that  the  differences  between  the  three 
classes  of  mind  are  innumerable.  Four  reasons  are  assigned  for  this.  The 
'first  is '  taratUmayogat,  1  meaning  in  consequence  of  the  degrees  of  goodness, 
of  passi’  ii,  and  of  darkness,  that  characterise  the  several  classes  of  mind.  The 
secot  d  reason  is  ‘  cariraviceshaly  ’  meaning  *  the  differences  of  bodies.  ’  Cha- 
krapSni  explains  this  as  implying  the  differences  which  age,  viz.,  infancy, 
youth,  manhood,  and  decrepitude,  bring  about  or  create.  The  third  reason  is 
‘  yoniviceshSt,  ’  meaning  ‘  the  differences  in  respect  of  the  orders  of  Being 
to  which  bodies  belong.  ’  Some  bodies  are  human  ;  seme  are  equine;  some 
bovine  ;  some  lupine  ;  some  feline,  &c.  Among  human  bodies,  again,  there 
are  iunnmerable  (lasses,  as  dependent  on  strength,  stature,  complexion,  &c 
The  last  reason  is  ‘  ai  yanyauuvidbanat.  ’  This  means  that  the  three  previous 
reasons  exist  ill  a  state  of  onion  with  each  other,  or  one  another  ;  in  other 
words,  the  permutations  and  combinations  of  the  first  three  with  one  another. 
Each  of  tlie  three  being'  of  infinite  variety,  the  number  of  their  permutations 
and  combinations  cannot  but  be  infinite.— T. 

t  What  is  meant  by  this  is  that  the  nature  of  the  body  determin ns ,-the 
mind,  and  the  nature  of  the  mind  determines  the  body.  Tiie  two  are  entirely 
dependent  oil  each  other  and  reguiate  each  other’s  nature. 

I  ‘  Auukabhiuirddecena  ’  and  1  Auukasadricyabhiifirddecena  ’  are  the 
two  readings.  Chakrapani  adopts  the  former.  ‘  Anuka  ’  here  means  ‘  family  * 
or  ‘.race,  ’  or  ‘class.’  Wbat  the  Rislii  says  is. that  the  distinctions  being 
innumerable,  be  would  speak  of  only  a  few,  for  purposes  of  illustration,  by 
I'tferi ing  to  particular. families,  <  rgroupg,  or  classes,— T 


CHAR  A  KA ...  SAM  HIT  A.  757 

that  is  equipt  with  knowledge,  science,  power  of  speech  as  also 
of  reply,  that  is  endued  with  a  good  memory,  that  is  bereft  of 
lust  and  wrath  and  cupidity  and  pride  and  heedlessness  and  envy 
and  melancholy,  and  that  behaves  with  equality  towards  all  crea¬ 
tures,  should  be  known  as  possessed  of  a  ‘  Brahmya  ’  mind. *49 

One  that  offers  sacrifices,  that  is  devoted  to  study  (of  the 
Vedas),  that  is  observant  of  vows  and  Homo,  and  Brahinacharyya, 
that  is  attentive  to  guests,  and  that  has  subjugated  arrogance  and 
pride  and  attachment  and  aversion  and  heedlessness  and  cupidity 
and  wrath,  and  that  is  endued  with  the  power  of  reply  and  science 
and  the  power  of  apprehension,  should  be  known  as  possessed 
of  a  mind  like  that  of  the  Rishis.t'’ 

One  who  is  possessed  of  affluence,  whose  words  are  accepted 
by  others,  who  performs  sacrifices  (in  honour  of  the  deities),  who  is 
endued  with  courage  and  energy,  who  is  possessed  of  glory,  who 
is  never  fatigued  in  acting,  who  is  endued  with  foresight,  and 
who  pursues  duty,  wealth,  and  pleasure  (in  judicious  proportions), 
is  said  to  be  endued  with  a  mind  like  that  of  Indra.J51 

One  who  does  not  transgress  by  his  conduct  the  limits  of 
duty,  who  promptly  does  what  should  be  done  in  view  of  what 
has  happened,  who  is  irresistible,  who  is  ready  for  great  acts,  who 


*  ‘  Saravibhagin  ’  literally,  is  one  who  divides  or  distributes  equally  what 
hethas  amongst  all  ;  that  is,  one  who  gives  unto  each  what  is  his  or  ln  r  due  ; 
in  other  worde,  a  person  of  extremely  fair  behaviour. 

By  ‘  BiSbmya  mind  *  is  meant  a  mind  that  is  striving  after  the  acquisition 
of  Brahma  or  the  Supreme  Sou1,  and  has  made  a  fair  progress  towards  it. — T. 

t  By  ‘  Brahmacharjya  ’  is  meant  the  practice  of  cehb icy  in  particular,  or 
abstention  from  sexual  congress.  According  to  all  authorities,  a  person  indulg¬ 
ing  in  such  congress  at  the  prescribed  seasons  but  abstaining  from  it  at  other 
times,  is  not  regarded  as  swerving  from  Brahraacharyya.  Attentive  to  .*  Atithis,  ’ 
or  mindful  of  guests  ;  that  is,  observant  of  the  duties  of  hospitality.— T. 

J‘  Aicwaryya  ’ — the  status  of  an  ‘  Icwara  ’—is,  literally,  lordship.  It  im¬ 
plies  affluence  or  wealth,  with  power  extending  over  others, 

‘  AdeyavSkya  ’  is  one  whose  words  are  accepted  hy  others  :  one,  that  is 
who  is  regarded  as  an  authority  ;  or  one  whose  counsels  are  sought  by  others. 

‘  Tejas’  here,  as  explained  by  GangSdhara,  is  ‘  dipti  ’  or  brilliance;  Pro¬ 
bably,  glory.— T. 


758 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


is  endued  with  a  good  memory,  who  is  possessed  of  affluence, 
and  who  is  bereft  of  attachment  and  aversion  and  heedlessness, 
is  said  to  be  endued  with  a  mind  like  that  of  Yama  (the  great  judge 
of  the  dead).*12 

One  who  is  brave,  patient,  pure  (in  body  and  mind),  who  hates 
all  that  is  impure,  who  performs  sacrifices  (in  honour  of  the  deities), 
who  takes  pleasure  in  all  sorts  of  sports  on  water,  who  is  never 
fatigued  in  work,  and  who  knows  where  to  be  angry  and  where 
to  show  favour,  should  be  known  as  endued  with  a  mind  after  the 
manner  of  Varuna’s.f5® 

One$  who  knows  when  to  abstain  from  enjoyments  and  when 
to  indulge  in  them,  who  is  possessed  of  a  family  (consisting  of 
relatives  and  dependants),  who  indulges  in  pleasure,  who  pursues 
duty,  wealth,  and  pleasure  judiciously,  who  is  pure  (in  body  and 
mind),  and  who  indulges  in  wrath  and  shows  favour  openly,  should 
be  regarded  as  possessed  of  a  mind  like  that  of  Kuvera.J5'1 

One  who  is  fond  of  dancing  and  singing  and  instrumental 
music  and  hymns,  who  is  well-versed  in  poetry,  narratives  of 
interesting  events,  history,  and  Puranas,  who  is  attached  to  sweet 
scents,  garlands  (of  flowers),  fragrant  unguents,  costly  and  beautiful 
robes,  and  the  companionship  of  beautiful  women,  and  who  is  reft 


*  1  Lekh5sthavritta  ’  is  explained  by  ChakrapSni  as  one  who  does  not  trans¬ 
gress,  by  his  conduct,  the  limits  of  duty  as  laid  down  in  the  scriptures. 

‘  PrSptakSrina  is  one  who  does  what  should  be  done  in  view  of  the 
.emergency  that  lias  arisen.;  in  other  words,  a  man  of  decision. 

Chakrapani  reads  ‘  asampraharyyam  ;  for  1  asamharyyam.  ’  The  first 
means  ‘  incapable  of  being  beaten, ’ t.  e.,  invincible. — T. 

+  Varuna  fs  the  lord  of  waters.  ‘  One  who  takes  pleasure  in  sports  on 
water’  would  seem  to  indicate  a  naval  hero.  In  ancient  times,  the  Hindus 
made  sea-voyages  and  fought  naval  battles  for  protecting  their  trade. — T. 

t  Kuvera.  is  the  lord  of  treasures,  and  the  friend  and  companion  of 
Mahadeva.  He  is  described  as  owning  a  splendid  palace  and  always  indul¬ 
ging  in  diverse  sports.— T. 


■  CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


7  59 


of  envy  and  malice,  should  be  known  as  possessed  of  a  mind  like 
that  of  the  Gandharvas.#ss 

Thus  should  be  known  the  seven  varieties  of  mind  called  Pure. 
Amongst  these  that  which  has  been  called  the  1  Brahmya  ’  mind 
is  regarded  as  the  Purest  in  consequence  of  its  perfect  (or  complete) 
union  with  what  is  good  and  auspicious.!56 

One  who.  is.  brave,  and  fierce,  and  incapable  of  bearing  the 
;pfbspefity  of  others,  who  is  endutd  with  affluence,  who  is  glutton¬ 
ous  in  respect  of  food  and  drink,  who  is  terrible,  who-  is  bereft  of 
compassion,  and  who  is  mindful  of  only  his  own  self,  should  be 
regarded  as  possessed  of  a  mind  like  that  of  an  Asura.j5' 

One  who  is  incapable  of  bearing  any  humiliation,  ,  who.  nurses 
his  anger  for  a  long  time,  who  strikes  at  his  foe,  taking  advantage 
of  his  weakness,  who  is  cruel,  who  is  gluttonous,  who  is  excessively 
fond  of  animal  food,  who  can  sleep  and  labour  for  long  hours, 


*‘Ullapaka’,  as  explained  by  Chakiapani,  means  ‘  hymn^.  ’  Hymns  in 
honour  of  the  deities  are  sung  in  accompaniment  with,  or  without  the  aid  of 
instrumental  music.  To  this  day,  Bhajans  (hymns  in  honour  of  the  deities) 
constitute  the  most  delightful  mus  c. 

Akhyayika  m-ans  narratives  or  stories  f  aught  with  moral  instruction. 
The  facts  may  or  may  not  be  true 

‘  Itihasa  ’  means  histories  or  fables.  The  Puranas  are  ‘  Itih5sas.  ’  The 
separate  mention  of  ‘Puranas’  seems  to  imply  that  ‘  Itihasa’  is  used  here 
in  the  sense  of  fables. 

‘  Puranas,  ’  as  defined  by  Rhetoricians,  are  accounts  of  fivedistinct  sub¬ 
jects,  >i2.,  i  the  .reation  of  the  universe  or  cosmogony ;  2.  secondary  crea¬ 
tion,  meaning  the  evolution  of  beings  and  races  from  the  individual  types 
first  created  by  the  Supreme  Lord  ;  3.  genealogies  of  great  dynasties  ;  4. 
cycles  of  ages  commencing  from  the  different  Manus  ;  and.  accounts  of 
dynasties  of  kings,  Rishis  and  gr  at  men.  There  are  altogether.  18  principal 
Puranas,  with  many  subsidiary  ones  called  “  Upaparanas.  T. 

1-  Some  texts  read  1  Kalyfmftnctwat  tat  samyog&ttu  ’  This  is  >  irfcorrect. 
Chakrapani  gives  the  correct  reading,  ‘is.,  Kalykntmcasya  samyagfit  T. 

| 1  Atmapujaka,’  literally  implies  one  who  worships  his  own  self ;  e., 

who  is  always  mindful  of  his  own  concern0,  and  never,  makes  even  the  slight¬ 
est  sacrifice  for  others. — T. 


7<5o  CHARAKA  AAMHLTA. 

and  who  is  full  of  malice,  should  be  regarded  as  possessed  of  a 
mind  like  that  of  a  Ral;shasa.»58 

One  who  has  great  aversion  for  toil  or  exertion,  who  is  hen¬ 
pecked,  Vho  is  fond  of  passing  his  time  in  places  of  retirement 
in  the  company  of  females,  who  is  impure  (in  body  and  mind), 
who  feels  an  aversion  for  those  that  are  pure  (in  body  and  mind), 
who  takes  a  pleasure  in  frightening  timid  people  (but  takes  care 
to  avoid’  the  braVe),  and  who  indulges  in  abnormal  food  and 
drink  and  sports,  should  be  known  as  possessed  of  a  mind  like 
that  of  a  Picacha.f59 

One  who  is  wrathful,  who  is  malicious,  who  is  endued  with 
courage,  who  seldom  yields  to  fear,  who  is  fierce,  who  is  capable 
of  much  toil,  who  is  capable  of  readily  understanding. the  secret 
counsels  of  others,  and  who  is  excessively  addicted  to  food  and 
sports,  should  be  known,  as  possessed  of  a  mind  like  that  of 
Snakes.}8' 


*  ‘  Cchidra-praharh  ’  is  one  who  strikes  at  his:  fee,  taking  the  latter  at  a 
disadvantage.  ‘  Cchidra  ’  is,  literally,  a  hole.  There  are  many  passages 
in  the  Hindu  scriptures,  particularly  the  Mahabharata,  which  deprecate 
the  striking  at  a  foe,  taking  him  at  a  disadvantage.  Thus  a  Foe  who  is  on 
foot  should  never  be  attacked  by  one  who  is  on  a  car,  a  horse,  or  an  ele¬ 
phant.  A  foe  who  has  not  his  coat  of  mail  on  his  body  should  not  be 
attacked  by  one  who  is  equipt  in  mail.  Or,  a  foe  on  a  car  whose  steeds 
have  become  unmanagable,  should  not  be  attacked  by  one  who  is  on  a  car 
with  managable  steeds.  A  foe  that  is  afraid,  or  is  flying  away,  or  tha  has  no 
longer,  any  offensive  and  defensive  ,  weapons,  or  that  is  asleep,  or  that  is 
engaged  in  saying  his  prayers  or  cooking  his  food,  or  that  has  fasted,  &c„ 
should  never  be  attacked.  The  code  of  chivalry  that  prevailed  arilong  the 
warriors  of  ancient  India  would  .  compare  favourably  with  the  code  of 
chivalry  in  modern  Europe.— T.  ■  ■ 

t  The  qualities  enumerated  here .  would  best  explain  who  and  what  i^a 
Pic5cha.  Picachas  are  an  order  of  evil  spirits  of  inferior  power,  given  up 
to  every  kind  of  revolting  practices  and  bereft  of  everything  that  is  noble 
or  good.  They  are  supposed  to  haunt  crematoria  and  grave-yards  an  1 
other  repulsive  spots. — T. 

%  ‘Kruddham  Kruram  & c.  ’  is  the  correct  reading.  Some  editions  om  t 
‘Kruddham.’  The  fact  is,  the  qualities  mentioned  here  all  belong  to  the 
poisonous  snakes  of  India.  They  are  wrathful  and  malicious  to  a  degree. 
When  they  once  erect  their  distended  hoods  for  assailing  one  whom  they, 
take  for  a  foe,  they  know  not  what  it  is  to  fear. — T.  i. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA  >6r 

One  who  is  excessively  fond  of  eating  (and  drinking),  whose 
behaviour,  practices,  and  surroundings  are  exceedingly  miserable, 
who  is  full  of  envy,  who  is  utterly  selfish,  who  is  characterised 
by  excessive  cupidity,  and  who  is  unfit  for  action,  should  be 
known  as  possessed  of  a  mind  like  that  of  a  Preta.*61 

One  whose  lust  is  always  excited,  who  is  always  addicted  to 
food  and  drink,  who  is  restless,  who  is  incapable  of  bearing 
humiliation  or  insult,  and  who  never  lays,  by  anything  for  future 
Use,  should  be  regarded  as  possessed  of  a  mind  like  that  of 
birds.f54 

Verily,  even  thus  are  the  six  different  sorts  of  Rajas-pervaded 
mind,  in  consequence  of  the  element: of  passion  occurring  in  it.'* 

One  who  always  starts  objections  against  whatever  is  proposed, 
who  is  always  meanly  dressed,  who  is  addicted  to  censurable 
practices  and  food  and  sports  and  sexual  indulgence,  and  who  is 
addicted  to  sleep,  should  be  known  as  possessed  of  a  mind  like 
that  of -the  lower  animals/4 

One  who  is  timid,  and  foolish,  who  is  easily  allured  by  food, 
who  is  restless  (or  has  no  fixity  for  purpose),  whose  lust  and 
wrath  are  over  excited,  who  is  wandering  in  his  habits,  arid  who 
is  fond  of  water,  should  be  known  as  possessed  of  a  mind  like 
that  of  the  fishes.8SJ 

One  why  is.  idle,  who.  is  engaged;  continually, in. eating  (and 
drinking);  and  who  is  destitute  of  all  the  organs  of  the.  understand¬ 
ing,  should  be  known  as  possessed  of  the  nature  of  trees.^4 

*  ‘  Cila  ’  is  general  behaviour  or  conduct  ;  ‘  achara  ’  irihj>lies  'practices 
relating  to  food,  drink,  bath,  dress,  &c.  •  ‘  upachara,  ’  probably,  has  reference 
•‘to  one’s  surroundings.— T.- 

t  ‘  Anushaktakamam  ■'  may  be  taken  as  .  implying  one  whose  mindc  -is 

always  under  the  influence  of  desire  for  enjoyments. 

•  Asanchayinam  ’  is  one  who  is  wasteful  ;  who  spends'le  very  thing  he 

has,  without  any  thought  for  the  morrow,  like  birds  and  other  orders  of 
‘what  is  Cafied-the  lower  animal  creation.— T.  hv.*  /  :  r  r 

t  *  Anavasthitam  ’  may  mean  also  *  without  fixity  of  purpose^ —T.-  • 

The  word  which  I  render  ‘  tr.-es*  is  •  Vanaspati.  >  It  literally  Signifies 
‘  a  lord  of  the  .  fo:est,  ’  meaning,  of  course,  such  large  trees  as. the  . peepul, 
the  banian,  the  cala  ('ho/ea  robust*),  &c.  Charaka,  classifies,  .members 
of  the  vegetable  kingdom  into  four  orders,  vis.,  Vanaspati,  Qshadhi,  Vi'udha, 
and  Pratsna.  For  the  characteristics  of  t^ach.of  these,  title  ijmrasthana, 
attie,  p, — T. 


£62  CHAR  AKA  S-AMHITA. 

Verily,  even  thus  are  the  three  different  varieties  of  Tamas- 
pervaded  mind,  in  consequence  of  the  element  of  stupefaction  (or 
heedlessness)  occurring  in  it.6' 

Verily,  among  the  innumerable  distinctions  between  the  three 
kinds  of  mind  (vis.,  the  Sattwa-pervaded,  the  Raj  as-pervaded, 
and  the  Tamas-pervaded),  only  a  small  part  thereof  is  ex¬ 
plained.^ 

Of  the  pure  mind  the  seven  varieties  are  those  that  are 
after  the  manner  of  the  minds  possessed  by  Brahman  the 
Rishis,  Cakra,  Varuna,  Yama,  Kuvera,  and  the  Gandharvas.* 

Of  the  •  Rajas-pervaded  mind  the  six  varieties  are  those  that 
are  after  the  manner  of  the  minds  possessed  by  Daityas, 
Rdkshasas,  Picdchas,  Snakes,  Pretas,  and  birds.t 

Of  the  Tamas-pervaded  mind  the  three  varieties  are  those 
that  are  after  the  manner  of  the  minds  of  beasts,  fishes,  and  trees. 

The  practices  (or  conduct)  of  a  person  will,  somehow,  accord 
with  the  variety  of  mind  he  may  possess.^ 


5  It  is  difficult  to  understand  the  precise  meaning  of  the  word  ‘Brahma’ 
as  used  in  the  compound  4  Brahma- Sattwa  ”  Probably,  ‘  Brahma-Sattwa  ’ 
means  the  mind  of  a  pure  Brahmana,  taking  the  word  ‘  Brahmana  ’  in  the 
sense  of  one  who  has  knowledge  of  ‘  Brahma  ’  or  the  all-pervading  universal 
Essence.  A  ‘  Rishi  ’  may  not  necessarily  be  a  Brahmana.  One  who  is 
both  a  Brahmana  and  Rishi  is  a  ‘  Brahmarshi  1  It  will  thus  be  clear  that 
1  Brahma-Sattwa  ’  and  ‘  Rishi-Sattwa  ’  are  two  different  things. — T. 

+  In  auhorism  57,  the  word  used  is  ‘  Asura-sattwa.  1  Here,  for  ‘  Asura  ’ 
the  word  ‘  Daitya  ’  is  used.  Asuras  and  •  Daityas  are  the  same.  They 
are  step-brothers  and  opponents  of  the  deities  ‘Pretas’  are  Earth-bound 
spirits  of  the  dead. — T. 

J  The  words  ‘  Kathanch'a  yathSsattwam  upacharah  sy5.d:ti  ’  do  no: 
•present  any  difficulty.  Yet  all  the  Bengali  translators  have  misunderstood 
them  completely.  The  fact  is,  the  Rishi  has  expressly  mentioned  a  few  varie¬ 
ties  only  of  the  three  kinds  of  mind.  The  varieties  are  infinite.  Hence, 
the  general  proposition,  viz.,  one’s  practices  will  accord  with  the  kind  of 
'  Sattwa  ’  one  has.  Thus  there  are  men  who  may  be  ealled  1  Vyaglira-.-attwa  ’ 
(tiger-minded),  or  ‘  cukara-sattwa,  (hog-minded),  or  ‘  Kukkura-sattwa  ’  (dog- 
minded),  &c.  What  is  said  here  is  that  they  who  are  so,  resemble  in 
conduct  the  respective  creatures  mentioned,  -T. 


.  .  ...  ...  .  [  2  : 

Sir  Alfred  Croft  M.A.,  C.  I.  E.  Director  of  Public  Instruction.  Bengal : — 

I  have  been  greatly  entertained  as -well-  as-edified  by  the’  examination  in  part;. 
IW  of  all  the  things  which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  unde  rstand 
the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life  cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 

•  James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister',  ' Maryland,  U.  S.  A.  You  have 
undertaken  agreat  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to;  me,  deserves’ 
the  approbation  and  encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise 
men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and  taught  on'  a  topic  so  important  as  the. 
preservation  of  health  and  the  cure  of  disease.  - 

William  Emette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco ,  California.—*  *  *' 

As  each  successive  part  ,  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is', 
apparent.  *  *  *  There  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the. 

Western  mind,  occidental  medical  science,  therapeutic.  American  and  Europe-' 
an  medical  science  has  much  to  learn.  *  *  * 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia ,  U.  S.  A.  You  are  entitled  tor 
the  greatest  praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my-, 
editorial  management— will  begin  to  review  books,  etc.,  and  one  of  the  first 
to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

.  Chas.  0.  Court-man  Esq.,  St.  Louis ,  Ohio  U.  S.  A.  : — The  work  interests  ' 
me  very  highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night,  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of 
one  of  our  medical  societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively, 
curiosity  and  expressions  of  interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical 
journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical  monthly. 

Professor  E.  B  Cowell,  Cambridge:.. .A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient 
work  will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in. 
translating  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G- Eccless,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York -....The  matter  is  certainly 
of  great  interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis,  Esq-,  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,' 
Philadelphia  :  Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the 
Medical  literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq.,. ..Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  • 
its  importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it 
to  the  attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academ  of  Medicine. 

Dr.  H-  C.  Wood,  Philadelphia  :... I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interestnig  and 
sincerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be.- 
one  of  the  happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  quite  a  long 
notice  of  it  which  I  expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the' 
de  mi-official  organ  of  the  greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mittra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  of  Cashmere  :... No  medical  man’s  library  - 
should  be  without  Charaka  ;  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has 
studied  this  great  work  of  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldsberg  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-: 
Western  University  ;  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exhibition; 
:...I  am  already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take: 
occasion  to  speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary.  , 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S,  A.  :...Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possib'e  in  your  noble  undertaking. 

I  regard  it  as  very  important.  .  ' 

Abbot  H-  Buck,  Esq  ,  19  East  38th  Street,  New  York  :...  Wish  you  a-success 
in  your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T-  Gebbard.,  Derselhofber  Traise  Dramstadt  :...The  difficulties  yo« 
speak  of  in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  ' 
says  what  takes  much  lime,  comes  out .  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Phd  ,  GM  D  ,  F  R.M  S.  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A.  Editor' 
Meyer  Brothers  Druggist  :... I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  it  in  our  colu  mn» 
and  advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire 


C  3  ] 


English  writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter 
at  their  disposal.  The  work  is  certainly  highly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  general 
interest. 

Mons  H.  Le-  Soudor.  Librarie  Etrangere  174.  Boulevaise.  Saint  Germain:.,. 
Beg  to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of 
Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  :...Wish  you  every  sue  cess  that  can  recompense 
you  for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review 
which  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.A.,  MD..  PHILADELPHIA  As  I  go  over  each 
fasciculus  I  always  a- rive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians 
of  the  present  day  would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  modern  Drugs 
and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients  according  to  the  method  of  Char 
aka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and  fewer  chronic 
invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  com  pletion  of 
the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C-  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6.  Park  street,  Calcutta  :... My  dear  Pundit  Kabiratna 
Mabasaya,...!  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen 
of  whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise 
to  you  [about  drawing  their  attention  to]  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again, 
sometime  after,. ..An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note  *  *  ‘considerable  praise  is  due 
to  you  for  your  efforts  to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Faul  Burtholom,  M  D.  Philadelphia  :... I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with 
the  profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anythinS  that 
I  have  ever  met  before  in  Medical  literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord 
Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C  S-  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Maimensing  :...The 
translation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  0.  Dutfc,  Esq.  C  S  ,  0. 1.  E.  Magistrate  and  Collector  :...Your  patriotic 
labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun.  *  *  * 
You  deserve  the  especial  acknowledgements  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  H.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I-  0-  S  : — I  have  read  Charaka- Samhita  with  interest. 
It  is  marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonder¬ 
ful  to  note  the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sage  s  of  your 
country  and  how  completely  they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  wr 
moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the  enlightment  of  this  age. 

G  A.  Grierson.  Esq-  0.  S-,  Gya  :...  It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall 
be  obliged  by  yourgetting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr  Griffith  Evans,  M  D,  Brynkynall,  Bangor  North  Wales.. ..The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the 
origin,  growth  and  development  of  medical  science,  also  illustrates  some  ancient 
social  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C  S.  I.  Your  English 
translation  of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures 
of  a  great  work  before  a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevit¬ 
able  dfficulty  of  identifying  a  large  number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the 
Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as  possibly  the  best  that  could 
be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning  to  find  that  a 
knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka- 
Samhita  It  is  a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or 
young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerjee.  The  work  is  not  only  of 
value  to  the  physician  and  the  antiquarian,  be  of  but  will  be  of  great  interest 
to  the  general  reader  as  well.  Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and 
support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


4  7357 


CHiRiKA-SlMHITis. 

(  TRAN  SLA  TED  INTO  ENGLISH ). 


PUBLISHED 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita 
(in  original)  with  Commentaries  ;  Bengali  and 
Hindi  Translator  of  Charaka-Samhita 
and  of  Susruta-Samhita  ;  Editor  of 
Chikitsa-Sammilani  (Medical  Journal 

in  Bengali)  ;  PRACTITIONER  OF  THE 

Hindu  System  of  Medicine, 

&c.,  &c.,  &c.,  &c., 

Published 

AT 

200,  Cornwallis  Street, 


( The  Right  of  Translation  is  Reserve f). 


Herald  Printing  Works. 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extract  from,  their  Letters.) 

Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English 
translationof  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  fee  very 
glad  to  help  you  in  any  way  you  may  wish — Writing  again  in  November 
1893.  he  says — ■*  *  *  I  am  surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful 
translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention  *  *  *  Our  Regius  Pro¬ 
fessor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested  in  it. 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  0. 1.  E. : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of 
the  successive  parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susrata  Samhitas.  I  regard  them 
as  a  valuable  addition  to  my  library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would 
be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office —  *  *  * 
Your  excellent  translation  *  *  *  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work 
which  will  not  fail  to  make  ancient  Hindu  Medicine  better  understood  and 
appreciated  in  the  West  *  *  *  I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental 
scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work  *  *  *  Many  important 
additions  to  our  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from  your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq-,  New  York  U.  S.  A.  I  have  read  with  much  pleasure 
the  first  fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very 
glad  to  receive  the  rest  of  the  work.  It  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest 
to  the  medical  profession,  which  will  be  under  great  obligation  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden  : — I  am  deeply  interested  in 
anything  Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to 
obtain  whatever  insight  I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable 
translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College ,  New  York, 
U.  S.  A. — I  must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts. 
I  should  very  much  like  to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the 
:  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing.  Be  assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and 
approbation  and  ol  my  deep  interest  in  India  and  antique  lore. 

Mons  A.  Birth.,  Paris  Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  ithe 
readers  of  ancient  literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  :the 
Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men  of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  find 
I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice  of  the  French  public, 
or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hilaire  ,  Paris  : — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and 
wish  you  all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and:  to 
medical  men  and  the  commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility. 

I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the  Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can , 
and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University ,  Germany  : — The  work  you  have 
undertaken  will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care,  for 
the  History  of  their  science.  I  shall  not- fail  to  draw  the  attention  .of 
some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally,  to  the  ancient  work  of 
Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  G-arbe,  Prinzenstram  Keningsburg,  Germany  The  English 
translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  is  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point 
of  view,  the  most  important  work  of  the  medicinal  literature  of  your 
country.  *  . 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS. 


The  contents  of  this  Part  are  extremely  interesting.  The  Fourth  Lesson, 
called  ‘  Mahati-Garbhavakranti  ’  ends  in  page  764  of  this  Part. 

The  five  auspicious  incidents  connected  with  Conception  (or  the 
appearance  of  the  embryo  in  the  womb),  and  the  three  inauspicious  in¬ 
cidents  connected  with  it,  are  referred  to  in  page  763. 

The  physician  who  understands  these  eight ,  auspicious  and  inauspi¬ 
cious  incidents  of  Conception;  is  regarded  tas  possessed  of  great  learning 
and  skill. 

Lesson  V  commences  in  page  764.  It  is  called  ‘  Purushavichayam,' 
meaning  ‘  an  examination  of  Purusha.’ 

The  Rishi  shows  the  similarity  between  the  external  universe  and 
Purusha.  In  fact,  the  human  body  is  shown  to  be  an  epitome  of  the 
universe.  It  is  in  every  respect  a  microcosm.  Everything  existing  in 
the  macrocosm  is  shown  to  exist  in  this  microcosm. .  The  points  of 
similarity  are  certainly  very  interesting. 

The  original  cause  from  which  ‘  Purusha’  springs,  viz.,  ‘  Pravritti 
or  an  inclination  for  acts,  is  then  explained. 

The  way  of  ‘  Nivrirti  ’  or  cessasion  of  desire  and  acts,  is  also  ex¬ 
pounded. 

It  is  ‘  Nivritti,’  that  leads  to  Emancipation.  As  long  as  there  are  acts, 
there  must  be  life  or  re-birth.  If  the  acts  are  good,  a  happy  life,  if  they 
are  otherwise,  an  unhappy  life,  will  be  the  consequence.  Acts  are  never 
destroyed  until  their  fruits  are  e.njoyed  or  endured. 

The  practices  which  lead  to  the  acquisition  of  a  Pure  Mind,  or  that 
Understanding  which  is  true,  and  which  leads  to  Emancipation,  and, 
lastly,  Emancipation,  are  also  explained  by  the  Rishi. 

The  course  of  discipline,  which  one  desirous  of  achieving  Emancipation 
must  go  through,  is  set  out  in  full.  It  deserves  study.  It  constitutes 
the  highest  training  for  the  human  mind.  It  cannot  be  said  that  there 
were  not  men  in  ancient  India  who  observed  this  course  of  conduct  with 
diligence  and  sincerity.  To  this  day  there  are  many  men  who  ostensibly 
conform  to  it  for  the  sake  of  the  worldly  advantages  5  it  brings,  for  such 
men  conimand  'tKp  'respect  of  the  people  and  live  upon' them.  The  bane 
of  India  is  that  everything  noble  has  deteriorated  fritb  what  .is,  ignoble 
and  insincere.  The  true  has  degenerated  into  the  false. 

Then  commences  Lesson  VI,  called  ‘  Carira-Vichayam,’  meaning  an 
anatomical  examination  of  the  body. 

Observations,  extremely  interesting,  occur  on  *  dhatus  ’  or  the  cons¬ 
tituent  ingredients  of  the  body.  Their  increase  and  decrease,  and  the 
methods  to  be  adopted  for  neutralising  the  effects  of  such  increase  and 
decrease,  form  the  other  topics  of  the  preliminary  portion  of  this  Lesson. 


NOTICE. 


Subscribers  are  informed  that  they 
should  not  pay  any  portion  of  their 
subscriptions  to  any  one  without  Re¬ 
ceipts  containing;  my  signature.  If  they 
kindly  remit  their  dues  b.y  postal  Money 
Order,  or  in  Registered  covers,  the 
amounts  will  then  reach  me  duly, 


CALCUTTA.  ", 

*•*  £',*•  AVINASH  CH.  KAVIRATNA. 

July  25th,  1901.  J 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


76  3 


Only  this  purpose  has  (by  what  has  been  said)  been  indicated 
agreeably  to  what  was  premised.* 

By  this,  the  capacity  (will  arise)  of  apprehension  of  the  topics 
connected  with  Conception  :  also  the  application  of  all  those  cir¬ 
cumstances  and  incidents  which  produce  Conception :  and  the 
extirpation  of  those  circumstances  and  incidents  which  are  des¬ 
tructive  of  Conception. 3  6 

The  pre-existing  circumstances  that  lead  to  Conception  (or 
the  appearance  of  the  embryo  in  the  womb),  the  essence  (or  Soul) 
of  the  foetus,  the  normal  nature  of  the  foetus,  the  gradual  growth  ": 
of  the  foetus  in  the  womb,  and  the  causes  that  lead  to  such  growth" 
— these  five  topics  connected  with  Conception  are  regarded  as- 
auspicious.1!  ' 

That,  again,  which  is  the  cause  of  the  non-appearance  of  Con- 
ception  (z.  e.,  of  barrenness  or  sterility),  that  which  is  the  cause 
of  the  destruction  of  Conception  (after  its  appearance),  and  that 
which  is  the  cause  of  defects  and  malformations  tin  the  foetus), — 
these  three  circumstances  or  incidents  which  are  destructive  of 
Conception  are  regarded  inauspicious.2 

That  physician  who  thoroughly  .  understands  these  eight 
auspicious  and  inauspicious  incidents  (connected  with  Conception), 
deserves  to  treat  the  king  himself.8 


*  ‘  Kevalagchayam  uddega,  ’  that  is,  ‘  only  this  purpose,  1  meaning  ‘  the 
resemblance <^jf  one’s  conduct  with  that  of  the  creature  after  whose  Sattwa 
one’s  Sattwa  is.  ’ 

What  the  Rishi  says  is  that  ‘  having  premised  the  topic  before,  it  is  ex¬ 
plained  thus.  T. 

t  The  words  used  in  the  original  are  1  Nimitfram,’  ‘Atman,’  1  Prakriti,  ’ 
1  Kukshau  kramena  vriddhih,  ’  and  1  Vriddhihetuh  ’  They  are  the  same  as 
‘  Yatah  garbhah  sambhavati, 1  ‘Yasmin  garbhasamja,  ’  ‘  Yadvikarah 

garbhah,’  ‘Yaya  anpuruvya  nirvattate  kukshau,’  and  ‘Yatcha  asya  Vriddhihetu’ 
occurring  in  aphorism  2  of  this  very  Lesson.  Similarly,  the  three  inauspi  • 
cious  circumstances  mentioned  here  are  the  same  as  those  occurring  in  the 
concluding  portion  of  aphorism  2.  To  understand  the  auspicious  and  in¬ 
auspicious  circumstances  properly,  the  language  employed  in  aphorism  2 
should  be  compared  with  that  of  this  verse. — T. 

97 


764 


CHAR  AKA  SAMHITA. 


Such  a  person  of  high  intelligence  knows  what  those  means 
are  by  which  Conception  may  take  place,  and  what  those  other 
incidents  are  which  have  been  laid  down  as  destructive  of  Con¬ 
ception.4116 

Thus  ends  the  Fourth  Lesson,  called  “  Mahati-Garbhava- 
kranti,  ”  in  the  Division  called  Qarira,  of  the  treatise  of  Agnivega 
as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  V. 


We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  called  ‘  Purusha-Vichayam  ’ 
in  the  Division  called  Qarira. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atridf 

The  illustrious  son  of  Atri,  viz.,  Punarvasu,  said, — 

Purusha  is  like  unto  the  Universe. 

As  many  particular  entities  endued  with  form  occur  in  the 
Universe,  so  many  occur  in  Purusha. 

As  many  occur  in  Purusha  so  many  occur  in  the  Universe. 
Unto  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  who  said  so,  Agnivega  said, — 
The  sense  expressed  by  these  words  (of  thine)  we  are  unable 
to  comprehend.  We,  therefore,  desire  to  hear  the  subject  ex- 


*This  verse  seems  to  be  a  repetition.  One  conversant  with  the  eight  auspi¬ 
cious  and  inauspicious  incidents  mentioned  in  verses  I  and  2  cannot  but  be 
conversant  with  the  ‘  Upayas  of  ‘  avapti  ’  and  the  *  Vighatakan  bhavan.  T. 

t  ‘  Purusha-Vichayam  ’  means  ‘  that  by  which,  or  that  in  which,  Purusha 
is  examined  or  inspected.  ’  Chakrapani  explains  it  as  meaning  ‘  a  comparison 
of  Purusha  with  the  external  world.  ’  The  fact  is,  in  this  Lesson,  the  Rishi 
shows  the  points  of  resemblance  existing  between  the  human  body  and 
the  external  world.  The  human  body  is  an  epitome  of  the  universe.  It  is 
in  every  respect  a  microcosm.  Everything  existing  in  the  macrocosm  is  shown 
to  exist  in  this  microcosm.— T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA.  765 

pounded  by  thy  Holiness’s  intelligence  more  fully  than  thou 
hast  done.5 

The  illustrious  son  of  Atri  then  said  unto  him  : 

Innumerable  are  the  parts  of<the  universe.  So  are  the  parts 
(limbs)  of  a  human  being  innumerable.  We  shall  cite  a  few 
examples,  keeping  in  view  their  resemblance,  of  some  of  the 
principal  entities  of  the  universe  and  some  of  the  grosser  parts 
of  the  human  body.* 

O  Agnivega,  do  thou  listen  with  undivided  attention  to  these 
as  they  are  being  set  forth  ! 

The  universe  is  made  of  six  ingredients.  This  is  what  is 
generally  heard.f 

They  are  as  follows:  Earth,  Water,  Heat,  Air,  Ether  (or 
Space),  and  Brahma  which  is  unmanifest. 

Purusha  is  made  up  of  six  ingredients.  This  is  what  is  gene¬ 
rally  heard.  Of  that  Purusha,  the  form  is  Earth  ;  the  liquid  secre¬ 
tions  are  Water  ;  the  animal  heat  is  Heat ;  the  life-breaths  are 
Air  ;  the  hollow  places  are  Ether  (or  Space) ;  and  the  Inner  Self 
is  Brahma.4 

Verily,  as  there  is  in  ;jthe  universe  the  manifestation  of 
Brahma,  so  there  is  in  Purusha  -also  the  manifestation  of  the 
Inner  Self. 

In  the  universe  the  manifestation  of  Brahma  is  Prajapati  (the 


*  This  passage  is  differently  read  in  some  editions.  Some  texts  have  ‘  Yatha 
yatha  pradhSnancha  tesham,  yathasthula-bhavam.  ’  The  correct  reading  is 
given  by  Gangadhara.  He  reads  ‘  Yatha  yatha  pradhanancha  tesham,  yatha 
sthulam  purusha  vayavavigeshah  katichittesham.  ’— T. 

t  ‘  Iti  gavdam  labhante,’  literally,  ‘  this  speech  is  got,’  meaning,  ‘  this 
saying  in  current.’  Indeed,  no  saying  is  more  generally  quoted  than  this, 
viz,  ‘The  universe  consists  of  six  ingredients,’  even  as  the  other  saying 
‘  Purusha  consists  of  six  ingredients.’ 

It  should  be  noted  that  of  the  six  ingredients,  that  which  is  called  ‘  Tejas  ’ 
is  generally  rendered  either  as  ‘  light  ’  or  ‘  heat.  ’  Properly  speaking, 
‘  Tejas  ’  is  ‘  energy.  ’  The  fact  is,  Light  and  Heat  are  convertible 
terms  ;  in  such  a  connection,  what  is  meant  is  Fire— T. 


766 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


Creator,  called  Brahman,  otherwise  named  the  Grandsire  of  all 
creatures). 

In  Purusha  the  manifestation  of  the-  Inner  Self  is  the  Mind. 

He  who  is  Indra  in  the  universe  is  Consciousness  in  Purusha. 

Corresponding  with  him  that  is  Aditya  (in  the  universe)  is 
the  faculty  called  Adana  in  man.* 

Corresponding  ftflth  Rudra  (of  the  universe)  is  Wrath  in  man.f 

Corresponding  with  Soma  (of  the  universe)  is  Satisfaction  (or 
cheerfulness)  in  man.J 

Corresponding  with  , the  Vasus  is  Pleasure  (or  Happiness)  in 
man.§ 


*  Indra  is  the  chief  of  all  the  deities.  He  is  at  their  head.  In  the 
world  of  man,  Consciousness  is  at  the  head  of  all  the  faculties,  the  true 
theory  of  the  mind  being  that  Consciousness  is  the  substratum  on  which 
all  the  faculties  exist.  It  is  co-extensive  with  all  the  faculties.  It  is  im¬ 
possible  to  know  without  knowing  that  we  know  ;  or  recollect  without 
knowing  that  we  recollect. 

‘  Aditya  ’  means  Surya  or  the  Sun.  It  is  so  called  because  of 
its  taking  or  sucking  up  all  juicy  matters.  Corresponding 
with  Aditya  of  the  external  world  is  the  Power  in  man  to  assi¬ 
milate  diverse  substances  into  his  system  or  organism.  The  mental 
faculty  called  Perception,  taken>ith  the  physical  power  of  assimilation— 
constitutes  what  the  Rishi  calls  ‘  Adanam.’  Some  texts  read  ‘  Adityah  ’  in 
the  plural,  as  there  are  twelve  Adityas  in  all.  The  powers  of  assimila¬ 
tion  may  be  regarded  to  be  many.— T. 

t  Some  texts  read  ‘  Rudrah  ’  and  1  Roshah.  ’  There  are,,  in  Hindu 
mythology,  eleven  Rudras.  They  are  all  parts  of  the  deity  of  destruction, 
viz ,  Rudra,  otherwise  called  (Jiva  or  Mahadeva.  1  Roshah  ’  in  the  plural 
would  rrfean  the  diverse  kinds  of  of  angry  feelings.— T. 

X  1  Shoma  ’  is  Chandra  or  the  Moon.  It  is  the  symbol  of  mildness 
and  contentment  and  satisfaction  and  joy.  ‘  Prasada  ’  may  be  rendered 
as  contentment,  or  satisfaction,  or  joy,  or  cheerfulness.  It  is  milder  than 
what  is  called  pleasure. — T. 

§  The  Vasus  are  eight  in  number.  They  are  supposed  to  preside  over 
the  pleasures  of  life,  and  everything  that  contributes  to  pleasure  or  happi¬ 
ness.  For  this  reason,  the  word  ‘  Vasu  ’  in  the  singular  is  often  used  as 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA.  7$7 

Corresponding  with  the  A$wins  (in  the  universe)  is  Beauty 
(in  man).* 

Corresponding  with  Marut  (of  the  universe)  is  exertion  (in 
man.)t 

Corresponding  with  the  Vigwedevas  (of  the  universe)  are  all 
the  senses  (or  organs  of  knowledge)  with  their  several  objects.^ 


the  equivalent  of  wealth  and  all  kinds  of  valuable  possessions,  inas¬ 
much  as  these  are  supposed  to  be  the  means  of  bringing  about  pleasure 
or  happiness. — T. 

*  The  Agwins  are  twins.  They  are  the  offspring  of  Lakshmi  or  £ree 
herself  while  she  took  the,  form  of  a  mare.  The  Agwins  are  celestial 
physicians.  At  one  time  Indra  refused  to  drink  ‘soma’  with  them  in  sacri¬ 
fices.  Feeling  their  exclusion  keenly,  they  came  to  the  Rishi,  Chyavana, 
who  had  become  very  old  and  decrepit.  They  offered  wealth  and  beauty 
to  the  old  Rishi  if  he  could  induce  or  compel  Indra  to  admit  them  to 
the  soma-drinking  circle.  Chyavana,  puissant  in  penances,  forced  Indra 
to  admit  the  Agwins  to  an  equality  with  the  other  gods.  Health  and 
beauty  are  derived  by  man  from  the  Acwins. — T. 

t  ‘  Marut  ’  is  the  deity  of  the  wind.  In  Hindu  mythology,  Marut,  when 
born  in  the  womb  of  Aditi,  the  mother  of  all  the  deities,  inflamed,  in 
consequence  of  his  strength  and  prowess,  the  jealousy  of  Indra.  The  latter, 
fearing  Marut,  cut  him,  .while  he  was  still  in  the  form  of  a  fcetus, 
into  fortynine  parts.  Hence,  when  Aditi  was  delivered  in  time,  she  gave 
birth  to  nine  and  forty  Maruts.  These  powerful  gods  all  became  com¬ 
panions  of  Indra  and  served  hi  n  loyally  in  all  his  battles  with  the 

Asuras  and  the  Danavas.  Marut  (or  the  Maruts)  correspond  with 
Exertion  in  man.  All  exertion,  again,  is  the  direct  result  of  the  wind 

in  the  human  system.  Hence,  from  both  the  mythological  and  the 

physiological  view  of  the  matter,  there  is  a  propriety  in  representing 
Exertion  in  the  human  system  (both  bodily  and  mental)  as  corresponding 
with  Marut  or  the  Maruts. — T, 

t  The  Vigwedevas  are  a  class  of  inferior  deities.  Sacrifices  are  direct¬ 
ed  to  be  performed  everj’  day  in  honour  of  these  gods.  The  peculiar 
feature  of  these  sacrifices  is  the  offer  of  food  and  drink  to  guests  as 
also  all  creatures  of  the  world  such  as  beasts  and  birds,  including  the 
spirits  of  the  dead.  The  senses  require  to  be  gratified.  Indeed,  the  pro¬ 
per  gratification  of  the  senses  is  a -.high  duty.  Probably,  the  senses  are, 
therefore,  regarded  as  correspnding  with  the  Vigwedevas— T. 


768 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Corresponding  with  the  Darkness  (of  the  external  universe) 
is  the  Ignorance  (of  man). 

Corresponding  with  the  Light  (of  the  external  universe)  is 
the  Knowledge  (of  human  beings). 

Corresponding  with  Heaven  and  the  like  (of  the  external 
universe)  is  the  residence  of  man  within  the  mother’s  womb. 

Corresponding  with  the  Krita  age  is  the  period  of  Infancy  and 
Boyhood. 

Corresponding  with  the  second  age,  called  Treta,  is  the  period 
of  youth. 

Corresponding  with  the  third  age,  called  Dwapara,  is  the  period 
of  Manhood. 

Corresponding  with  the  fourth  age  called  Kali  is  the  period  of 
decay  or  decrepitude. 

Corresponding  with  the  termination  of  the  Yugas  is  death.* 


*  How  ‘  Heaven  and  the  like 1  (swargadih)  can  be  regarded  as  correspond¬ 
ing  with  : 1  Garbhadhana,  ’  meaning  ‘residence  within  the  womb,’  is  not 
at  all  clear.  Chakrap'ani  explains  ‘  Swarga 1  as  meaning  1  pralayantah 
kalah,  ’  that  is,  the  period  of  time  that  comes  after  ‘  Pralaya  1  or  the 
apparent  dissolution  of  the  universe.  That  period  of  time,  however,  is  the 
period  of  the  rebrith  or  re-appearance  of  all  en  ities.  It  may  be  called  ‘  Sarga  ’ 
(Creation},  but  not  ‘  Swarga  (Heaven),  which  is  a  place  of  bliss  where  creatures 
reside  for  sometime  before  coming  into  the  world  again.  Besides  what  is 
meant  by  ‘  adih  ’  in  ‘  Swargidih  ?  ’  Is  Hell,  or  a  state  or  region  of  misery, 
included  in  ‘adi  ?’  If  by  ‘  Swargadih  ’  be  meant  those  regions  where  one  must 
dwell  for  sometime  before  one’s  rebirth  or  re-appearance  in  the  world, 

<  Garbhadhana 1  or  the  period  of  gestation,  or  the  region  of  the  womb, 
may  not  be  unfitly  likened  to  ‘swargadih,’  for  that  is  the  period 
before  life  begins,  and  that  is  the  region  where  one  must  reside  before  one 
comes  into  the  world. 

There  are  four  ‘  Yugas  1  or  periods  of  time  in  the  life  of  the  universe  ;  the 
first  is  called  Krita  or  Satya,  corresponding  to  the  Golden  age  of  the  Greeks  ; 
the  second  is  Treta,  corresponding  with  the  Silver  age  of  the  Greeks  ;  the 
third  is  Dwapara,  and  the  fourth  is  Kali,  corresponding  respectively  with 
the  Brazen  and  the  Iron  age  of  the  early  European  nations.  When  Kali 
expires,  the  dissolution  of  the  universe  takes  place.  After  a  long  period, 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


769 


By  this  kind  of  analogy,  0  Agnivega,  it  should  bs  known 
that  a  similarity  exists  between  a  human  being  and  the  external 
universe,  as  regards  even  those  particulars  to  which  express 
reference  is  not  made  here.5 

Unto  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  who  said  so,  Agnivega  replied 
— What  has  been  said  by  thy  illustrious  self  about  the  similarity 
or  agreement  between  man  and  the  universe  is  truly  so.  Indeed, 
the  whole  of  it  is  faultless.  What,  however,  is ,  the  utility  of  thy 
instructions  on  this  head  ?8 

The  illustrious  (Rishi)  said,— 

Listen,  O  Agnive$a  !  He  who  sees  the  universe  in  himself, 
and  himself  in  the  universe,  attains  to  Self-knowledge. 

Of  him  who  sees  the  whole  uuiverse  in  himself,  the  Self  be¬ 
comes  the  author  of  his  pleasures  and  pains,  and  none  else. 
Even  this  is  what  happens. 

In  consequence,  again,  of  pleasure  and  pain  having  acts  for 
their  soul,  one,  becoming  dissociated  from  causes  and  the  rest, 
and  regarding  oneself  as  identical  with  the  universe,  attains  to 
that  knowledge  (of  Self)  which  results  in  Emancipation.7* 


Brahman,  the  Grandsire,  awakes  from  sleep  and  creates  the  universe 
anew.  The  fact  is,  the  universe  lasts  as  long  as  it  is  Brahman’s  day. 
When  the  Grandsire’s  night  comes,  it  is  dissolved,  and  remains  in  that 
state  till  his  day  comes  again.  The  life  of  the  Grandsire  is  measured  by  a 
hundred  years  consisting  of  such  days. 

Corresponding  with  the  four  Yugas  or  periods  of  time  in  the  life  of  the 
the  universe,  are  the-  four  periods  in  the  life  of  man,  called  Infancy  or 
boyhood,  youth,  manhood  and  decrepitude.  The  limits  of  these  periods  have 
been  set  forth  in  VimSnasthana.). — T. 

1  Atmabuddhih  ’  or  ‘  Atmajnanam  ’  is  knowledge  of  Self.  The  knowledge 
of  Self  arises  when  one  sees  the  universe  in  oneself,  and  oneself  in  the 
universe.  Seeing  the  universe  in  oneself  and  oneself  in  the  universe  is  a 
consciousness  of  one’s  identity  with  the  universe  ;  in  other  words,  the 
conviction  that  one  is  not  different  from  other  creatures  ;  what  is 
called  variety  in  the  universe  is  only  apparent  instead  of  being  real.  When 
the  Self  is  truly  apprehended,  one  comes  to  feel  this,  viz , — I  am  the  universe 
and  the  universe  is  me.  Such  a  consciousness  or  conviction  is  possessed  by 
Yogins.  What  the  Rishi  says  next  in  this  aphorism  is  that  when  one  sees 


770 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


In  this  conection,  the  word  ‘  Loka  ’  has  two  senses  which 
are  intimately  connected  with  each  other.  (It  signifies  both  the 
universe  and  the  man).  This  is  so  because  ordinarily  all  men 
and  all  the  universe  are  each  a  union  of  six  ingredients — [viz., 
earth,  water,  light  or  fire,  air,  ether  or  space  and  soul).  ‘  Loka  ’ 
has  Hetu  (cause)  utpatti  (birth),  Vriddhi  (growth),  Upaplava 
(decay),  and  Viyoga  (dissolution).  Amongst  these,  Hetu  is 
the  cause  from  which  flows  birth ;  Utpatti  is  birth ;  Vriddhi 
is  growth  or  development  ;  Upaplava  is  the  advent  of  pain  or 
decay;  and  Viyogo  is  the  dissolution  or  separation  of  the  six 
ingredients.  This  last  is  (otherwise  known  as)  disappearance  of 
Jiva:  this  is  the  stoppage  of  the  life-breaths;  this  is  dissolution  or 
breaking;  this  is  the  Nature  of  ‘Loka.  ’*8 


the  whale  universe  in  oneself,  in  other  words,  when  one  realises  one’s 
identity  with  the  universe  of  beings  and  things  exterior  to  oneself,  one 
is  oneself  the  cause  of  one’s  pleasure  and  pain,  and  none  else.  Of  course, 
when  one  regards  the  external  universe  as  identical  with  one’s  own  self, 
one  necessarily  realises  that  one’s  own  self  is  the  only  existing  Being.  As 
such,  one  cannot  but  regard  one’s  pleasures  and  pains  as  proceeding  from 
one’s  own  self,  there  being  none  else  to  whom  or  to  whose  action  these  may  be 
attributed. 

The  last  proposition  in  this  aphorism  is  this  :  when  one  comes  to 
realise  that  one’s  own  self  is  the  cause  of  one’s  pleasures  and  pains,  one 
at  once  understands  that  as  pleasures  and  pains  are  the  results  of  acts, 
one  may  dissociate  oneself  from  acts  and  thus  rise  superior  to  pleasure 
and  pain.  One  may  act,  but  then  there  is  no  attachment  to  acts.  The 
knowledge  then  arises  that  one  is  oneself  the  universe.  This  knowledge 
leads  to  ‘  Apavargah  1  or  Emancipation.  The  fact  is,  two  stages  of  progress 
towards  complete  or  thorough  Brahmajndna  are  indicated  here.  The  first 
is  when  one  sees  the  universe  in  oneself  and  oneself  in  the  universe.  Here 
the  seer  and  the  seen  are  apparently  distinct.  The  second  is  the  stage  when 
one  feels  that  one  is  oneself  the  universe.  Here  there  is  thorough  identity. — T. 

*  What  the  Rishi  wishes  to  incu'cate  in  this  passage  is  simply  this  :  the 
word  ‘Loka’  has  two  senses  which  are  closely  connected  with  each  other. 
One  is  the  universe  ;  the  other  is  man,  or  humanity.  In  both  senses  it  is  a 
union  of  six  inredients.  In  the  case  of  th9  universe,  besides  the  five 
primal  elements,  Brahma  is  the  sixth.  In  the  case  of  man,  besides  the  five 
same  five  primal  elements,  the  soul  is  the  sixth.  In  the  case  of  both,  again 
the  same  five  incidents,  viz.,  Hetu  and  the  rest,  apply.— T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


77 1 


Pravritti  (inclination  for  acts)  is  the  root  (cause)  of  this  Viyoga 
(dissolution)  as  also  of  all  advents  of  pain  (or  decay). 

Nivritti  is  cessation  of  Viyoga  as  also  of  pain. 

The  knowledge  which  arises  to  the  effect  that  Pravritti  or 
inclination  is  sorrow  while  Nivritti  or  abstention  from  acts  is 
pleasure,  is  true  knowledge.  The  root  from  which  this  knowledge 
arises  is  the  conviction  of  the  identity  of  man  and  the  universe. 
Hence  is  the  necessity  of  teaching  the  existence  of  similarity 
between  man  and  the  universe.  3 

Agnivega  said, — What,  O  illustrious  one,  is  the  root  of  Pravritti 
or  inclination,  and  what  are  the  means  for  attaining  to  Nivritti  or 
abstention?  10 

The  illustrious  one  said,  — Heedlessness,  desire,  aversion,  and 
acts  are  the  roots  of  Pravritti  or  inclination. 

From  Pravritti  arise  Ahankara,  Sanga,  Sandeha ,  Ahhisamplava , 
Abliyavapdta,  Vipratyaya ,  Vigesha  and  Anupdya.  * 

As  trees  with  gigantic  branches  spring  up  from  the  soil, 
overwhelming  a  little  plant  that  is  near,  even  so  these,  over¬ 
whelming  Purusha,  spring  up  (from  his  mental  soil).  Over¬ 
whelmed  by  these,  Purusha  becomes  incapable  of  transcending 
existence.  11 

Amongst  these,  the  consciousness  that  I  am  possessed  of  such 
parentage  or  caste,  such  beauty  of  form,  such  wealth,  such 
intelligence,  such  character,  such  learning,  such  rank  or  pedigree, 
such  age,  such  energy,  and  such  influence  or  puissance,  is  called 
Ahankara.  f1* 

That  mind,  word,  body,  and  act  which  are  not  for  emancipation 
are  known  as  Sanga.  13+ 


*  All  these  words  are  explained  below  by  the  Rishi  himself.  Hence,  I  retain 
them  in' their  original  forms.  Some  editions  read  ‘  Sangaya  for  ‘Sandeha.’— T. 

t  ‘Ahankara,’  as  explained  by  the  Rishi  here,  is  evidently  identical  with 
pride,  and  to  some  extent,  even  vanity.  It  is  a  consciousness  or  feeling  of 
one’s  superiority  over  others  in  respect  of  the  particulars  noted  — T. 

J  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  that  mind,  t.e.,  that  frame  of  mind,  meaning 
those  thoughts  which  one  entertains  ;  that  word,  meaning  those  words  or 

98 


772 


CHARAKA  SAMHTTA. 


That  frame  of  mind  in  which  one  is  uncertain  about  the 
existence  of  the  fruits  of  action,  of  Emancipation,  of  the  soul  or 
self,  of  a  future  state  of  life,  and  such  others,  is  called  Sangaya.  14 

In  all  conditions  I  am  the  same  or  unchanged  ;  jjb  is  I  who 
am  the  .  creator  ;  I  am  the  development  of  my  own  Nature  ; 
I  am  only  a  conglomeration  of  body,  senses,  understanding,  and 
memory  ; — an  acceptance  of  such  beliefs  is  called  Abhisam- 
plava.  *  15 

The  apprehension  that  mother,  father,  brother,  wife,  children, 
kinsmen,  friends,  servants,  and  others  are  mine,  and  that  I  am 
theirs,  is  Abhyavapata.  16f 


language  which  one  utters;  that  body,  meaning  that  frame  of  body  ;  and 
those  actions,  meaning  actions  in  general.  When  these  have  not 
Emanicipation  for  their  object,  they  are  called  ‘  Sanga  ’  or  Attachment. 
The  frame  of  mind  which  is  for  Emanicipation  is  different  from  that  which  is 
not  for  Emancipation  Attachment  is  an  obstacle  to  Emancipation. 
Dissociation  from  the  world  is  the  way  of  Emancipation. — T. 

*  The  commentators  do  not  explain  this  passage  at  all.  Chakrapani 
makes  some  observations,  but  they  are  unintelligible.  The  fact  is,  some 
sturdy  sceptical  beliefs  are  introduced  here.  From  the  orthodox  Hindu 
point  of  view,  Jiva  undergoes  thousands  of  transformations.  Hence,  the 
doctrine  that  one  remains  unchanged  or  the  same  in  all .  conditions, 
involves  downright  heterodoxy.  Such  a  doctrine  is  identical  with  the  belief 
that  there  is  no  other  state  of  being  than  the  present  one. 

*  It  is  I  who  am  the  creator  ’  has  probably  reference  to  the  conviction 
that  it  is  I  who  am  the  author  of  the  continuous  stream  of  life  (or  jiva- 
pravSha) ;  in  other  words,  it  is  I  who  am  the  author  of  the  life  of  my 
children  directly  and  of  my  children’s  children  indirectly.  ‘  I  am  the 
development  of  my  own  Nature,  ’ — such  a  belief  is  heterodox  or  against  the 
approved  doctrines  of  Hindu  philosophy.  In  truth,  what  I  am  is  determined 
by  the  effects  of  my  actions  of  this  and  many  previous  lives.  Lastly, 
the  belief  that  I  am  but  a  conglomeration  of  body,  senses,  understanding,  and 
memory,  implies  a  disbelief  in  a  Self  which  combines  them  all  and  stands 
behind  all  our  knowledge  or  individual  convictions. — T. 

t  ‘  Abhyavapata  ’  is,  literally,  a  fall.  Such  an  apprehension,  as  described 
here,  is  in  reality  a  fall  or  falling  away  from  the  true  state  of  the  Self. 
Birth  or  existence  is  the  result  of  the  ignorance  that  invests  the  Self.  When 
that  ignorance  is  dispelled  and  true  knowledge  comes,  Emancipation,  that 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


77  3 


Vipratyaya  is  that  state  of  the  mind  in  which  one’s  notions 
are  reversed  of  what  should  be  and  what  should  not  be  done, 
of  what  is  beneficial  and  what  is  not  beneficial,  and  of  what  is 
not  good  and  auspicious.  17 

Viqesha  consists  of  viewing  (these  couples  of  opposites,  viz.,) 
the  learned  and  the  ignorant,  the  normal  and  the  abnormal,  in¬ 
clination  and  abstention,  as  really  different  from  each  other.  *18 

Immolation  (to  the  gods)  of  acceptable  victims,  fasts,  the 
pouring  of  libations  on  the  sacrificial  fire,  ablutions  in  the  morning, 
noon,  and  evening,  dedication  of  articles  to  the  deities,  invoking 
the  gods,  "performance  of  sacrifices  on  one’s  own  account,  officiation 
at  the  sacrifices  of  others,  (religious)  mendicancy,  the  giving  up  of 
life  by  entering  into  water  or  fire,  and  such  .other  acts  are  called 
Anupaya.  f13 


is,  a  return  of  the  Self  to  its  true  or  natural  condition,  results.  The 
knowledge  that  mother,  father,  etc.,  are  mine,  and  that  I  am  theirs,  stands 
in  the  way  of  true  knowledge.  In  oth?r  words,  one  must  use  superior  to 
the  sense  ineum  and  tuum  if  one  is  to  regain  one’s  true  condition. — T. 

0  The  truly  wise  view  all  these  as  the  same  or  undiffering,  for,  as  is  often 
said,  they  are  ‘  Samadarginah.  ’  It  is  only  those  who  have  no  wisdom  that 
regard  these  as  really  different.  As  long  as  this-conception  of  difference  lasts, 
Emancipation  is  necessarily  delayed. — T. 

t  ‘  Upaya  ’  implies  means  ;  ‘  anupaya  1  is  the  reverse  of  the  same  ;  that 
is,  obstructions.  These  various  religious  acts  are,  no  doubt,  conducive 
to  heaven  ;  but  they  are  incapable  of  leading  to  Emancipation.  The 
distinction  between  ‘  prokshana  ’  and  ‘  abhyukshana  1  is  very  slight.  Both 
imply  the  dedication  and  offer  of  animals  and  other  articles  to  the  deities. 

‘  Anagana  1  implies  fasts,  including  continued  fasts  by  which  men  sometimes 
lay  down  their  lives.  Men  sometimes  used  to  lay  down  their  lives  by 
entering  into  fire  or  water.  In  the  Rjmayana  occurs  the  noted  example  of 
the  Rishi  Qarabhanga.  As  soon  as  he  saw  Rama  in  the  Dandaka  forest 
(for  whom,  indeed,  he  had  been  waiting),  he  caused  a  pyre  to  be  made 
and  cheerfully  entered  the  blazing  fire  and  then  proceeded  in  his  astral 
body  to  heaven.  The  example  is  mentioned  of  the  Hindu  devotee, 
Calanus,  who  accompanied  Alexander  from  the  Punjab  to  Babylon  and 
there  entered  the  blazing  pyre  for  proceeding,  as  he  said,  to  Heaven.— T, 


774 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Thus,  this  one,  (i.e.,  Purusha),  beconiing  divested  of  (true) 
understanding,  apprehension,  and  memory,  immersed  in  pride, 
tied  to  attachments,  involved  in  doubt,  his  intelligence  overwhelmed 
by  false  notions,  falling  away  from  the  Supreme  with  vision 
totally  distorted,  viewing  difference  where  difference  does  not 
exist  and  led  astray  along  paths  that  do  not  lead  to  the  desirable 
goal,  happens  to  be  the  roosting  tree  of  all  the  faults  of  mind  and 
body,  as  also  the  rest  of  all  sorrows. 

Thus  obliged,  by  pride  ( Ahankdra )  and  the  other  faults,  to 
wander  (through  repeated  rebirths'!,  one  fails  to  transcend 
Pravritti  (inclination  for  acts).  Verily,  Pravritti  is  the  root  of 
sin.  41 

Nivritti  (abstention  from  acts  )  is  the  foremost  of  all  ends.! 

It  is  Param  (or  the  Highest). 

It  is  Tranquillity. 

It  is  Akshararm  (Undecaying),  f 


*  Some  : texts  read  ‘  Evamayam  Purusha  khalu  etc.,  smritihinah.  ’  The 
better  reading  is  ‘  Evamayamadhi  &c.  ’ 

Here  the  several  obstacles  to  Emancipation,  mentioned  in  aphorism  u, 
are 'mentioned  in  different  language.  The  reading  ‘  Sasamgayah  ’  is  to  be 
preferred.  Then,  again,  ‘  Sattwagariradoshanam  ’  and  not  ‘  Sattwagarira 
doshamulanSm  ’  is  the  reading  I  adopt. 

‘  Nivasha-vriksha  ’  is,  lit ,  ‘  habitation-tree  ’  ;  i.  e.,  a  tree  in  which  birds 
nestle  or  roost  night  and  day. — T. 

*  There  are  four  Vargas,  viz.,  Beligion,  Wealth,  Pleasure,  and 
Emancipation.  The  particle  ‘  apa  ’  implies  superior  or  foremost.  Hence, 
Emancipation,  which  is  the  foremost  of  the  quadruple  group.— T. 

t  Godhead  or  what  is  Highest  is  undecaying  or  unfading.  There  is  no 
change  in  it  for  the  worse.  The  attribute  of  immutability  is  implied.  All 
change  (as  Plato  observed)  must  be  either  for  the  worse  or  the  better.  In 
Godhead  there  can  be  no  change  ;  for  if  God  changes  for  the  worse,  He 
ceases  to  be  God ;  and  if  for  the  better,  He  was  no  God  before  In 
1  Aksharam  ’  the  idea  of  the  impossibility  of  change  for  the  worse  is 
implied. — T. 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


77  5 


It  is  Brahma. 

It  is  Emancipation. 

In  this  connection,  we  shall  expound  the  means  (or  practices) 
of  persons  desirous  of  achieving  Emancipation.  * 

Amongst  those  means  (or  practices)  of  one  desirous  of 
achieving  Emancipation,  at  the  outset  is  going  to  a  preceptor  ; 
the  carrying  out  of  his  (the  preceptor’s)  instructions  ; 
attending  the  (sacrificial)  Fire  ;f 
the  persual  of  the  Scriptures;]; 
comprehension  of  their  meaning  ; 
with  its  aid  the  fixing  of  the  mind  ;§ 

acts  in  conformity  with  what  is  laid  down  therein  (i.e.,  in  the 
Scriptures)  ; 

sitting  by  the  side  of  the  Righteous  ; 
avoidance  of  the  Unrighteous  ; 
avoidance  of  association  with  the  wicked  ; 

speech  that  is  truthful  ;  that  is  beneficial  to  all  creatures  ; 
that  is  not  rough  (or  harsh)  ;  that  is  not  untimely,  and  that  is 
uttered  after  due  consideration  (or  examination) ; 

surveying  all  creatures  in  the  same  light  as  one’s  own  self  ; 
absention  from  recollecting,  soliciting,  and  addressing  the  other 
six  in  its  entirety ; 

renunciation  of  all  earthly  possessions  ; 

a  scanty  piece  of  cloth  steeped  in  red  chalk  for  covering  the 
privities ;  1 


*  ‘  Udayana  implies  means  or  practices. — T. 

t  *  Upacharyya  ’  of  Fire  implies  service  of  or  attention  to  the  sacred 
Fire  ;  i.  e.,  the  due  performance  of  Homa. — T. 

t  '  Dharmasastras  ’  implies  the  Scriptures  on  Religion  and  Duty. — T. 

$  ‘  Avashtambha  ’  is  fixing  of  the  mind.  Gangadhara  explains  it  as 
such.  What  is  implied  is  ‘  prevention  of  the  mind  from  going  astray.  ' T. 

IT  The  reading  ‘  Kaupina-prachcchadanartham  &c.  ’  is  better  than 
‘  Kaupinam  prachcchadanartham  &c.  ’  ‘  Kaupina  ’  primarily  means  the 
privities  ;  secondarily,  a  scanty  piece  of  cloth  for  covering  the  privities.— T. 


776 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


For  sewing  his  kanthd  (coarse  upper  garment)  a  needle  and 
torn  rags  ;  *  , 

for  (external)  purity,  and  support  of  the  body  (while  walking), 
a  water- Jar  and  a  wooden  staff ;  f 

a  pot  (or  vessel)  for  the  keep  of  doles  (obtained  in  course  of 
eleemosynary  rounds  ;  J 

Collection  of  such  doles,  as  may  be  readily  obtained,  of  wild 
corn,  fruits,  and  roots,  once  in  a  day,  for  the  preservation  of  the 
life-breaths  alone  ;  § 

for  throwing  off  fatigue,  a  bed  and  pillows  made  of  withered 
and  dry  leaves  and  grass  ; 


*  ‘  Kantha  1  means  a  coarse  quilt  made  of  torn  rags  sewn  together.  A 
Sanyasin,  besides  his  '  Kaupina,  ’  must  have  a  ‘  Kantha.  ’  The  coarsest 
blanket  or  carpet  :is  luxury  compared  to  the  1  Kantha  ’  of  a  religious  devotee 
in  India.— T. 

t  1  £aucha  ’  is  such  external  purity  as  is  effected  by  washing,  that  is,  by 
water.  A  Sanyasin  must  have  a  1  Kamandalu  1  or  ‘  Kundika  ’  for  vessel  of 
a  peculiar  size,  made  of  a  scooped  gourd  or  wood)  with  water  within  it. 
He  should  have  also  a  staff  as  a  support  for  his  body  while  walking  ; 

‘  adhara  ’  means  ‘  support.  T. 

\  Sanyasins  have  to  live  upon  the  doles  obtainable  in  course  of  their 
rounds  of  mendicancy.  These  doles  generally  consist  of  handfuls  of 
rice  or  flour.  When  enough  has  been  gained  for  one  meal,  more  should 
not  be  sought.  For  the  keep  of  these  doles  of  charity  they  have  a  vessel 
that  is  generally  made  of  wood.  Cocoanut-shells  are  sometimes  used. 

Another  reading  is  ‘  bhakshya-charrya  1  instead  of  ‘  bhaikshya-charyya  ’ 
which  I  have  adopted.  The  meaning  is  ‘  for  the  gathering  of  food.  T. 

§  The  Sanyasin  should  go  out,  only  once  on  a  day,  on  his  round  of 
mendicancy.  He  should  not  accept  anything  that  is  not  wild.  As  already 
said,  he  should  not  collect  more  than  what  is  needed  for  his  bare  subsistence. 
If  mendicant  rounds  among  human  habitations,  i.e.,  villages,  be  interdicted 
(and  it  has  been  interdicted  for  Sanyasins  of  an  advanced  type),  the  passage 
would  mean,— collection,  only  once  a  day,  of  such  food  as  consists  of  only 
the  products  of  the  wilderness,  and  as  would  be  needed  for  the  bare  support  of 
life.  ’-T. 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


777 


for  meditation,  assumption  of  different  attitudes  of  the  body  ;  * 
dwelling  in  the  forest,  without  the  shelter  of  a  house  ; 
avoidance  of  sloth,  sleep,  idleness,  and  such  other  habits  and 
acts  ;  f 

indifference  to  pleasure  and  pain  arising  from  all  objects  of  the 
senses ; 

Indulgence  with  deliberation  in  such  acts  as  sleeping,  resting, 
walking,  seeing,  eating,  sporting,  moving  of  every  limb,  and  the 
rest;  X 

capacity  to  bear  honour  and  praise  and  censure  and  disgrace  ; 
capacity  to  bear  the  contact  of  hunger  and  thirst  and  exertion 
and  toil,  and  cold  and  heat,  and  wind  and  rain,  and  pleasure  and 
pain ; 

incapability  of  being  moved  by  grief  and  melancholy,  hatred 
and  pride  and  honour,  and  cupidity  and  attachment  and  envy,  and 
fear  and  wrath,  and  the  like  ; 

regarding  pride  and  the  rest  as  calamities  ; 
looking  at  the  creation  and  the  rest  of  the  universe  and  man  as 
similar ; 


*  ‘  Kayanibandhanam  ’  is  explained  by  Chakrapani  as  ‘  use  or  wearing 
of  ‘  yoga-patta.  ’  The  yoga-patta  is  a  garland  of  deer-sk\n.  I  prefer 
Gangadhara's  interpretation.  He  understands  by  the  word  ‘  yoga-asana,  ’ 
assumption  of  different  attitudes  of  the  body.  Yjanavalkya  mentons 
eighty  different  kinds  of  asanas,  such  as  ‘  Padmasana,  ’  ‘  Virasns,’  &c — T. 

+  ‘  Tandra  ’  is  sloth  or  indolence.  One  working  for  one's  Emancipaion 
should  conquer  sloth,  sleep,  and  idleness. — T. 

t  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  all  these  and  similar  acts  are  done  by  the 
generality  of  men  without  the  exercise  of  judgment  or  deliberation.  The 
Yogin  who  wishes  to  achieve  Emancipation  should  do  every  one  of  these 
acts  with  due  deliberation.  He  should  not  sleep  whenever  he  feels  sleepy, 
but  have  fixed  hours  for  sleep.  He  should  not,  again,  outsleep  the  hours  he 
has  fixed  for  himself.  The  fact  is,  Yogins  by  practice,  can  acquire  control 
over  sleep. 

One  moves  one’s  limbs  quite  unconsciously  or  without  any  fixed  purpose. 
The  Yogin  is  forbidden  to  do  this.  He  should  never  move  any  limb  of  his 
body  without  previous  deliberation. — T. 


778 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


fear  at  the  thought  of  the  time  slipping  away  of  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  an  action  ; 

constant  alacrity  in  all  acts  relating  to  yoga ; 
mind  and  vigour  directed  to  the  achivement  of  Emancipation  ; 
increasing  the  strength  of  Intellect,  apprehension,  and  memory  ; 
concentration  of  the  senses  in  the  mind  ;  ' 

concentration  of  the  mind  and  the  soul  in  the  soul ;  * 
knowledge  of  every  part  of  the  body  as  made  of  the  different 
dhatus  (or  ingredients),  t 

the  conviction  that  everything  which  springs  from  a  cause  is 
fraught  with  woe;  that  it  does  not  belong  to  one’s  Self ;  and  that 
it  is  not  durable.  % 

Calling  every  Pravritti  as  woe ;  and  the  conviction  that  in 
complete  renunciation  there  is  felicity. 

This  is  the  way  (that  leads)  to  Emancipation. 

Any  other  way  leads  to  destruction. 

The  means  (for  attaining  to  Emancipation)  have  thus  been 
explained.  ®8 


*  The  senses  should  be  withdrawn  from  all  external  objects  and  con¬ 
centrated  within  the  mind.  This  is  called,  in  Yoga-treatises,  Pratyahara. 
The  mind,  again,  and  the  soul,  should  both  concentrated  within  the 
soul.  The  withdrawal  of  the  soul  implies  the  profoundest  abstraction.  The 
soul  then  beholds  the  soul  as  the  eye  beholds  other  objects.— T. 

t  This  implies  a  distinct  perception  of  ths  different  dhatus  as  entering 
into  the  composition  of  the  body.  The  dhatus  are  the  juice,  blood,  flesh, 
bones,  m  irrow,  adeps,  vital  seed,  and  ojas.  The  Yogin  should  have  a  thorough 
knowledge  of  the  composition  of  the  body.— T. 

J  “All  things  which  have  a  cause  ’  mean  and  include  all  born  objects; 
i.e.,  all  that  is  called  ‘Not-Self.  ’  They  are  perishable,  and  fraught  with 
woe.  They  do  not  partake  the  essence  of  Self.  That,  again,  which  is 
without  a  cause;  is  unborn  or  increite  ;  viz.,  Self  or  the  soul.  It  is 
ever  lasting  or  eternal,  and  is  fraught  with  felicity. 

It  is  only  when  the  Self  falls  away  from  its  own  primal  nature  that 
life,  under  the  conditions  we  know,  begins.  When  ignorance  is  conquered 
and  the  Self  returns  to  its  own  nature,  life  under  the  conditions  we  know 
ceases,  and  eternal  felicity  begins.— T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


779 


{There  are  some  Verses  here.) 

The  mind  which  is  (by  nature)  stainless,  becomes  pure  by  these 
means,  like  a  mirror  that  is  rubbed  with  oil,  or  with  a  piece  of 
cloth,  or  a  brush  of  hair. 

As  the  disc  of  the  sun  blazes  forth  with  effulgence  when  un¬ 
shrouded  by  Rahu  or  the  clouds,  or  dust  or  smoke,  or  fog,  even 
so  does  the  mind  when  it  becomes  pure.  2 

The  mind,  when  withdrawn  into  the  Soul,  blazes  forth 
like  the  pure;  steady,  and  cheerful  flame  of  a  lamp  kept  within 
a  lamp-keeper  having  all  its  sides  closed  (against  the  wind).*8 
That  pure  and  true  understanding  which  arises,  of  one 
whose  mind  has  become  pure,  by  which  one  pierces  the  thick 
gloom  of  ignorance  (or  delusion',  by  which  one,  acquiring 
conversance  with  (the  nature  of)  all  entities  and  (of)  one’s 
own  Self,  becomes  free  from  desire,  by  which  one  is  made 
to  go  through  all  the  acts  relating  to  yoga,  by  which  one 
becomes  a  Sankhya.  by  which  one  is  kept  free  from  pride 
{Aliankara  and  the  rest),  by  which  one  becomes  dissociated 
from  those  causes  which  lead  to  rebirth,  by  which  one  ceases 
to  have  an  attachment  for  anything,  by  which  one  is  led  to 
renounce  everything,  by  which  one  attains  to  Brahma  which  is 
eternal,  unfading,  tranquil,  and  without  decay,  that  pure  and 
true  understanding  is  called  ‘Vidya’  (science),  ‘Siddhi’  (success!, 
‘Mati’  (thoughtfulness),  Medha  (quickness  of  apprehension),  ‘Prajna’ 
(wisdom),  and  Jnanam  (knowledge).f  4-7 


*  Whether  there  were  lanterns  in  those  days,  made  of  glass  or  horn, 
or  any  other  transparent  or  semi-transparent  substance,  is,  of  course, 
not  well-known.  Hence,  I  render  ‘Dwipa?aya’  ‘as  lamp-keeper’  and  not 
‘lantern  ’  or  ‘  lanthorn..  ’ — T. 

t  The  pure  and  true  understanding  which  belongs  to  a  pure  mind,  i.e. 
to  a  mind  which  has  been  rendered  pure  by  the  various  ways  and 
practices  already  described,  enables  one  to  dispel  the  thick  gloom  of 
ignorance  ;  in  other  words,  such  an  understanding  enables  one  to  see  things 
in  their  proper  light  ;  the  vision  of  such  a  person  is  never  clouded.  He 
knows  what  to  regard  and  what  to  disregard. 


99 


780 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Of  one  who  beholds  one’s  own  Self  spread  over  the  uni¬ 
verse,  and  who  beholds  the  universe  in  one’s  own  Self, — indeed, 
who  is  conversant  with  the  distinction  between  ‘Param’  (the 
Highest  or  Brahma)  and  1  Avaram  ’  (the  not-High,  i.  e. 
Prakriti  or  matter),— the  tranquillity  (of  soul)  based  upon  (true) 
knowledge  is  never  lost.  s 

Of  him  who  always  sees  all  creatures  in  all  circumstances  as 
perfectly  equal. — of  such  a  person  of  purity  (of  soul)  who  has, 
indeed,  attained  to  the  status  of  Brahma, -no  touch  (or  contact) 
takes  place  vwith  those  causes  which  bring  about  rebirth).*  9 

In  consequence  of  the  absence  of  Cause,  the  Soul  of  such  a 
person  ceases  to  have  (even)  any  of  its  indications.  Owing  to 
his  dissociation  from  all  causes,  he  is  said  to  be  Freed  (Eman¬ 
cipated).  10 


Such  an  understanding  enables  one  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  all 
entities  and  of  one’s  own  Self  ;  that  is,  one,  through  such  an  understanding, 
succeeds  in  distinguishing  between  Self  and  Not- Self.  The  result  of  such 
distinction  is  cessation  of  desire.  One  is  cured  of  cupidity  or  covetuousness 
in  respect  of  every  thing  that  is  regarded  valuable  or  desirable  by  others. 

Such  an  understanding  enables  one  to  devote  oneself  to  yoga ,  and  to 
become  a  Sankhya,  i.e.,  a  practical  follower  of  that  system  of  philosophy  which 
goes  by  the  name  of  Sankhya.  That  philosophy  teaches  that  everything  in 
the  universe  is  the  result  of  the  union  of  1  Purusha 1  and  ‘Prakriti.’ 
When  this  is  understood  and,  further,  that  ‘  Purusha  ’  is  distinct  from 
‘  Prakriti,  ’  then  ‘  Purusha  ’  becomes  able  to  shake  off  ‘  Prakriti  ’  or 
tear  off  the  latter’s  bonds,  the  result  of  which  is  Emancipation  or  the 
highest  felicity.  In  the  last  line  of  verse  ^  the  words  ‘  Vidya,  ’  1  Siddhi,  ’ 
‘  Smriti,  ’  ‘  Medha,  ’  ‘  Prajna,  ’  and  ‘Jnanam’  are  said  to  apply  to  the 
pure  understanding  which  belongs  to  a  pure  mind. 

‘  Vidya  ’  is  knowledge ;  i.e.,  that  true  knowledge  which  teaches  the 
distinction  between  Self  and  Not-Self.  ‘  Siddhi  ’  implies  Success.  When 
such  an  understanding  is  attained,  the  highest  object  of  acquisition  is 
attained  ;  in  other  words,  success  is  achieved.  ‘  Smriti  ’  and  '  Medha  ’ 
and  ‘  Prajna  ’  and  Jnanam  ’  are  synonyms  of  ‘  Buddhi,  ’  expressing  only 
its  different  phases. — T. 

*  Such  a  person  is  above  Piety  and  Sin,  which  lead  to  felicity  and 
misery,  to  Heaven  and  Hell,  and  therefore  to  new  states  of  existence.  Such 
a  person  attains  to  Emancipation.— T. 


CHARAICA  SAMHITA. 


781 


Tranquillity  of  Soul  (ganti)  is  otherwise  known  by  these 
synonyms,  viz.,  Vipapam,  Virajas,  Qantam,  Param,  Aksharam, 
Avyayam,  Amritam,  Brahma,  and  Nirvanam,*  11 

This,  O  amiable  one,  is  that  Knowledge  by  acquiring  which 
the  Munis,  their  doubts  dispelled,  and  themselves  freed  from 
heedlessness,  and  passion  and  desire,  attained  to  the  tranquillity 
of  Emancipation.  la 


{Here  are  two  verses  containing  a  summary). 

In  this  Lesson  called  ‘  Purusha-Vichayam,  ’  the  following 
topics  have  been  expounded  by  the  great  Rishi,  viz., 

The  similarity  between  the  world  and  Purusha,  together 
with  the  object  in  view  of  which  such  similarity  should  be 
studied  and  understood  ; 

the  original  cause  from  which  the  life  of  Purusha  arises  ;f 
the  way  of  ‘  Nivritti  ’  (or  cessasion  of  desire  and  acts); 
the  practices  which  lead  to  the  acquisition  of  a  pure  mind  ; 


*  ‘  Vipapam  ’  is  Sinlessness  ;  ‘  Virajas  1  is  Stainlessness,  or  freedom 
from  rajas  or  darkness ;  ‘  Cantam  ’  is  the  same  as  ganti  ’  the  difference 
being  one  of  form  or  grammatical  gender.  ‘  Param  ’  is  High  or  Highest  ; 
meaning  the  Supreme  Soul ;  ‘  Aksharam  ’  is  that  which  knows  no  decay 
or  loss  ;  ‘  Avyayam  ’  is  that  which  has  no  change  ;  i.e.,  Immutable  j 
‘  Amritam  1  is  Deathlessness  ;  it  may  otherwise  imply  nectar  or  ambrosia 
which  confers  immortality  ;  ‘  Brahma  ’  means  the  vastest,  or  that  which 
pervades  all  things  ;  Nirvanam  ’  is  extinction  of  all  known  conditions  of 
life.— T. 

t  The  cause  from  which  ‘  Purusha  ’  or  his  life  arises  is  ‘  Pravritti  ’  or  the 
inclination  for  acts.  By  the  conquest  of  1  Pravritti  ’  one  attains  to 
‘  Nivritti  ’  or  the  cessasion  from  all  acts  and  freedom  from  desire.  It  is 
‘  Nivritti  ’  that  leads  to  Emancipation.  As  long  as  there  are  acts,  there 
must  be  life.  If  the  acts  are  good,  happy  life  (Heaven),  and  if  the  a;ts 
are  bad,  an  unhappy  life  (Hell)  will  be  the  consequence.  Acts  are  never 
destroyed  till  their  fruits  are  enjoyed  or  endured.— T. 


782 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


the  Understanding  which  is  true  and  which  leads  to  Eman¬ 
cipation  ;  and  lastly,  Emancipation.  1-2 

Thus  ends  the  Fifth  Lesson,  called  ‘  Purusha-Vichayam,  ’ 
in  the  Division  called  ‘garira’,  of  Agnive$a’s  treatise  as  revised 
by  Charaka. 


LESSON  VI. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  called  ‘garira-Vichayam’ 
in  the  Division  called  *  garira.  ’ 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  1 

In  the  Physician’s  Science,  ‘  garira- Vichaya’,  i.e.,  an  ana¬ 
tomical  knowledge  of  the  body,  is  desirable  for  (compassing) 
the  good  of  the  body.  ’• 

By  knowing  the  anatomy  of  the  body,  one  attains  to  a 
knowledge  nf  all  those  things  \vhich  are  productive  of  benefits 
to  the  body.  For  this  reason,  physicians  possessed  of  skill  ap¬ 
plaud  a  knowledge  of  the  anatomy  of  the  body.5 

In  this  connection  (it  may  be  said  that)  what  is  called  the 
body  is  that  which  has  for  its  essence  a  union  of  the  modifi¬ 
cation  of  the  five  (primal)  elements,  which  constitutes,  besides, 
the  seat  of  the  conscious  Ego.*  4 

Then  the  ‘Dhatus’  (constituent  elements,  i.  e.,  juices,  blood,  flesh, 
&c.)  in  the  body,  which  (in  their  normal  state)  act  with  one  another 
in  harmonious  proportions,  attain  to  inequality  of  proportions, 


*  From  the  point  of  view  of  Hindu  philosophy,  this  is,  pi  rhaps,  the  best 
definition  of  the  body.  The  body  is  a  material  compound,  the  constituting 
elements  being  the  five  primal  essences,  viz.,  earth,  water,  light  or  heat, 
air,  and  space  or  ether,  or,  rather,  their  modifications.  This  material 
compound  is  called  the  body  when  it  is  the  seat  of  Chetana,  by  which  is  meant 
the  Conscious  Ego.— T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


783 


then  this  one  (viz.,  Purusha)  becomes  subject  to  pain  (in  the 
form  of  disease)  or  destruction  (death).  * 

That  which  is  called  the  absence  of  harmony  on  the  part 
of  the  ‘  dhatus,  ’  is,  again,  nothing  but  the  occurrence  of  the 
increase  or  the  decrease  of  some  of  the  ‘  dhatus.’f5 

By  (their)  nature,  increase  and  decrease  of  ‘  dhatus  ’  that 
are  hostile,  take  place  simultaneously.6 

That  which  increases  a  particular  ‘  dhatu  ’  operates  as  the 
decrease  of  that  other  ‘  dhatu  ’  which  is  of  opposite  attributes. 

Hence  that  is  regarded  as  the  rightly  selected  medicine 
which  restores  simultaneously  to  their  normal  condition  the 
increased  and  the  decreased  ‘  dhatus  ’  by  diminishing  the  in¬ 
creased  and  increasing  the  diminished  one. 

Even  this  is  the  effect  that  is  desired  of  the  administration 
of  medicine,  and  even  this  is  the  method  of  the  preservation 
of  health,  viz.,  the  restoration  of  the  dhatus  ’  to  a  state  of 
harmony.!7 


*  Simply  stated,  when  the  constituent  elements  of  the  body  are  in  a  state 
of  harmony,  the  condition  is  called  health.  When  that  harmony  is  lost,  the 
condition  is  called  disease.  If  the  loss  of  harmony  be  decided,  the  result 
is  death. — T. 

t  The  last  word  in  the  aphorism  is  ‘akartsnena,  ’  meaning 
‘  ekadegena  ’  (as  explained  by  Chakrapani),  i.e.,  not  wholly.  The  sense,  of 
course,  is  ‘  of  only  few  ’  or  ‘  of  some  of  them.  ’  As  a  matter  of  fact,  some 
one,  or  two,  or  more  among  the  1  dhatus  ’  becomes  or  become  increased,  or 
decreased.  Upon  such  increase  or  decrease,  the  harmony  of  the 
‘  dhatus,  ’  which  is  their  normal  condition,  becomes  destroyed.  Instead 
of  harmony,  what  succeeds  is  inharmony  or  discordance. — T. 

{  It  has  been  explained  (in  Sutrasthana,  ante,)  that  what  is  called 
Health  is  really  nothing  else  than  the  existence  of  the  several  ‘  dhatus  ’ 
or  constituent  ingredients  of  the  body  in  a  state  of  harmony.  The  normal 
condition  of  the  body  is  the  co-existence  of  the  ‘  dhatus  ’  in  a  state  of 
harmony.  When,  however,  that  harmony  is  destroyed  through  any  cause, 
that  is,  when  some  one  or  more  among  the  ‘dhatus’  is  or  are  increased 
and  some  other  or  others,  possessed  of  opposite  attributes,  is  or  are 
diminished,  the  result  is  inharmony  or  discordance.  Even  this  is 
disease.  If  a  particular  ‘  dhatu  ’  is  increased,  another  that  is  possessed 
of  opposite  attributes  is  sure  to  be  diminished.  The  object  of  medicine  is 


784 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A 


For  keeping  up  the  harmony  of  even  the  harmonious  1  dhatus  ’ 
of  one  who  is  in  health,  persons  possessed  of  skill  desire  .  to 
prescribe  food  in  various  forms,  endued  with  taste  and  the 
attributes  (of  heaviness  and  lightness,  etc.)  in  proper  order. 

When,  again,  persons  take  such  food  as  is  known  to  be 
assimilable  but  as  abounds  in  only  one  kind  of  taste,  (the 
harmony  of  the  ‘  dhatus  ’  being  disturbed),  they  desire  to 
restore  the  (lost)  harmony  by  such  effort  (in  the  form  of  food 
and  drink)  as  are  known  to  be  hostile  in  consequence  of 
(methods  of)  preparation  and  attributes.*8 


simultaneously  to  dimin  ish  the  increased  ‘  dhatu  ’  and  to  increase  the 
diminished  one. — T. 

*  ‘  Anugrahartham  ’  implies  ‘  for  keeping  up  or  maintaining.  1 

‘  Rasagunan,  ’  as  explained  by  Chakrapani,  refers  to  the  tastes  and  the 
attributes  of  heaviness  and  lightness. 

Almost  all  the  printed  editions  have  ‘  ahara-vilcaran,  ’  meaning  1  various 
modifications  of  food  ’  probably,  products  of  diverse  methods  of  cooking  and 
corrections.  Chakrapani  explains  it  as  implying  the  different  kinds  of 
food,  viz.,  ‘  Charya,  ’  ‘  Choshya,  ’  ‘  I  ehya  ’  and  ‘  Peya,  ’  that  is,  food  that 
is  chewed,  or  sucked,  or  licked,  or  drunk. 

Another  reading  is  1  ahara-viharan,  ’  meaning  ‘  food  and  sports.  ’ 
The  only  objection  to  the  acceptance  of  this  reading  is  the  inapplicability 
of  the  adjective  1  rasagunan  ’  to  it.  ‘  Paryyayena  ’  is  explained  by 
Chakrapani  as  ‘  atyuchitena  kramena,  ’  that  is,  ‘  in  due  or  proper  succession 
or  order.  ’  He  explains  it  further  thus  :  if  by  excessive  use  of  honey,  the 
phlegm  is  excited,  articles  which  are  pungent  or  bitter  should  be  taken 
for  alleviating  the  excited  phlegm.  This  is  as  regards  the  tastes.  Then, 
if  by  taking  food  that  is  heavy,  the  digestive  fire  becomes  weakened,  light 
food  should  be  taken  so  that  the  weakened  fire  may  recover  its  normal 
strength.  ‘  Kuijalah,  ’  in  the  first  portion  of  the  aphorism,  may  mean  hoth 
skilled  physicians  and  (as  explained  by  Gangadhara)  1  Swahitai$inah 
buddhimantah,  ’  that  is,  ‘  intelligent  persons  that  are  always  careful  of  their 
own  health.  ’ 

‘  Viparita  karana-lakshmana-samakhyata-cheshta  ’  has  been  explained 
differently  by  different  commentators  and  translators.  Chakrapani,  I  think, 
is  correct.  He  understands  the  compound  as  meaning  1  such  cheshta 
or  effort  (in  the  form  of  administering  food  and  drink)  which  is  known  by  this 
lakshana  or  name,  viz.,  ‘  Viparita  -karana,  ’  i.e.,  of  hostile  or  opposite  action 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A 


785 


A  judicious  recourse  to  such  acts  as  are  opposed  to  (or 
capable  of  neutralising  the  effect  of)  place,  season,  and  attributes 
(or  peculiarities)  of  body,  and  to  such  modifications  of  food 
and  drink  in  proper  succession  (as  are  opposed  to  the  same), 
a  judicious  correlation  with  all  things, 
suppression  of  such  excreta  whose  urgings  are  not  felt, 
non-suppression  of  such  excreta  whose  urgings  are  felt,  and 
avoidance  of  all  acts  of  temerity  and  foolhardiness, 
these  are  laid  down  as  the  regimen  of  the  healthy  for  pre¬ 
servation  of  the  harmony  of  the  constituent  elements  of  their 
body.  *9 


or  elects.  ’  The  compound  is  otherwise  explained.  ‘  Karana  ’  means 
‘  process, '  and  ‘  lakshmana  ’  means  ‘  attributes.  ’  Hence,  the  compound 
may  be  taken  as  meaning  ‘  such  effor  s  (in  the  form  of  food  and  drink) 
as  are  known  to  be  hostile  in  consequence  of  (methods  of)  preparation  and 
attributes.’ — T. 

*  The  word  ‘  Vipa  itanam  ’  is  connected  grammatically  with  ‘  dega,  ’ 

‘  kala,  ’  and  •  atmaguna  ;  1  hence,  the  sense  is  1  those  acts  which  are  hostile 
to  or  which  are  capable  of  neutralising  the  effects  of  place,  time,  and 
bodily  or  physical  attributes,  i.e.,  peculiar!' ies  of  the  body.  ’  Chakrapani  gives 
the  following  illustrations  :  of  acts  neutralising  the  effects  of  ‘  dega  ’  or  place, 
is  sleep  in  a  desert.  The  sense,  perhaps,  is  that  in  a  desert  one  feels 
thirsty.  If,  however,  one  goes  to  sleep  while  in  such  a  place  and  while 
one  is  thirsty,  the  thirst  may  be  allayed  if  not  quenched  outright  Of 
acts  neutralising  the  effects  of  season  is  instanced  physical  exercise  in 
the  season  of  spring  In  this  season,  the  body  becomes  heavy  with  juifces. 
Hence,  physical  exercise  (particularly  walking)  is  needed  in  this  season 
for  neutralising  the  heaviness  caused  by  accession  of  juices.  Among  acts 
capable  of  neutralising  the  effects  of  particular  attributes  or  conditions 
of  the  body,  is  mentioned  hard  exercise  and  avoidance  of  sleep  by  one 
whose  body  is  characterised  by  obesity.  Absence  of  exercise,  aided  by 
sleep,  is  sure  to  increase  one’s  obesity. 

The  compound  ‘  aharavikaranam  ’  (in  the  genetive  plural)  is  gramatically 
qualified  by  ‘  dega-viparitanam.  ’  Hence,  such  kinds  of  dietary  modifications, 
that  is,  different  kinds  of  food  and  drink  manufactured  by  different 
processes,  are  meant  as  are  capable  of  neutralising  the  effects  of  place,  time  or 
season,  and  attributes  or  peculiarities  of  the  body. 


786 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


The  constituent  elements  of  the  body  attain  to  increase 
through  use  of  dietary  modifications  which  are  endued  with 
qualities  that  are  wholly,  or  in  a  large  measure,  accordant  with 
them. 

These  attain,  again,  to  decrease  or  attenuation  through  use 
of  dietary  modifications  that  are  wholly,  or  in  a  large  measure, 
unaccordant  with  (or  hostile  to)  them.10 

In  this  connection,  the  following  are  (some  of)  the  attributes 
of  the  constituent  attributes  of  the  body.  A  knowledge  of  these 
attributes  is  capable  of  enabling  one  to  distinguish  different 
objects  from  one  another. 

They  are, — 

heavy  and  light  ;  cold  and  hot  ;  oily  and  dry  ;  mild  and 
keen  ;  compact  and  mobile  ;  soft  and  hard  ;  clear 
and  slimy  ;  smooth  and  rough  ;  minute  and  gross  ; 
and  solid  and  liquid.11 

Amongst  these,  those  constituent  elements  which  are  heavy, 
are  nourished  through  use  of  such  modifications  of  food  and  drink 
as  are  heavy  in  quality;  while  those  which  are  light  become 
attenuated  (through  use  of  such  food  and  drink). 

Those  constituent  elements,  again,  which  are  light,  are 
nourished  through  the  use  of  such  modifications  of  food  and 


‘  Sarvabhiyogah  ’  is  the  correct  reading,  and  not  *  Sarvatiyogah  ’  as  in 
some  blundering  manuscripts  of  Chakrapani’s  gloss.  The  word  means 
‘  judicious  correlation  with  all  things,  ’  that  is,  with  ‘  kala,  ’  1  buddhi,  ’ 
and  the  objects  of  the  senses.  Of  course,  the  absence  of  1  Atiyoga,  ’ 
‘  Ayoga,  ’  and  1  Mithya-Yoga  ’  is  implied. 

‘  Anudirnanam  gatimatam  sandharanam  ’  implies  the  absence  of  the 
very  objectionable  and  injurious  habit  of  seeking  to  expel  all  kinds  of 
excreta  even  when  no  urging  thereto  is  at  all  experienced.  ‘  Gatimat  ’ 
is,  literally,  ‘  anything  endued  with  motion  ;  ’  here,  all  kinds  of  excreta 
which  escape  out  of  the  body. 

The  avoidance  of  all  acts  of  rashness  or  temerity  is  absolutely  necessary 
for  the  preservation  of  the  harmony  of  the  constituent  elements  of  the  body. 
Danger  operates  injuriously  on  many  temperaments.— T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


787 


drink  as  are  light  in  quality  ;  while  those  which  are  heavy  become 
attenuated  through  them. 

In  this  way,  through  union  with  something  of  similar 
attributes,  all  the  attributes  of  the  constituent  elements  (of  the 
body)  gain  in  strength while  through  union  with  things  of 
dissimilar  attributes,  they  become  attenuated.  *12 

Hence,  by  flesh  is  nourished  flesh  above  all  other  constituent 
elements  of  the  body. 

Similarly,  blood  is  nourished  by  blood  ;  adeps  by  adeps; 
fat  by  fat;  bones  by  cartilage  ;  marrow  by  marrow  ;  semen  by 
semen  ;  and  conception  by  the  newly- formed  foetus  (of  some  other 
animal).  +13 

Where,  however,  such  modifications  of  food  and  drink  as  are 
possessed  of  similar  attributes  are  not  obtainable,  or  being 
obtainable,  are  not  suitable  in  consequence  of  unassimilability,  or 
of  an  aversion  felt  for  it,  or  of  any  other  reason,  and  where  it  is 
necessary  to  nourish  the  particular  in  gredients  (of  the  body), 
the  physician  should,  viewing  the  impossibility  of  administering 
such  modifications  of  foo  l  and  drink  as  are  possessed  of  similar 


*  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  in  the  previous  aphoiism,  ten  pairs  of 
attributes  in  respect  of  the  constituent  elements  of  the  body  have  been 
mentioned.  They  are  heavy  and  light,  cold  and  hot,  &c.  Each  pair 
represents  attributes  opposed  to  each  other.  In  the  present  aphorism  it  is 
said  that  elements  that  are  heavy  are  nourished  by  food  and  drink 
possessing  the  property  of  heaviness.  Such  food  and  drink,  while  nourishing 
the  elements  that  partake  their  own  nature,  attenuate  those  that  are 
possessed  of  attributes  dissimilar  to  theirs.  In  brief,  heavy  food  nourishes 
the  heavy  elements  and  weakens  the  light  ones.  So  light  food  nourishes 
the  light  elements  but  weakens  the  heavy  ones.  The  same  holds  good  with 
all  the  pairs  of  opposites. — T. 

t  What  the  Rishi  says  here  is  that  by  taking  food  consisting  entirely  or 
largely  of  the  flesh  of  other  animals,  one  would  gain  in  flesh  although  the 
other  ingredients  of  one’s  body  would  not  remain  totally  unnourished.  This 
is  the  sense  of  1  bhuyas  ’  in  the  original.  What  is  meant  by  ‘  garbhastu 
amagarbhena  ’  imply  that  one’s  conception  is  nourished  by  one’s  eating  a 
raw  foetus  or,  rather,  an  ovum  in  the  raw  or  first  stage  of  some  such  animal 
as  goat,  sheep,  &c.— T.  * 


IOO 


788 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA, 


attributes,  administer  substances  of  other  nature  as  happen  to  be 
possessed,  in  a  great  measure,  of  similar  attributes.  *14 

The  following  are  examples  : 

When  there  is  absence  of  semen,  the  use  is  approved  of  milk 
and  ghee,  as  also  of  other  articles  which  are  regarded  as  sweet  and 
oily. 

When,  again,  there  is  absence  of  urine,  the  use  is  approved 
of  the  juice  of  the  Sugarcane,  of  the  wine  called  Varuni,  of  gruel 
(of  rice,  barley,  and  other  corn),  of  liquids,  of  articles  that  are 
sweet,  or  acid,  or  saline  in  taste,  and  of  all  articles  that  are  endued 
with  laxative  properties,  f 

When  there  is  loss  of  faeces,  the  use  is  approved  of  Kulmasha 
(a),  of  Masha  ( b ),  of  Kushkunda  ( c ),  Ajamadhya  («?),  Yava  ( e ), 


*  The  language  of  the  original  is  altogether  so  pleonastic  and  redundant 
that  it  is  difficult  to  resist  the  belief  about  its  being  an  interpolation. — T. 

t  ‘  Varuni  ’  is  a  kind  of  wine.  ‘  Manda, 1  in  this  connection,  may  imply 
a  spiritous  liquor,  although  the  word  is  generally  applied  to  mean  their  gruel 
of  rice  or  any  other  grain  duly  boiled. 

‘  Upakledi,  ’  probably,  means  such  articles  as  have  not  much  substance  in 
them  ;  that  is,  as  do  not  nourish  flesh,  or  blood,  or  bones,  &c.,  but  as  have 
much  that  is  called  asara  or  unsubstantial  ;  hence,  as  produce  much  urine  or 
feces,  or  other  secretions. — T. 

a.  ‘  Ayurvedartha  Chandrika  ’  explains  that  ‘Kulmasha’  as  another  name 
of  ‘  Kulattha,  ’  i.e.,  Dolicho$  uniflorus,  Lcimk.,  or  Dolichos  biflorus,  Roxb.  In 
this  connection,  ‘  kulmasha  ’  seems  to  be  nothing  else  than  ‘  kulattha.  ’ 
The  word  is  used  sometimes  as  another  name  for  the  variety  of  paddy  called 
‘  Boro '  in  Bengal,  which  yields  a  very  rough  and  coarse  kind  of  rice. 
When  fields  are  inundated  (in  Bengal)  the  Boro  is  cultivated,  for  it  grows 
vigorously  in  water.  The  word  also  implies  Tulasi,  i.e.,  Ocimum  Sanctum. 

b.  Pkaseolus  radiatus,  Roxb  ;  syn  Phaseolus  Roxburghii ,  W.  A. 

c.  Chakrapani  explains  that  this  word  is  applied  to  ‘  Palalu  Cchatra,  ’  i.e., 
a  sort  of  fungus  or  mushroom  that  grows  on  rotting  straw  or  grass  and 
that  is  much  eaten  by  the  lower  classes  of  the  Indian  people. 

d.  Literally,  ‘  the  middle  part  of  a  goat.  ’  Chakrapani  says  it  implies 
the  entrails  of  a  goat,  i.e.,  the  intestines,  &c., 

e.  Hordeum  hexastichun,  Linn.  Barley.  The  fact  is,  the  lower  classes  of 
the  Indian  people  take  the  flour  of  bnrley  (called  Cchatu)  with  water  and  salt. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


789 


Qaka  (/),  and  Dhanyamla  (g). 

When  there  is  absence  or  loss  of  wind  in  the  system,  the 
use  is  recommended  of  articles  that  are  pungent,  or  bitter,  or 
astringent,  or  dry,  or  light,  or  cooling.  When  there  is  absence 
or  loss  of  bile,  the  use  is  recommended  of  articles  that  are  acid,  or 
saline,  or  pungent,  in  taste,  or  that  are  alkaline,  or  heating  or  keen. 

When  there  is  absence  or  loss  of  phlegm,  the  use  is 
recommended  of  articles  that  are  oily,  or  heavy,  or  sweet,  or  thick, 
or  lardaceous. 

Those  acts  also  which  enhance  particular  ingredients  should  be 
had  recourse  to  when  those  particular  ingredients  are  required 
to  be  strengthened  or  restored.  *15 

And  in  this  way,  as  regards  the  other  ingredients  of  the  body, 
their  increase  and  decrease  should  be  accomplished,  in'  due  time, 
by  means  of  food  and  drink,  as  also  acts,  which  are  similar  and 
dissimilar  to  them  in  respect  of  their  attributes 

Thus  has  been  explained,  through  the  process  call  extended 
application  or  analogy,  those  means  which  accomplish  the 
increase  and  decrease  of  all  the  constituent  elements  of  the  bodyf1® 


/.  Potherbs  of  all  kinds. 

g.  Inspirated  rice-gruel,  commonly  called  ‘  Kanji  ’  in  Bengal.  It  is 
cooling  and  slightly  intoxicating.  It  operates  as  a  purgative. 

*  The  acts  referred  to  here  are  of  the  following  description  ;  night -keeping 
increases  the  wind  ;  sleep  increases  adeps  and  fat  ;  fasts,  and  physical 
exercise,  decrease  them. — T. 

t  The  constituent  elements  of  the  body  have,  it  should  be  remembered, 
been  classified  under  ten  pairs  of  opposites,  {vide  aphorism  1 1  above)  How 
the  elements  of  a  particular  kind  can  be  increased  and  how  they  can  be 
decreased  is  the  subject  which  the  Rishi  is  explaining.  He  has  especially 
noticed  only  a  few  kinds  of  elements,  and  laid  down  the  processes  to  be 
adopted  for  their  increase  and  decrease.  What  he  says  in  the  latter  part  of 
aphorism  16  is  that  the  increase  and  decrease  of  those  kinds  of  elements 
which  have  not  been  expressly  mentioned  are  to  be  regarded  as  explained  by 
simply  an  extended  application  of  the  principle  or  process  which  has  been 
laid  down  in  the  case  of  those  elements  which  have  been  expressly  mentioned. 

‘  Atidega  ’  implies  an  extended  application  of  a  principle  laid  down.  It  is 
something  like  Analogy.— T . 


790 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


The  following  are  the  means  which  nourish  the  whole  body  ; 
Suitability  or  conjunction  of  time  ; 

Dispensation  of  Nature  ; 

Congenial  food  and  drink,  and 
Absence  of  shocks  (or  adverse  circumstances).  *  17 
The  following  are  means  of  increase  of  strength  ; 

They  are — 

Birth  in  a  country  of  strong  men ; 

Birth  in  an  age  of  strong  men  ; 

Happy  conjunction  of  time  ; 

Wealth  of  attributes  of  both  seed  and  soil  ; 

Wealth  of  food  and  drink  ; 

Wealth  of  body ; 

Wealth  of  assimilability  ; 

Wealth  of  Mind  ; 


*  Some  texts  used  ‘  Kartsneua.  ’  The  correct  reading,  it  seems,  is 
‘  Kritsna  ’  as  qualifying  1  £aira.  ’  The  sense  is  this  :  having  spoken  of  the 
nourishment  of  particular  constituents  of  the  body,  the  Rishi  in  this  aphorism 
speaks  of  what  would  nourish  the  entire  body. 

By  ‘  Kalayoga  ’  is  meant  the  suitability  of  time,  understood  either  as 
applying  to  the  particular  season  of  the  year  or  the  age  of  a  person.  Thus 
when  the  period  comes  of  decrepitude,  nothing  can  nourish  the  body.  So, 
when  the  season  of  the  year  is  adverse  to  a  particular  constitution,  nothing 
can  make  it  thrive. 

1  Swabhava-siddhi  ’  is  dispensation  of  Nature.  If  the  body  be  naturally 
weak,  nothing  can  nourish  it.  Nature  must  help  all  the  other  means  of 
nourishment. 

Amongst  all  causes  of  nourishment,  congenial  food  and  drink  are 
certainly  the  foremost.  All  other  causes  being  present,  a  person  can  never 
hope  to  have  any  nourishment  without  such  food  and  drink  as  are  congenial 
or  well-suited  to  him,  meaning  food  and  drink  that  are  readily  assimilable. 

The  last  cause  is  the  absence  of  shocks  or  the  sudden  operation  of  over¬ 
powering  forces,  such  as  a  fall  from  a  high  place,  or  a  sudden  accession  of 
great  joy  or  grief  or  fear,  or  a  sudden  outburst  of  emotion.  Excessive  physical 
exercise  or  toil  falls  within  this  head.— T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA 


79i 


Dispensation  of  Nature  ; 
Youth  ; 

Acts  ;  and 

Cheerfulness  or  joy.  *18 


*  ‘  Birth  in  a  country  of  strong  men  ’  is,  of  course,  a  cause,  of  strength. 
One  born  in  Afghanisthan  or  in  the  Soudan,  has  every  chance  of  becoming 
an  able-bodied  and  strong  man.  One  bom  in  Bengal  has  little  chance  of 
becoming  so. 

‘  Birth  in  an  age  of  strong  men  ’  is  another  reason  of  one’s  gaining 
strength.  Those  born  in  the  Krita  or  the  Treta,  or  even  the  Dwapara  age, 
had  very  favourable  chances  of  becoming  strong  according  to  Pauranik 
writers  and  Hindu  physicians.  Those,  for  example,  speaking  of  historical  times, 
who  were  born  in  Sparta  at  the  time  of  Lycurgus,  had  every  chance  of  becoming 
strong. 

‘  Kala  ’  implies  both  season  and  the  age  of  man.  Season  includes 
climate.  The  spring  is  the  season  when  men  generally  becomes,  stronger 
than  at  other  times  of  the  year.  Similarly,  youth  is  the  time  when  one 
becomes  stronger  than  at  any  other  period  of  one’s  life. 

Wealth  of  seed  and  soil  is  one  of  the  most  powerful  causes  of  strength. 
S'rong  parents  very  generally  be  get  strong  children. 

Continent  couples  may  also  be  said  to  possess  wealth  of  soil  and  seed. 
Nothing  need  be  said  of  wealth  of  food  ;  wealth  of  body  (meaning  a  well- 
formed  body),  and  wealth  of  assimilation,  are  causes  of  strength.  It  very 
generally  happens  that  wealth  of  assimilation  is  not  possessed  by  rich  people. 
There  occurs  a  flue  verse  in  the  Mababharata.  It  runs  as  follows  : 

Prayena  grimatam  loke  bhoktum  gaktirna  vidyate, 

Kashthanyapi  hi  jiryyante  daridranancha  sarvasah. 

“  Very  generally,  men  of  wealth  lack  power  of  assimilation  ;  while  the  poor 
succeed  in  digesting  even  hard  wood. 

It  is  one  thing  to  have  good  food  ;  and  another  thing  to  digest  the  food 
one  has.  In  many  countries,  there  are  stronger  men  among  the  poorer 
classes  who  live  on  coarser  food  thau  their  superiors  in  the  social  scale. 
This  is,  of  course,  due  to  wealth  of  assimilation. 

By  wealth  of  Mind  is  meant  a  cheerful  and  contented  mind.  None  but 
a  cheerful  and  contended  man  can  have  a  good  digestion.  All  his  organs 
have  full  play.  Such  men  are  likely  to  have  strength.  A  melancholy  person  is 
believed  to  have  a  bad  liver. 


792 


CHARAKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


The  following  are  the  entities  which  accomplish  the  transforma¬ 
tion  of  food  (into  juices,  blood,  and  the  other  constituent  elements 
of  the  body)  : 

They  are, — 

Heat  or  (digestive  fire) ; 

-Wind; 

Secreted  juices  (such  as  saliva,  gastric  juice,  &c.)  ; 

Oil ; 

Time  ;  and 

Judicious  correlation.#19 


‘  Swabbava-samsiddhi 1  ‘  I  render,  is  ‘  dispensation  of  Nature.  ’  The  sense 
is  this  :  there  are  some  constitutions  wh;ch  are  so  endued  by  nature  that 
they  surmount  all  obstacles,  and  gain  strength,  or  having  gained  it, 
succeed  in  retaining  it  under  even  the  most  unfavourable  considerations.  The 
vitality  of  such  constitutions  is  simply  wonderful.  The  enumeration  of  youth 
as  a  cause  of  strength  seems  to  be  a  repetition,  for  ‘  Kala  1  has  already  been 
mentioned.  It  occurs  third  in  the  text. 

‘  Acts  as  a  source  of  strength,  would  imply  physical  exercises.  Acts  may 
also  mean  all  kinds  of  righteous  acts,  particularly  abstention  from  ugly  and 
infamous  deeds.  It  is  the  belief  in  India,  among  Hindus  in  especial,  that  sin 
destroys  strength,  and  righteous  adds  to  it.  In  one  sense,  this  is  undoubtedly 
correct. 

The  mention  of  cheerfulness  or  joy  as  a  cause  of  strength,  seems  to  be  a 
repetition,  for  1  wealth  of  mind  ’  implies  nearly  the  same  thing,  seeing 
cheerfulness  especially  mentioned.  ‘  Wealth  of  mind  ’  ought  to  be  taken  in  a 
wider  sense. — T. 

*  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  it  is  food  that  is  transformed  into  blood, 
bones,  flesh,  marrow,  &c.  The  question  is,  what  are  those  agents  which 
transform  food  into  these  constituent  elements  of  the  body  ?  The  answer  is — 
Heat  (meaning  the  digestive  fire)  ;  wind  (whose  operation  is  referred  to  in  the 
next  aphorism)  ;  ‘  Kleda  ’  (by  which  is  meant  recreted  juice  like  snlive,  the 
gastric  juice)  ;  Oil  (which  means  the  oily  substances  in  food  ;  without  these, 
food  cannot  be  softened  and  digested)  ;  Time  (about  whose  eflects,  there  can 
be  no  doubt  ;  and  judicious  correlation,  which  implies  the  presence  of  harmo¬ 
nious  elements  or  the  absence  of  hostile  elements,  in  the  food  taken.  It  is, 
of  course,  well-known  that  hostile  elements  in  food  are  an  impediment  to 
digestion. — T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


793 


In  this  connection,  truly,  of  these  entities,  viz.,,  Heat  and  the 
rest,  which  accomplish  the  transformation  of  food,  the  following 
are  the  functions  of  each  : 

They  are, — 

Heat  cooks  (i.  e.,  digests)  ; 

Wind  draws  ; 

Secreted  juices  slacken  ; 

Oil  generates  softness  ; 

Time  achieves  the  completion  (of  the  operation)  ;  and, 
lastly,  the 

Judicious  correlation  (of  the  ingredients  of  the  food  taken) 
aids  in  accomplishing  the  transformation  of  food, 
and  brings  about  harmony  of  the  constituent 
elements  of  the  body*“ 


*  The  function  of  Heat  or  digestive  fire  is  to  cook,  that  is,  to  digest 
the  food  in  the  stomach.  (The  root  ‘  pach  ’  means  to  cook  ;  digestion  also 
is  culled  ‘  Paka  ’  or  ‘  paripaka, '  both  of  which  are  from  the  root  ‘  pach.  ' 
The  fact  is,  digestion  is  regarded  as  a  sort  of  cooking). 

The  function  of  wind  is  ‘  apakarshana,  ’  literally  meaning  ‘drawing1 
or  1  dragging.  ’  Chakrapani  explains  that  wind  draws  the  food  to  the 
digestive  fire  ;  that  is,  brings  it  near  the  fire. 

The  secreted  juices  cause  1  Qaithilya, 1  that  is,  slacken  or  loosen  the 
particles.  Of  course,  this  implies  dissolution,  or,  at  least,  semi-dissolution. 

Time  is  a  great  factor.  Jt  accomplishes  or  causes  the  completion  of  the 
operation  called  digestion.  What  is  meaut  is  this  :  heat  may  cook  ;  wind 
may  draw  ;  the  juices  may  slacken  ;  oil  may  soften  ;  yet  all  these  operations 
require  time  before  they  can  be  completed,  or  reach  that  stage  which  is  called 
completed  digestion. 

Lastly  comes  ‘  Samayoga  ’  (and  not  ‘  Samyoga  ’  as  some  texts  read 
incorrectly).  ‘  Samayoga, '  is  contradistinguished  from  ‘  Ayoga  ’  ‘  Atiyoga,  ’ 
and  ‘  Mithyayoga.  ’  These  words  have  been  explained  fully  in  Sutrasthana. 
By  ‘Samayoga’  is  meant  the  judicious  correlation  of  the  ingredients  of  food, 
in  the  absence  of  such  correlation,  digestion  must  be  impeded.— T. 


794 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


The  attributes  of  food  after  transmutation,  when  not  hostile, 
attain,  each  according  to  its  own  nature,  to  the  condition  of  the 
attributes  of  the  body. 

When  hostile,  destroyed  by  their  opposite  natures,  they  destroy 
the  body.*21 

The  ingredients  (or  constituent  elements)  of  the  body  are, 
briefly,  twofold. 

They  are — 

(1)  Those  whieh  are  Impure  (Refuse),  and 

(2)  Those  which  are  Pure. 

Amongst  these,  those  are  said  to  be  Impure  which  are 
impediments  of  which  the  body  must  rid  itself. 

They  are — 

(1)  Extraneous  products,  occurring  in  the  holes  and  pores  of 
the  body,  of  separate  birth  ;  and 


*  The  original  is  exceedingly  terse.  I  have  endeavoured  to  present  it  in  all 
its  terseness.  I  fear,  the  English  version,  like  the  otiginid,  would  be  un- 
intelligble  without  a  commentary.  What  the  Rishi  says  here  is  this  : 

Heat,  wind,  the  secreted  juices,  oil,  &o.,  transfoim  or  transmute  the  food 
that  is  taken  into  such  substances  as  become  blood,  bones,  flesh,  marrow,  &c. 
The  substances  into  which  food  is  transmuted  are  called  here  ‘  aharasya 
gunah.  ’ 

‘  Gunah— plural— is  generall;.  rendered  ‘attributes.  ’  It  is  technical 
term  in  such  connections.  That  into  which  a  particular  thing  is  transmuted 
is  called  the  ‘  guna  ’  or  attribute  of  gold. 

The  word  ‘  guna  ’  in  ‘  garira-guna,  ’  again,  would  imply  the  ingredients 
or  elements  which  constitute  the  ‘  garira  ’  or  body. 

There  are  other  senses  in  which  ‘guna'  is  used.  With  them  we  have 
nothing  to  do  here. 

Having  said  that  the  substances  into  which  food  is  transmuted  by  heat, 
&c.,  become  the  ingredients  or  constituent  elements  of  the  body,  the  Rishi 
refers  to  the  limitation  under  which  this  result  takes  place  The  limitation 
is  that  the  substances  must  not  be  hostile  to  one  another.  In  the  second  part 
it  is  stated  that  if  those  substances  be  hostile  to  one  another,  that  is,  if 
instead  of  Samayoga  there  be  Ayog,  Atiyoga,  or  Mithyayoga  in  the  food 
one  takes,  the  result  is  not  nourishment  but  disease  and  destruction  of  the 
body.— T. 


Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.A.,  C.  I.  E.  Director  of  Public  Instruction.  Bengal : — 
I  have  been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination  in  part 
IV  of  all  the  things  which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  unde  rs.tand 
the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life  cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 

James  W •  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister ,  Maryland ,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  have 
undertaken  agreat  ana  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves 
the  approbation  and  encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise 
men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and  taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the 
preservation  of  health  and  the  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco ,  California. — *  *  * 
As  each  successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is 
apparent.  *  *  *  There  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the 

Western  mind,  occidental  medical  science,  therapeutic.  American  and  Europe¬ 
an  medical  science  has  much  to  learn.  *  *  * 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia ,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  are  entitled  to 
the  greatest  praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my 
editorial  management — will  begin  to  review  books,  etc.,  and  one  of  the  first 
to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  0.  Court-man  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Ohio  U.  S.  A.  ' The  work  interests 
me  very  highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night,  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of 
one  of  our  medical  societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  -lively 
curiosity  and  expressions  of  interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical 
j  ournal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical  monthly. 

Professor  E.  B-  Cowell,  Cambridge:... A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient 
work  will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in 
translating  the'entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  Or  Eccless,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York  :...The  matter  is  certainly 
of  great  interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis,  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences, 
Philadelphia  :  Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the 
Medical  literature. 


F.  A.  Castle,  Esq.,-- -Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with 
its  importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing -it 
to  the  attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academ  of  Medicine. 

Dr-  H-  C.  Wood,  Philadelphia:... I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interestnig  and 
sincerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be 
one  of  the  happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  quite  a  long 
notice  of  it  which  I  expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the 
de  mi-official  organ  of  the  greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mittra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  of  Cashmere  :...No  medical  man’s  library 
should  be  without  Charaka  ;  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has 
studied  this  great  work  of  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldsberg.  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North- 
Western  University  ;  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exhibition 
:...I  am  already. deeply 'interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take 
occasion  to  speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 


Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  :...Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking. 
I  regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H-  Buck,  Esq  ,  19  East  38th  Street,  New  York  :...Wish  you  a  success 
in  your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

MOHS.  T-  G-ebbard-,  Derselhofber  Traise  Dramstadt  :...The  difficulties  you 
speak  of  in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb 
says  what  takes  much  lime,  comes  out  well. 

Dr  H.  N-  Whelpley,  Phd-,  G-.M.D ,  FR-M  S.  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A.  Editor 
Meyer  Brothers  Druggist  :... I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  it  in  our  colu  mns 
and  advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire 


[  3  ] 


English  writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter 
at  their  disposal.  The  work  is  certainly  highly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  general 

Mons  H-  Le-  Soudor-  Librarie  Etrangere  174.  Boulevaise.  Saint  Germain:... 
Beg  to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of 
Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq..,  New  York  :...Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense 
you  for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review 
which  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.A.,  M-D.,  PHILADELPHIA  As  I  go  over  each 
fasciculus  I  always  arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  if  the  physicians 
of  the  present  day  would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  modern  Drugs 
and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients  according  to  the  method  of  Char 
aka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and  fewer  chronic 
invalids  in  the  world.  1  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  com  pletion  of 
the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C-  Bonnerjee,  Esq  ,  6.  Park  street,  Calcutta  :... My  dear  Pundit  Kabiratna 

Mahasaya,...I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen 
of  whom  I  spoke ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise 
to  you  [about  drawing  their  attention  to]  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again, 
sometime  after,. ..An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note  *  *  Considerable  praise*.is  due 
to  you  for  your  efforts  to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Faul  Burtholom,  M  D.  Philadelphia  :... I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with 
the  profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that 
I  have  ever  met  before  in  Medical  literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord 
Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C  S.  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Maimensing  :...The 
translation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.  C-  S  ,  0.1.  E.  Magistrate  and  Collector  :...Your  patriotic 
labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun.  *  *  * 
You  deserve  the  especial  acknowledgements  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  H.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S  : — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest. 
It  is  marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’ maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonder¬ 
ful  to  note  the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sage  s  of  your 
country  and  how  completely  they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we 
moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the  enlightment  of  this  age. 

G  A.  Grierson.  Esq-,  C.  S.,  Gya  :..,It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall 
be  obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr-  Griffith  Evans,  M.D.,  Brynkynall,  Bangor  North  Wales.. ..The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the 
origin,  growth  and  development  of  medical  science,  also  illustrates  some  ancient 
social  customs  of  India.  1 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C-  S.  I-  Your  English 
translation  of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures 
of  a  great  work  before  a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevit¬ 
able  dfficulty  of  identifying  a  large  number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the 
Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as  possibly  the  best  that  could 
be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning  to  find  that  a 
knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka- 
Samhita  It  is  a  work  that  should  he  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or 
young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerjee.  The  work  is,  not  only  of 
value  to  the  physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the 
general  reader  as  well.  Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support. 
I  wish  you  all  success. 


Oft! 


PART  XXVI. 


4738  7 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


(  TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH). 


4VINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of_Susruta-Samhita 
(in  original)  with  Commentaries  ;  Bengali  and 
Hindi  Translator  of  Charaka-Samhita 

AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF 

Chikitsa-Sammilani  (Medical  Journal 
in  Bengali) ;  Practitioner  of  the 
Hindu  System  of  Medicine, 

&c.,  &c.,  &c.,  &c., 


Published 

AT 

200,  Cornwallis  Street , 


( The  Right  of  Translation  is  Reserved). 


Herald  Printing  Works. 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extract  from  their  Letters.) 

Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English 
tianslation  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very 
glad  to  help  you  in  any  way  you  may  wish— Writing  again  in  November  1893. 
he  says— I  am  surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  haa 
not  attracted  more  attention.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine  ,  Sir  Henry 
Edward,  was  much  interested  in  it. 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  c.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of 
the  successive  parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhitas.  I  regard  them  as  a 
valuable  addition  to  my  library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be 
very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinliold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office— 

Your  excellent  translation  is  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which 
will  not  fail  to  make  ancient  Hindu  Medicine  better  understood  and  appre. 
ciated  in  the  West.  I  shall  draw  the  'attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to 
your  difficult  and  meritorious  work.  Many  important  additions  to  our  Sanskrit 
dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from  your  translation. 

Austin  Flint  Esq. ,  New  York  U.  S.  A.: — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure 
the  first  fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  shall  be  very 
glad  to  receive  the  rest  of  the  work.  It  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the 
medical  profession,  which  will  be  under  great  obligation  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden  :— I  am  deeply  interested  in  any- 
thing  Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain 
whatever  insight  I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V-  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S. 
A. — I  must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should 
very  much  like  to  make  a  little  note  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy 
work  you  are  doing.  Be  assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation 
and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and  antique  lore. 

Mons  A.  Birth.,  Paris  — Your  efforts  to  place  within  each  of  the  readers 
of  ancient  literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental 
scholars  and  to  the  men  of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be 
happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice  of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those 
who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

MOHS.  B.  St.  Hilaire,  Paris  : — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish 
you  all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men 
and  the  commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put 
in  a  notice  in  the  Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy 
to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany  : — The  work  you  have  un¬ 
dertaken  will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the 
History  of  their  science.  1  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  emi¬ 
nent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally,  to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  G-arbe,  Prinzenstram  Keningsburgh,  Germany  : — The  English 
translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  is  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  view 
the  most  important  work  of  the  medicinal  literature  of  your  country.' 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS  OF  PART  XXVI. 

The  contents  of  this  Part  are  at  once  VARIED  and  extremely 
INTERESTING.  Lesson  VI  of  the  Division  called  “  Qiarira,  js 
concluded  in  this  Part. 

The  observations  on  the  increase  and  decrease  of  the  ‘  dhatus  ’ 
or  ingredients  of  the  body  are  brought  to  a  close.  When  the 
ingredients  are  in  their  normal  proportions,  the  result  is  Health  ; 
when  otherwise,  ;the  rrqsujt .  is ,  Diseasey 

After  this,  pe<fur  shite  pqfedtioiM  of  Agnive$a  about  the 
priority  or  subsequence  or  growth,  in  ‘the  womb  of  the  several 
parts  of  the  foetus. 

Various  opinions  are  propounded  by  various  Rishis  in 
answer  to  these  questions.  That  of  Dhanwantari  about  the 
simultaneous  growth  of  'alt  “thie 'limbs  with  the  Heart  which  is 
the  principal  one,  is  adopted  by  all  the  Rishis. 

The  foatus  is  supported,  through  the  1  amara  ’  (umanbilical 
cord),  with  juices,  etc.,  into  which  the  food  taken  by  the 
mother  is.,  converted. 

Then  occurs  a  discussion  on  the  question  whether  there  is 
untimely  death.  After  setting  forth  the  various  meanings  of 
the  word  in  time  this  connection,  and  the  various  ways  in 
which  the  question  is  answered, .  the  cqnclijsion  .  isr adopted 
J  that  thb're  is  timely :  deiath  '  as  ^l^  'unti'mfefy^ath'dh  -tfife' sense 
,  .that  some  perspi\s  die  at  what  may  be  called  the  prpper  age 
while  others  '  die  before  reaching  it.  . 

In  this,.  fepoch,  the  .usual  limit  of  human  life,  js  set  forth  as 
a'  hundred  years. 

Lpss.on  VII.  commences  at  page  8oj,  _  on  the  number  and 
“measurements  of  the  several  limbs  of  the  body.  The  entire 
lesson  .is  anatomical.  .The  six  tissues  or.  coats  of.  the  body 
-are  sefr-fcirth.  Then  occtir-the  Six-  pf-incipal  parts'-  bf  the  body, 
.  viz.'  %  he  two  arms,  t  the  two  legs,  the  trunk,  and  the  head  with 
the  neck.  -  -  -  -  v  -  '  . 

Then  comes  an  enumeration  of  the  three  hundred  and  sixty 
bones. 

There  are  900  tendons  (or  tubular  ducts  which  are  attacted 
to  the  bones  and  which  carry  the  vital  airs),  700  ‘  ciras,’  200  veins, 
500  muscles,  107  vital  parts,  and  200  joints.  ' 

There  are  30,56,900  mouths  of  nerves  and  veins.  There 
are  as  many  hairs  on  the  head,  in  the  beard,  and  on  the 
whole  body. 

The  measures  are  then  set  forth  of.  the  water  in  the  body, 
which  exists  with  the  stools,  the  urine,  the  blood,  etc.  ;  of  the 
Blood,  of  the  Stools,  of  Phlegm,  of  Bile,  of  Urine,  of  Adeps,  of 
Fa.t,  of  Marxoiv,  of  the  Brain,  pf..  SemenL  and-hf  The  Ojas.  ' '■ 

3  Then  comes  ain  enumeration  -of  those  parts'o'Tthe  body''  which 
partake  the  nature  of  the  five  primpal  elements-  1  pgrth , 

water,  fire,  air,  and  ether.  Taking  the  body  as  a  conglomeration 
of  atoms,  the  constituting  ingredients  are  inumerable. 

The  union  of  atoms  is  due  to  the  action  of  the  Wind.  When 
the  conglomeration  is  dissolved,  result  is  Emancipation  or 
dissociation  of  the  Self  from  matter. 

Lesson  VIII,  commences  at  page  813.  It  is  called  Jatisutriya, 
and  is  most  important.  It  deals  with  those  acts  which  a 
man  and  a  woman  desirous  of  good  offspring  should  do.  The 
course  of  discipline  to  which  each  is  to  be  subjected  is  laid  down 
in  full.  The  subject  is  extrimely  interesting  and  deserves  to  be 
studied  with  care,  for  the  improvement  of  the  human  race  may 
be  said  to  depend  upon  it. 


NOTICE 


Subscribers  are  informed  that  they 
should  not  pay  any  portion  of  their 
subscriptions  to  any  one  without  Receipts 
containing  my  signature.  If  they  kindly 
remit  their  dues  by  postal  Money  Order, 
or  in  Registered  covers,  the  amounts  will 
then  reach  me  duly. 


CALCUTTA,  *1 

2oo,  Cornwallis’  St.  AVINASH  CH.  KAVIRATNA. 

July  25th,  1901.  ) 


'CHARAKA  SAMHITA.  795 : 

"those  which  having  attained  to  ripeness  (or  maturity)  escape 
out  of  the  body, 

iThen,  again,  all  excited  Wind,  Bile,  and  Phlegm,  and  all 
other  entities  which  exist  in  the  body  and  which  operate  as 
impediments  to  the  body,  we  shall  regard  as  IrrqJfiritieS.  All  other 
entities  in  the  body  are  regarded  as  falling  within  the  head  of 
Purity  (or  Prasada). 

All  ingredients  classified  According  to  their  qualities  And 
beginning  with  ‘heavy’  and  ending  with  ‘liquid,’  as  also  all 
those  which  are  classified  according  to  substance  and  beginning 
with  ‘juice’  and  ending  with  ‘serrten,’  are  reckoned  As  Purities 
(or  PrasIdA).*22 


*  By  ‘  garira-dhalii  ’  is,  of  course,  meant  the  ingredients  that  make  up 
the  bddy.  These  are,  principally,  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  Impurities  (or  refuse) 
And  the  Pure  elements.  1  Mala  ’  is  Impurity.  ‘  Mala-bhuta  ’  is  ‘  that 
which  has  been  converted  or  transformed  into  ‘  Mala  ’  dr  Impurity. 

Similarly  ‘  Prasada  1  means  the  Pure  elements.  ‘  Prasada-bhuta  ’  is  ‘  that 
Which  has  been  transformed  into  ‘  Prasada  ’  or  the  Pure  elements'. 

The  characteristic  of  ‘  Pviala 1  is  that  it  is  ‘  badhakara,’  meaning 
‘  obstruction-causing.’  Impurities  of  every  kind  are  so  many  obstructions 
dr  impediments  which  the!  body  must  be  rid  of  if  it  is  to  remain  in  a  state  of 
health.  Sweat,  urine,  stools,  &c.,  are  all  of  this  kind. 

‘  Upadeha  ’  or  ‘  subsidiary  body,’  implies  ‘  extraneous  products.’ 
Sweat-,  urine,  stools,  are  Subsidiary  growths.  The  sdme  foOd  which 
generates  Pure  elements  of  blood,  bories,  flesh,  &c.,  generates  these  also. 
They  belong  as  much  to  the  body  as  blood  and  bones  and  flesh,  &c.  ;  only, 
as  obstructions,  the  body  gets  rid  of  them.  The  term  ‘  upadehA  ’  or 
‘  subsidiary  bddy,’  as  applied  td  these;  is  certainly  correct  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  Hindu  physician.  If  ndt  exactly  generated  in  the 
holes  and  pores  of  the  body,  they  escape  through  them.  Excited  wind,  bile, 
and  phlegm  generAte  Impurities.  The  products  of  excited  wind  are  urine  and 
stools  in  copious  measures  ;  of  excited  bile  Are  undigested  food  thrown  out 
by  tlie  stomAch  ;  also  the  watery  Secretions  of  the  mduth  ;  of  "excited 
phlegm  are  all  secretions  of  mucus  from  the  lungs,  the  throat,  the 
noSe,  &c. 

As  regard's  the  Pure  elements,  they  are  those  which  are  referred  td 
hnder  the  ten  couples  of  attributes  beginning  with  ‘  guru  ’  dr  Heavy  and 
ending  with  ‘  drava  ’  or  liquid,  if  classified  according  td  attributes.  The 
same  are  otherwise  called  ‘  Rasa  ’  dr  juice,  &c.,  gpding  with  ‘  ?ukra  ’  dr 
‘Semen,  if  classified  according  to  substance,  (vide  Aphorism  1 1  ante  df  this 
Lesson,  as  also  Sutrasthana,  Lesson  28,  ante).— T; 

101 


796 


CHAR  AKA  samhitA. 


Of  all  the  ingredients  of  the  body  including  both  those  which 
ate  impure  and  those  which  are  pure,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  in 
consequence  of  their  being  faults,  become  vitiators  when  they  are 
themselves  vitiated. 

The  indications  of  vitiated  wind  and  bile  and  phlegm  acting 
upon  the  other  ingredients  of  the  body  at  different  times,  have 
been  laid  down  in  the  Lesson  called  "  Vividha§itapitiya  ”  (Diverse 
kinds  of  food  and  think)* 

Of  these  faults  when  they  are  vitiated,  the  course  runs  thus 
far,  vis,,  contact  with  the  ingredients  of  the  body. 

The  result  of  wind  and  the  rest,  when  they  are  in  their  normal 
condition,  is  Health. 

I-Ience  they  that  are  gifted  with  intelligence  should  always 
endeavour  to  keep  these  (vis.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm)  in  their 
normal  condition,*2  8 


(Here  occurs  a  Verse). 

That  physician  who  knows  the  body  in  its  entirety,  as  it  is  at 
all  times,  and  in  every  respect,  knows  the  Science  of  Life  in  all 

*  Wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  are  called  ‘  doshas  ’  (faults),  for,  as  explained 
in  Sutrasthana,  they  become  ‘  dushta,1  i.e.,  themselves  vitiated,  and  also 
because  they  vitiate  the  other  ingredients  of  the  body.  To  render  the  word 
‘  dosha  ’  as  ‘  fault  ’  would  not  be  correct.  But  no  better  word  can  be 
suggested.  The  Lesson  called  ‘  Vividhajitapitiya  ’  (on  diverse  kinds  of  food 
and  drink)  is  numbered  28  in  Sutrasthana,  ante.  In .  that  Lesson,  the  Rishi 
has  explained  how  the  1  faults  ’  vitiate  the  other  ingredients  of  the  body, 
such  as  blood,  flesh,  bones,  &c.  The  action  of  each  of  the  three  faults,  or  of 
two  of  them,  or  of  all  the  three,  at  different  times,  upon  each  of  the  ingredi- 
ents,  is  explained..  The  consequences  of  that  action  are  also  laid  down; 

The  action  of  the  faults  extends  to  their  contact  with  the  ingredients 
of  the  body.  The  faults  are  themselves  ingredients  of  the  body.  Unless  and 
until  they  come  in  contact  with  particular  ingredients,  they  cannot  affect  or 

Health  is’rCgarded  as  the  co-existence  of  the .  three  faults  in  their  normal 
condition.  This  normal  condition  may  be  one  of  equality  or  inequality,  in 
respect  of  measure,  of  the  faults,  There  are  constitutions  in  which  the 
wind  prevails  ;  or  in  which  the  bile  prevails  ;  or  in  which  the  phlegm 
.prevails.  Yet,  when  these  three  co-exist  in  their  normal  or  natural  condition, 
.the  person  may  be  said  to  be  in  health,  notwithstanding  the  inequality  of 
measure  of  the  three-faults,  that  is,  the  predominance  of  one  over  the  other 
two. — T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


797 


its  details-r-the  Science  that  is  productive  of  great  happiness  to  the 
whole  world.  ** 

Unto  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  who  had  said  this,  Agnivega 
said  t 

We  have  heard  the  words  which  have  been  said  by  thy  illus-i 
trious  self  on  the  subject  of  the  body. 

Which  limb  of  the  foetus  grows  first  in  the  womb  ?- 

In  which  direction  does  the  face  remain  T 

In  what  attitude,  again,  does  the  foetus  lie  in  the  womb  ? 

What  food  supports  it  ? 

In  what  way  does  it  come  out  b 

By  what  food  and  practices  does  it  grow,  after  birth  (in  the, 
womb),  without  ailments  of  any  k,ind  ? 

By  what  causes  is  it  destroyed  immediately  after  birth  ? 

How  are  those  diseases  ascertained  which  affect  the  foetus 
through  the  anger  of  the  gods  and;  others  ? 

How,  again,  do  those  diseases  escape- detection  ? 

Amongst  existing  and  non-existing  entities,  which  is  regarded 
by  thy  illustrious  self  as.  the  cause  of  timely  and  untimely  death  ? 

What  is  the  period  of  life  (of  the  foetus)  ? 

What  are  the  indications  of  the  foetus’s  period  of  life  ?-  *2  5 

Unto  Agnivega  who  said  so,  the  illustrious  Eunarv.asu,  scion 
of  Atri’s  race,  said  : 

As  to  how  the  foetus  originates  and  appears  in  the  womb  has 
been  explained  before  in  the  Lesson  called  Garbhavakranti. 

Diversity  of  opinion  prevails  among  all  those  Rishis  who  have 
written  on  the  subject,  about  the  limbs  of  the  foetus  and;  the 
priority  or  otherwise  of  their,  appearance.  Do  thou,,  attend  as 
I  explain  them  ! 

It  is  the  head  that  is  first  formed  in  the  womb,  observes 
Kumaragiras-Bharadwaja,  as  the  head  is  the  seat  of  all  the  organs 
of  sense.. 

*  Certain  diseases  affect  the  foetus  while  it  is  in  the  womb,  in  consequence 
of  the  anger  of  the  gods  and  other  powerful  beings  such  as  Rakshasas  and 
Gandharvas  and  evil  spirits. 

‘  Bhava  >  and  ‘  Abhava  ’  mean  existent  and  non-existent  things.  The 
fatter  means  and  includes  such  things  as  the  absence  or  want  of  particular 
objects.  Thus,  the  absence  of  blood,  or  of  ‘  ojas,’  may  be  spoken  of  an 
‘  Abhava  ’  thing. 


CHAR  AKA  SAMIJITA. 


798 

The  well-known  physician,  Kankayana-Valhika,  said  that  it  ts 
the  Heart  \y^ich  is  first  formed,  since  it  is  the  seat  of  C/i eland 
(Consciousness). 

The  navel  ft  is  that  is  first  formed,  said  Bhadrakapya,  since  it 
js  the  place  where  food  is  received  * 

It  is  the  Pakkagudam  (or  Pakkasaya,  that  is,  that  portion  of  the 
Stomach  where  the  food  is  digested)  tha,t  is  first  formed,  since  it  is 
the  place  where  the  vfipd  jn  th?  body  has  its  seat.  This  was  sa,id 
fiy  Bhadra-gamiaka.f 

Tfhe  ha,nds  and  thp  feet  are  first  formed,  said  Vaditja,  since  they 
are  the  karanas.  of  a  person,  (vis.,  instruments  by  which  on,e  does 
all  c^cts). 

The  senses  (or  organs  of  knowledge)  are  formed  first,  said 
Janaka  of  the  country  of  the  Videhas,  sinpe  they  are  the  scats  of 
tfie  Understanding. 

In  consequence  of  the  subject  being  out  of  the  ken  of  the 
senses,  it  cannot  be  ascertained  (which  limb  grows  first  anfi  which 
afterwards,  &c).  Thus  said  Kapyapa  of  Marichi’s  race. 

All  the  limbs  appear  simultaneously.  Thus  said  Dhan,wantari. 

This  s,eems  to  be  consistent  with  reason,  since  a,ll  the  limbs 
including  the  Heart  appear  simultaneously.  Of  ah  the  limbs 
pf  man,  the  Heart  is  tfie  prime  (or  original)  refuge.  Hence,  no 
particular  limb  appears  prior  to  the  others.  Hence,  the  appearance 
of  all  the  limbs  haying  the  ffeart  for  their  foremost  refuge*  takes 
place  simultaneously.  All  the  limbs  aye  closely  connected  with 
one  another.  Hence,  it  is  well  to  view  the  subject  in  this  way.28  §■ 

*  ‘.The  navel  is  the  place,  where  food  is  received,’  means  that  it  is  the. 
navel  at  which  (through  the  umbilical  chord)  the  child  draws  sustenance  from, 
the  mother. — T. 

t  ‘  Pakkagudam  ’  is  otherwise  called  ‘  Pakkasaya.’  The  stomach,  according 
to  Hindu  physicians,  is  divided  into  two  compartments  :  one  of  these  is  called 
1  amajaya,’  and  the.  other,  ‘  Pakka$aya.’  In  the  former,  the  food  taken  goes 
first.  Becoming  drenched  in  the  juices,  it  then  passes  into,  the  ‘Pakkasaya’ 
before  digestion  takes  place. 

t  ‘  Hridaya-purvanam  ’  doss  no.t  mean  ‘  the  limbs  of  which  the  heart  appears 
first  in  point  of  time,  but  ‘the  limbs  of  which  the  heart  is  the  chief  or 
foremost  in  point  of  importance.’  The  heart  is  regarded  as  the  foremost  because 
it  supplies  all  the  other  pprts,  of  the  body  with  blood  which  is  their  chief 
support. — T. 

§  There  are  many  incorrect  readings  in  this  passage  as  it  is  printed  in. 


CftARAKA  SAMH1TA. 


m 


T'he  foetus,  verily,  remains  in  the  mothers  womb,  with  its  face 
turned  towards  the  back  (of  the  mother),  with  its  head  upwards, 
With  all  its  litnbs  contracted,  and  enclosed  in  a  bag  of  (thin)  skirt. 

Bereft  of  thirst  and  appetite,  the  foetus  depends  for  its  support 
Upon  another,  Indeed,  relying  upon  the  another,  it  lives  upon 
pily  juices  and  other  secretions  (in  tfye  womb). 

The  foetus  consists  o,f  limbs  existing  and  non  existing.  (When 
all  its  limbs  are  formed)  it  receives  the  oily  secretions  in,  the  womb, 
through  the  passage  afforded  by  pores  o,f  the  body  as  also  the 
(luct  of  the  navel. 

There  is  a  duct  attached,  tp,  its  navel. 

That  dirct  whjch  is  attached  to  the  nayel  is  called  ‘‘Amara.v 

The  ‘Angara,’  is  connected  with  the  heart  o,f  (he  mother. 

The  mother’s  heart  drenphes  that  duct  called  ‘Amara’  of  the 
foetus,  by  means  of  a  number  of  ducts  through  all  of  which  juices, 
poze  out.2? 

The  juices  hecom,e  productive  o,f  the  strength  and  complexion 
pf  the  foetus. 

The  food,  consisting  of  all  kinds  of  taste,  which  thp  pregnant) 
another  takes,  is.  transformed  into  three  kinds  of  juices. 

One  of  these  is  fo,r  the  development  of  the  mother’s  o.wn  body.. 

Another  is  for  conversion,  into  lacteal  su,bstance, 

The  third  is  for  the  growth  of  the  fcetus- 

Nourished  by  that  food  ( viz, the  last  kind),  the  foetus  re-, 
mains  within  (the  womb)3* 

The  foetus*  when  the  time  comes  for  its  birth,  revolves  through 
the  action  of  the  expelling  wind,  comes,  out,  with  head  downwards, 
through  the  usual  passage  (of  the.  delivery)  of  offspring, 

Even  this  is  the  natural  (o,r  normal)  course. 

Other  than  this  would  be  regarded  as  unnatural  (or  abnormal), 

After  delivery,  the  child  depends  UPPU  itself  for  its  sustenance. 


dost  of  the  Bengal  editions.  Thus  the  name  of-  Dhanwantari  does  not  appear 
i,n  many  of  them  at  all,  Gangadhara’s  edition  gives  the  correct 
readings. 

<  Yatha  bhuta  darganam  ’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  equivalent  to  ‘  ukta- 
tupena  dar?anam  sadhu,’  that  is  ‘-it  is  well  to  view  the  subject  in  this  way.’— ' T. 

*  ‘  Upastabdha  ’  implies  ‘  nourished.’  It  is  derived  from  the  same  roof  as 
*  s.tambha,  ’  which  meant  a  column  that  supports  a  weight.— T. 


8oo 


CHAR  AKA  SAM-HIT  A' 


Those  kinds  of  food,  and  practices,  which  are  not  injurious  ta 
the  foetus  and  which  conduce  to  its  nourishment,  have  been  laid 
down  in  the  Lesson  called  'Jatisutriya.’* 

If  the  food  and  practices  with  which  it  is  treated  be  uncon¬ 
genial,  then  the  child  that  is  born  meets  with  instantaneous 
destruction  like  a  tree  that  is  newly  planted  and  that  has  not 
its  roots  firmly  embedded  in  the  soil  meeting  with  destruction 
through  the  action  of  the  sun  and  the  wind.20 

Those  diseases  of  infants  which  correspond  with  the  excite¬ 
ment  of  particular  faults  and  those  which  arise  from  the  wrath 
of  the  gods  and  other  powerful  beings,  are  ascertained  by  the 
following  means,  viz.,  the  instructions  of  the  wise,  the  observation 
of  uncommon  indications,  especial  causes  or  premonitory  condi¬ 
tions,  especial  symptoms,  and  especial  methods  of  treatment.30  j* 

As  to  the  existence  or  non-existence  of  timely  or  untimely 
death,  even  this  is  our  conclusion  : 

Some  say  that  all  who  die,  die  in  time,  since  there  is  no  gap  in. 
the  course  of  time. 

•  This  is  reasonable,  since  of  time  neither  absence  nor  presence. 


*  This  Lesson  comes  next  in  this  very  Division  of  the  treatise. — T. 

t  One  of  the  questions  asked  is  how  are  those  diseases  of  infants  which 
are  due  to  the  wrath  of  the  gods  and  other  powerful  beings  to  be  ascertained  ?■ 
In  aphorism  29  is  the  answer  to  this  question.  The  only  words  requiring 
explanation  are  ‘  Samutthana,’  ‘  Linga  ’  and  ‘  Chikitsa,’  every  one  of  which  is 
grammatically  connected  with  1  Vijesha  ’  in  the  ablative  form.  ‘  Samutthana  ’ 
means  1  Nidana,’  i.e.,  those  causes  which  induce  disease.  These  include  such 
facts  as  excessive  exposure  to  sun,  wind,  or  rain  ;  uncongenial  food  ;  night¬ 
keeping,  excessive  toil ;  irregularity  of  food  ;  irregularity  of  baths  ;  continued 
constipation  ;  &c. 

By  1  Linga- Vijesha  ’  is  meant  ‘  especial  or  particular  symptoms.’  These  help 
the  physician  in  ascertaining  which  disease  is  due  to  the  ordinary  or  usual 
causes,  such  as  excitement  of  this  or  that  fault,  or  of  two  of  the  faults,  or  of  all 
the  three  faults,  and  which  to  others. 

‘  Chikitsa-.Viyes'ha  ’  is  particular  method  of  treatment.  Methods  of  treat¬ 
ment  help  the  physician  in  understanding  which  diseases  are  due  to  the  excite¬ 
ment  of  the  faults  and  which  to  the  anger  of  the  gods,  &c.  If  the  physician 
begins  a  particular  course  of  treatment  in  the  belief  that  the  disease  is  due  to 
ordinary  causes  and  if  that  treatment  fails  in  spite  of  its  being  the  best,  he. 
cannot  but  take  the  disease,  in  that  case,  as  due  not  to  the  causes  he  had 
accepted  but  to  the  anger  of  the  gods  and  other  powerful  beings.— T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


8oi 

of  any  gap,  is  realisable  in  consequence  of  the  nature  or  its 
attributes.31  * 

Others  say  that  when  one  dies,  that  is  one’s  ordained  time  of 
death.  Time*  in  its  relations  towards  all  creatures,  is  true 
without  affection  or  hatred),  because  its  action  towards  all  is 
equal. 

This  is  acceptable*:  of  a  meaning  other  than  that  which  is 
attached  to  the  word.  • 

It  is  true  that  there  is  no  one  that  does  not  die.  In  this 
respect*  time  may  be  said  to  be  equal  in  its  action  towards  all. 

The  fact*  however*  is  that  the  word  time  is  used  with  reference 
to  the  period  of  one’s  life.32  f 

He  who  regards  this  to  be  reasonable,  viz.,  that  that  is  one’s 
ordained  time  of  death  when  one  dies  (as  a  matter  of  fact)* 
practically  maintains  that  all  things  occur  at  the  times  ordained 
(respectively)  for  them.  This*  however,  is  evidently  inconsistent 
with  reason*  since  it  is  found  that  food*  words*  and  aets  may  be 
untimely  which  produce  baneful  results,  and  food*  words*  and 
acts  may  be  of  an  opposite  character*  which  are  productive  of 
beneficial  effects. 

It  is  noticeable  by  the  direct  evidence  of  the  senses,  observin  g 


*  lam  not  sure  of  the  meaning  of  this  aphorism.  The  Bengali  translators 
have  made  utter  nonsense  of  it.  Gangadhara  has  not  understood  it.  His 
comments  are  utterly  erroneous.  He  takes  the  second  sentence  (which  he 
numbers  as  a  distinct  aphorism  by  itself)  as  implying  that  there  is  nothing  like 
untimely  death,  as  all  who  die,  die  in  time,  for  of  time  there  is  no  gap.  The 
heading  he  adopts  of  the  hext  sentence  (Which  alSo  he  numbers  as  a  distinct, 
aphorism)  is ‘tachchasamyak,’ forgetting  that  what  follows  supports,  instead  of 
refuting,  the  previous  aphorism.  The  fact  is,  the  positive  ‘  samyak,’  and  not  the 
negative ‘asamyak’ would  be  the  correct  reading:  What  is  stated  in  the  last 
sentence  is  that  time  runs  on,  without  stoppage  or  gap.  This  is  precisely  what 
is  affirmed  in  the  previous  proposition:  Hence,  '  samyak  ’  and  not  ‘  asamyak  ’ 
is  correct,— T. 

T  The  argument  here  is  this  :  Time  is  said  (byjthose  whose  opinion  is  here 
adverted  to)  to  be  equal  in  respect  of  its  action  towards  all  creatures.  The 
Rishi  answers— it  is  very  true  that  time  is  impartial  in  this  respect,  •ait.,  that  all 
men  die,  there  being  none  who  does  not  die.  But  then  this  is  an  instance  of 
taking  the  word  ‘time’  in  a  sense  different  from  that  which  is  attached  to  it 
in  such  connection,  since  1  time  ’  is  a  word  applied  to  the  period  or  measure  of 
one’s  life.— T: 


8b  2 


tifARAKA  SAMfflTA. 


different  results  in  different  circumstances,  that  tliefe  is  sUch  ri 
thing  as  consideration  of  timeliness  and  untimeliness.  As  an 
example  of  this  it  is  said  among  men: — 

This  is  the  time  of  this  disease  j 

This  is  the  time  of  (taking)  this  food  ; 

This  is  the  time  of  (administering)  this  medicine; 

This  is  the  time  of  (adopting)  this  treatment ;  and 

This  is  the  time  of  thelctife  of  this  disease. 

Similarly,  it  is  said,  this  is  not  the  time  for  this,  &c. 

It  is  also  said,  the  deity  (of  the  clouds)  is  pouring  rain  in  time ; 
the  deity  (of  the  clouds)  is  p  oh  ring  rain  untimely  ;  this  Cold  has 
appeared  in  time;  this  cold  is  Untimely ;  this  heat  is  in  time ;  this 
heat  is  Untimely ;  these  flowers  and  fruits  ate  timely ;  these 
ftowers  and  fruits  are  untirriely-. 

Hence-,  both  exist,  viz.,  death  id  ti'm'e  arid  Untimely  death'. 
In  this  matter,  neither  the  one,  rtor  the  other,  is  exclusively 
true.  If  there  be  no  such  thing  as  unthriely  death,  then  the 
period  of  life,  of  Cvery  ereatUre-,  would  rriri  the  allotted  coU'rse.33 

Verily,  if  thete  wefe  hot  untimely  death,  the  knowledge  of 
What  is  beneficial  (to  the  body)  and  what  riot  s'o;  wohld  theh  bb 
absolutely  useless. 

Then  direct  Perception,  Irifefenfce,  and  the  Instructions  of  the 
Wise-,  which  aria  regarded  as  authorities  in  every  science  arid  by 
Which  acts  that  leftghfcri  life  arid  those  that  shorten  life  ate  deter- 
hnined,  would  lose  their  authority  (as  sanctions  for  particular 
Courses  of  conduct);  Hence  the  assertion  that  thete  is  no  Un¬ 
timely  death  is  regarded  by  the  Rishis  as  a  mere  form  of  speech 
Without  sense.34 

Verily,  in  this  age,  (viz.;.  Kali),  a  hundred  years  is  the  measure 
of  life. 

The  causes  Upon  which  this  depends  afe  COristitutioiial  exc'eU 
lence  as  derived  frdrh  parents-,  wealth  of  soUl  (as  dependent  oil 
the  unexhausted  acts  of  previous  lives);  and  recourse  to  assimilable 
food  and  drink  and  other  practices.36  * 


*  ‘  Prakriti-guna  ’  is,  lit.,  ‘  qualities  of  nature  or  birth,’  implying,  of  course, 
the  constitutional  excellence  that  one  derives  from  One’s  parents.  ‘Atma- 
sampAt  ’  means  ‘  wealth  of  soul,’  that  is,  excellence  of  the  unexhausted  acts  of 
previous  lives.  Acts,  good  and  bad,  are  never  exhausted  without  their  fruits; 


C&ARAKA  SAMHITA.  803 

( Here  occur  some  verses  containing  a  summary.) 

That  which  the  body  in  reality  is,  the  manner  in  which  it  is 
supported,  the  manner  in  which  it  becomes  afflicted  by  diseases, 
the  manner  in  which  it  meets  with  afflictions  and  destruction, 
the  dfiatus  which  compose  it,  the  means  by  which  these  are 
increased  and  decreased,  the  medicines  that  should  be  used  for 
strengthening  them  when  they  are  weakened  or  attenuated,  those 
things  which  nourish  the  body,  those  which  increase  strength, 
those  things  which  transform  food  and  drink  into  their  final  forms 
{vis.,  blood,  bones,  &c.,  and  excretia,  &c.),  the  respective  func¬ 
tions  of  those  agents,  those  dkatus  which  go  by  the  name  of 
mala  (or  Impurities)  and  those  which  go  by  the  name  of  Prasada 
(or  Pure  elements),  the  nine  questions  (asked  by  Agnive§a),  and 
the  solutions  of  those  questions,  have  all  been  duly  expounded 
in  this  Lesson,  called  Carira-vichaya,  of  the  Division  called  Carira, 
by  the  great  Rishi.1- * 

Thus  ends  the  sixth  Lesson,  called  Carira-vichaya,  in  the 
Division  called  Carira,  of  Agnivega’s  work  as  revised  by  Charaka„ 


LESSON  VII. 

After  this  we  shall  expound  the  Lesson  called  “Carira-sankhya” 
In  the  Division  called  "Carira”  of  this  treatise.  Thus  said  the 
illustrious  son  of  Atri.1* 

Agnivega  asked  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  about  “garira- 
sankhya”  with  a  view  to  acquire  the  knowledge  of  the  numbers 
and  measures  of  the  entire  body,  dividing  the  whole  into  the 
several  parts  of  which  it  is  made  up.2f 

in  the  form  of  Weal  and  woe  being  enjoyed  and  endured,  if  one  has  a  large 
stock  of  good  acts  to  one’s  credit,  one  is  said  to  have  ‘  atma-sampat.’  ‘  Satma- 
sevana’  includes  the  enjoyment  of  good  sights  and  sounds,  good  air  (z.e.,  of 
healthy  stations),  good  beds  and  robes,  besides  good  food  and  drink. — T. 

*  “  Garira-sankhySl  ”  literally  implies  “  numbering  the  body,”  that  is,  num¬ 
bering  the  different  kinds  of  skin,  the  different  bones,  the  different  teeth,  &c., 
as  also  the  measuring  of  the  different  secretions,  the  different  juices,  &C. — T. 

f  The  verb  ‘  paprachccha  ’  (from  the  root  ‘  prichccha’)  is  a  double* 
objectived  transitive  ;  its  two  objects  here  are  ‘  Carira-sankhyam  ’  and  ‘  Atreyam.’ 
The  disciple,  dividing  the  whole  body  (mentally)  into  the  several  parts  of  which 


CHARAKA  SAM  HEFT  A. 


804 

Unto  him  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri : — 

As  1  answer  thee,  listen  to  me,  O  Agnivega,  with  undivided 
attention,  about  the  whale  body,  agreeably  to  thy  question.3 

There  are  six  tissues  in  the  body,  one  after  another 

They  are  these  5 

1.  The  outer  tissue,  which  is  called  ‘  udagdharll.,' 

2.  The  second  is  *  asrigdhara.’ 

3.  The  third  is  that  in  which  such  ailments  as  1  sidhma*  (a 
variety  of  leprosy,  called  pityriasis  versecolor),  apd  'kilflsa* 
(leucoderma),  have  their  origin. 

4.  The  fourth  is  that  in  which  tubercular  leprosy  has  its 
origin. 

5.  The  fifth  is  that  in  which  such  ailments  as  ‘  Alagiy  (in? 
ftammation  of  the  joints)  and  ‘Vidradhi’  (deep-seated  abscesses) 
have  their  origin. 

6.  The  sixth  is  that  which  being  torn  (or  wounded)  one  falls 
down  in  a  swoon,  or  sees  darkness  all  around  Ipm  like  a  blind 
man,  and  depending  on  which  as  their  seat,  eruptions  break  out 
in  the  joints,  which  are  black  and  red,  and  whose  hases  are  broad, 
and  which  are  highly  difficult  of  cure.* 

These  are  the  six  tissues  which  exist  covering  the  whole  body 
that  is  made  up  of  six  (principal)  limbs.f* 

Now,  the  following  is  the  division  of  the  body  into  parts? 

They  are,— (i)  The  two  arms;  (2)  The  two  thighs  (with  the 


it  is  made  up,  questions  his  preceptor  about  the  numbers  and.  measures;  of  the 
several  parts.— T. 

*  It  would  seem  from  this  enumeration  that  though  the  Rishja  understood, 
that  the  skin  or  covering  is  not  one.  but  consists,  of  ' several  successive  layers, 
yet  except  the  first  and  the  second,  the  other  four  had  no  especial  names  given, 
to  them.  '  Sujruta,  the  great  authority  on  the  Anatomy  of  the  body,  mentions, 
seven  tissues.  He  also  does,  not  give  their  names  but  is  content  with  describing 
them  as  seats  of  several  diseases  of  the  skin. 

The  first  or  outermost  tissue  is  called  ‘  udagdhara,’  probabfy  because  of  the 
belief  that  the  liquid  secretion  called  perspiration  is  ejected  by  it.  If  it  is. 
injured,  blood  is  not  emitted. 

The  second  is  called  ‘asrigdhara,’  because  of  the  belief  that  there  is  blood  in 
it.  If  injured;  it  emits  blood. — T. 

t  The  body  is  called ‘shadanga’ because  of  its  having  six  principal  parts. 
These  six:  parts  are  mentioned  in  the  next  aphorism.— T,  < 


'CHARAKA  SAMHITA.  Fo's 

(wo  lower  joints) ;  (3)  the  head  with  the  neck  ;  and  (4)  the  trun  ks 
tor  middle  portion).5 

Of  bones  there  are  three  hundred  and  sixty  (several  pieces), 
including  the  teeth,  the  roots  of  the  teeth  in  the  gums,  and 
the  nails. 

These  are  32  tooth-roots ;  32  teeth ;  20  nails ;  20  roots  of 
fingers  and  toes;  4  bases  to  which  the  above  areattiched;  4 
dorsa  of  the  hands  and  feet;  60  digits  of  fingers  and  toes;  2 
heels;  2  palm-joints;  2  wrists  (of  the  hands);  2  ankles  (of  the 
feet) ;  2  lower  femurs  of  the  arms  ;  2  lower  femurs  of  the  legs  ;  2 
-knees  ;  2  elbows;  2  upper  femurs  of  the  legs;  2  upper  femurs  of 
the  arms  (with  the  shoulders) ;  2  eye-bails ;  2  palates ;  2  hip¬ 
bones ;  1  vaginal  bone;  (in  the  case  of  males,  1  bone  of  the 
pennis);  1  bone  in  the  ‘Trika’  (i  e.,  the  lower  part  of  the  spine 
and  above  the  hips);  1  bone  in  the  region  of  the  anus;  35  bones 
in  the  spine  (or  vertibrae);  15  bones  in  the  nape  of  the  neck ;  2 
collar  bones  ;  1  chin  ;  2  roots  of  the  chin  ;  2  fronta!  bones  ;  2  eye 
bones;  2  cheek-bones;  3  nasal  bones  (called  ‘  Ghonas’) ;  24  front 
ribs;  24  back  ribs ;  24  ‘sthalikas  ’  belonging  to  the  above,  each 
round  as  an  ‘  arvUda  ’  or  tumour)  2  temporal  bones;  4  crown 
bones;  and  17  separate  pieces  in  the  breast.*0 

*  This...  passage  affords  a  curious  illustration  of  the  utter  absence  of 
carefulness  which  one  may  notice  in  the  work  of  native  editors  and  translators 
generally. 

Gangadhara’s  list  is  entirely  incorrect.  His  total  comes  up  to  368, 
although  the  text  expressly  states,  both  at  the  outset  and  the  conclusion,  that 
'360  is  the  total.  He  speaks  of  4  1  ManikSs’ of  the  hands.  He  explains  the 
word  ‘  ManikS.  ’  correctly  as  ‘  manibandha-sthanam,’  that  is,  the  place  where 
jewels  or  jewelled  bangles  are  worn.  Of  course,  the  wrists  are  intended. 
Common  sense  would  have  told  him  that  of  a  human  being,  the  wrists  are  two. 
He  speaks,  again,  of  4  ‘  Gulfas  ’  of  the  feet.  ‘  Gulfa  ’  is  explained  by  him 
incorrectly.  It  means  the  heels,  and  not  that  portion  of  the  leg  which  is 
between  the  ankle  and  the  knee.  This  latter  is  called  ‘  JanghS.’  At  any  rate, 
even  if  ‘  Gulfas’ meant  the  ‘  Janghas,’  how  could  4  be  their  number?  The 
‘  aratnis,’  again,  are  two,  though  Gangadhara  states  their  number  as  four.  By 
1  aratni  ’  is  meant  that  part  of  the  hand  which  is  between  the  wrist  and  the 
•elbow.  The  femur  of  the  lower  arm  is  meant. 

A  Bengali  translator  who  has  come  last  into  the  field  but  whose  work  is 
a  reproduction,  in  many  respects,  of  the  labours  of  one  of  his  predecessors  and 
who  has  reproduced  the  very  errors  of  the  latter  and  made  many  new  ones, 


8o&  CHARAKA  SAMJSTITA. 

There  are  five  seats  of  the  senses.  They  are, — I.  the  skin  ;; 
2.  the  tongue;  3.  the  nose;.  4.  the  two  eyes;,  and  5*-  the 
two  ears.7 

There  are  five  senses  of  knowledge.  They  are,. — 1.  touch,; 
2.  taste;  3.  smell;  4.  sight;  and  5.  hearing.8  1 

There  are  five  senses  (organs)  of  action.  They  are, — 1.  the 
two  hands;  2.  the  two  feet;  3..  the  anal  canal ;  4.  the  organ  of 
generation;  and  5..  the:  organ  of  taste  (viz.,  the  tongue).9'1 

The  heart  is  the  one  seat  of  consciousness.. 

There  are  ten  substrata  (or  seats)  of  the  Life-breaths. 

They  are, — 1.  the  crown  (of  the  head);  2.  the  throat;  3.  thq. 
breast;  4.  the  navel;  5.  the  anus;  6.  the  pelvis;  7.  the  ojas 
8.  semen ;  9.  blood  ;  and  xo.  flesh. 

Of  these,  the  first  six  are  regarded  as  vital  parts.*10 

Fifteen  are  the  parts  of  the  ‘Koshtha’  or  the  trunk  of 
the  body.  They  are, — 1.  the  navel ;  2.  the  heart;  3.  the  lungs ;-f* 
4.  the  liver ;  5.  the  spleen ;  6.  the  two  breast-glands ;  7.  the 
bladder  $  8.  the  region  where  the  stools  collect ;  9.  the  region 
which  receives  the  food  that  is  taken  ;  10.  the  region  where  the 
foo'd  one  takes  is  digested;  11.  the  upper  part  of  the  anal  canal ;§ 
12.  the  lower  part  of  the  anal  canal;  13.  the  smaller  intestines; 
14.  the  larger  (and  grosser)  intestines;  and  15.  the  adeps- 
bearing  duct-.[Ji5‘ 


|  has  added'  a  curious  note.  Adopting  the  erroneous  readings  of  Gangadhara,. 
he  totals  the  bones  as  417  and  observes  that  the  readings  are  incorrect. 

The  fact  is,  every  editor  or  translator  ought  to,  be  able-  to  correct  such, 
downright  blunders  as  disfigure  this,  passage. — T; 

*  Compare  this  with  what  is  said  in  p.  402  of  Sutrasthana,  ante.  There  the 
ten  substrata  are  given  with  some  variation.  The  two  temples  are  there 
mentioned.  Flesh,  again,  does  not  occur  in  that  list.— T. 

f  'Otherwise  called  ‘  Kloma.’  This  is  explained  as  another  name  of 
‘  Phusphusa.’  The  word  also  implies  the  covering  of  the  lungs,’  called 
‘  Unduka.’— T. 

|  Gangadhara,  quoting  Susruta,  explains  the  word  ‘  vasti  ’  as  implying  the 
bladder  where  the  urine  collects. — T. 

§  Chakrapani  explains  that  this  is  above  the ‘  Vasti '  or  bladder.  Formed 
stools  gather  here. — T. 

||  The  adeps,  it  is  said,  of  the  heart,  or,  rather,  of  the  entire  internal  regions, 
js,  borne  away  by  a  particular  duct.  This  duct  is  called  ‘  Vapavaha.’ — T. 


'CHARAKA  SAMHITA.  fro* 

There  are  six  and  fifty  minor  limbs  attached  to  the  six 
(powerful)  members  of  the  body.  These  were  not  enumerated 
before  while  the  different  limbs  were  being  enumerated.  They 
Shall  be  mentioned  now,  being  named  under  different  heads. 

They  are, — 2  (fleshy)  muscles  of  the  two  ‘ janghas  ’  (or  lower 
legs) ;  2  (fleshy)  muscles  of  the  two  thighs  (or  upper  legs)  ;  2 
buttocks  or  hips ;  2  testicles;  1  (male)  organ  of  generation;  2 
‘‘ukshas;’  2  groins  (plibic  and  illiac  regions);  2  cavities  of  the 
loins  (just  above  the  hips) ;  I  head  of  the  hypogastric  region  ;  1 
abdomen  ;  2  breasts ;  2  arms  ;  2  mUscles  of  the  two  upper  arms ; 
1  chin  ;  2  lips ;  2  corners  of  the  mouth;  2  gums;  1  palate;  i 
Oesophagus  ;* * * §  2  subsidiary  tongues  (or  uvulae)  ;  1  principal 

tongue  ;-f-  2  cheeks ;  2  cavities  of  the  ears  ;  2  ears  (meaning  the 
two  outer  cartilageous  and  fleshy  growths  commonly  known  as 
the  ears)  ;  2  eye  balls  ;  4  eye  lids  ;  2  carnuculae  lachrymales ;  2 
eye  brows  ;  1  nape  of  the  neck  ;  2  palms  6f  the  hands;  2  soles 
of  the  feet  great  holes,  of  which  7  are  in  the  head  and  2  in 
lower  portion  of  the  body.J12 

These  are  visible  and  capable  of  being  ascertained  (by  eye¬ 

sight). 

After  these  we  shall  mention  those  which  are  not  ascertainable 
(by  eye-sight)  and  whose  existence  is  matter  of  inference. 

These  (last)  are, — 900  tendons  (or  tubular  ducts  which  are 
attached  to  the  bones  and  which  carry  the  vital  airs);  700  ‘ giras ;’ § 


*  1  Gala-gundika 1  is  correctly  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  that  which  is 
commonly  called  in  Bengali  the  ‘  nali  ’  or  tube-like  duct  in  the  interior  of  the 
throat.  Hence,  it  is  evidently  the  sesophagus.  The  Rishis  were  probably 
unaware  of  the  windpipe.  At  least,  it  is  not  mentioned  here.  According  to 
Some  authorities, 1  Gala-jundika  ’  means  the  uvula.  But  as  the  two  1  upajih- 
bhikas  ’  are  mentioned  immediately  after,  ‘  Gala-jundika  ’  should  not  be  taken 
as  standing  for  the  uvula. — T. 

t  1  Gojihbhika  ’  is  explained  by  ChakrapSni  to  mean  the  tongue  for  speech. 
The  word  ‘  Go  ’  implies  speech  among  its  many  meanings. — T. 

J  The  seven  holes  in  the  head  are  the  2  eyes,  the  2  ears,  the  2  nostrils,  and 
one  mouth.  (The  eyes,  it  seems,  were  regarded  as  holes.  It  seems  that  in 
counting  the  six  and  fifty  limbs,  the  9  holes  are  to  be  excluded.  If  these  9  be 
taken,  the  total  would  come  up  to  65. — T. 

§  The  word  ‘  siras  ’  implies  any  tube-shaped  duct  in  the  body.  Thus  it  may 
imply  veins  and  nerves  and  arteries.— T. 


cHarAka  'SAmMITA. 


200  veins  ■*  500  muscles  ;  107  vital  parts  ;-f-  200  joints.14 

There  are  30,56,900  mouths  of  nerves  and  veins  if  these  are 
■divided  and  sub-divided  minutely, 

There  are  as  many  hairs  on  the  head,  in  the  beard,  and  on  the 
whole  body. 

It  is  as  these  have  been  counted. 

Amongst  these,  the  number  of  the  parts  beginning  with  skin 
(and  the  rest),  is  visible.  As  regards  the  rest,  their  number  is 
matter  of  inference.11 

Some  hold  that  as  regards  the  numbers  set  down  above  of 
both  the  visible  and  the  invisible  limbs  and  parts  of  the  body, 
these  cannot  be  otherwise,  counting  by  the  normal  state  of  the 
body. 

As  regards  the  instructions  we  shall  lay  down  about  the 
measures  of  certain  things  by  palmfuls,  the  proof  (of  their 
accuracy),  it  should  be  known,  is  of  the  last  form  {vis.,  that  which 
■depends  upon  inference  and  not  direct  perception).  The  pleasure 
is  subject  to  increase  and  decrease,  and  is  matter  of  inference. 

(As  regards  the  measures)  they  are, — 

According  to  the  measures  of  one’s  own  4  anjali’  there  are  16 
‘‘anjalis’  of  water  in  the  body. 

These  10  are  thus  made  up : 

The  measure  existing  with  the  stools  that  pass  out  of  the  body, 
-jWhen  those  stools  are  excessive  j 

The  measure  existing  with  the  urine; 

The  measure  existing  with  the  blood  ; 

The  measure  existing-  with  the  other  d/ialus  (ingredients)  of 
the  body  ; 

The  measure  which  travels  over  the  whole  body  and  is  held  by 
the  outer  skin ; 

The  measure  which  exists  in  abcesses,  below  the  outer  skin, 
and  which  receives  the  name  of  1  Lasika ;’ 


*  The  original  is  ‘  Dhamani.’  The  difference  between  4  <;ira  ’  and 
4  dhamani  ’  is  not  stated  here  or  anywhere  else.  The  difference  between  arteries 
and  veins  was  not  probably  known  to  the  Rishis. — T. 

f  The  original  is  4  saptottaram  satam.’  The  number  is,  of  course,  4  seven 
more  than  one  hundred,’  that ’is,  167.  Yet  the  Bengali  translators  have  all  erred 
by  taking  it  as  700, — T. 


CSfARAKA  SAMWTA.  8:09, 

The  measure  which,  depending  upon  heat,  issues  out  of  the 
pores  of  the  body  and  which  receives  the  name  of  perspiration. 
These  together  make  up.  the  lneasiye  of  ten  palmfuls.*1' 

Of  the  ‘  d.hatu  ’  ipto  which  food  is  first  transformed  and  which 
is  called  ‘  Rasa,’  the  measure  is  9. '  anjalis/ 

Qf  the  hlood  the  measure  is  8  ‘  anjalis/ 

Of  the  stools  th?  treasure  is  7  -  anjalis.’ 

Of  the  Phlegm,  the  measure  is  6  1  anjalis./ 

Qf  the  Plile,  the  measure  is  5  ‘  anjalis.’ 

Qf  the  Urine,  (he.  measure  is  4  ‘  ai  jalis/ 

Qf  the  Adeps,  the  measure  is  3  ■anjalis,’ 

Qf  the  pat^  the  pleasure  is  a  V anjalis.” 

Of  the  Marrow  ih?  measure  is  1  ‘anjali.’ 

Of  the  Brain  the  measure  is  half  an  '  anjali/ 

Qf  the  Semen  the  measure  is  the  same  (as  above). 

Of  the  Qjas  the  measure  is.  the  same  (as  above  ).f 

*  Having  set  do.wn  the  numbers  of  the  several  limbs  and  parts  of  the  body-, 
as  ascertained  by  direct  perception  and  by  inference,  or,  rather,  the  inner  sense 
that  tells  of  things  beyond  the  ken  of  the  outer  senses,  the.  Ri'shi  says  that, 
there  %re  scyne  who  accept  the  numbers  set  down  by  him,  saying  that  those 
numbers,  are  correct  only  when,  th,e  body-  is,  in  a  normal  state.  When,  however, 
the  body  is  in  an  abnormal  condition,  the  numbers  are  not,  they  contend, 
correct.  There  is  thus,  according  to,  them,  an  increase  and  decrease  in  those 
numbers,  caused  by  different  conditions  of  the  body  in  different  diseases. 

The  Rishi  admits  the  justness  of  this  contention.  He  says  that  as  regards^, 
for  example,  the  measures  set  down  below  of  the  several  things  in  the  body, 
these,  depending  not  on  direct  perception  but  on  the  knowledge  which  the  inner- 
sense  gives,  admit  of  increase  and  decrease  according  to  the  conditions  of  tha 
body.  The  measures  set  down,  it  should  be  understood,  prefer  to  the  normal 
condition  of  the  body. 

An  ‘  anjali  ’  is.  the  hollow  or  cavity  which  is  formed  by  joining  the  two  palms 
together.  It  is  a  measure  applied  to  both  solids  and  liquids.  One  measures 
rice  by  the  ‘  anjali.’  One  drinks  water,  when  one  has  no  vessel  to  use,  with  the 
'anjali,’  In  offering  oblations,  of  water  to,  deceased  ancestors,  one  offers, 
them  with  the  aid  of  the  ‘anjali.’  In  offering  flowers  to,  the  gods,  one  uses  the 
1  anjali.’  The  ‘  anjali,’  therefore^  is  a  well-known  measure. — T. 

f  Some,  texts  read  ‘  yleshmanajcliaujasah.’  Gangadhara-,  following  this, 
reading,  explains  it  as  meaning  ‘  the  particular  kind  of  phlegm  known  as.  ojas.’ 
This  can  be  hardly  correct.  The  ‘  ojas  ’  has  been  before  described.  It  is  not 
regarded  as  any  kind  of  phlegm.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  blood  of  blood, 
the  mosjt  vital  ‘  dhatu  ’  in  the  body.  The  reading  is  evidently  incorrect.— T. 


8io  CHARAgA  SAtflUTA, 

This  is  called  ‘the  Science  of  the  Body,”10 

In  this  connection  it  should  be  said  that  those  (parts  of  the 
body)  which  are  distinguished  as  gross,  firm,  having  form  and 
weight,  rough,  and  hard,  such  as  nails,  bones,  teeth,  flesh,  skin, 
stools,  hairs,  beard,  bristles,  arteries  and  veins,  &c.,  partake  of  the 
element  of  earth  (in  their  composition). 

So  also  Is  smell  and  the  sense  of  smell.17 

Those  constituents  of  the  body  which  are  liquid,  moving,  mild, 
oily,  soft,  and  glutinous,  such  as  the  juice  into  vyhich  the  food 
■eaten  is  first  converted,  blood,  adeps,  phlegm,  bile,  urine,  sweat* 
&c.,  partake  the  property  of  water.  [Besides  these,  taste  and  the 
sense  of  taste  are  both  of  water.18 

The  bile  and  heat  and  the  radiance  that  are  in  the  body,  all 
partake  of  the  property  of  fire. 

Besides  these,  form  and  the  sense  of  sight  are  pf  the  same 
kind.1® 

These,  via.,  the  inhaling  and  the  exhaling  of  breath,  the  opening 
and  the  shutting  of  the  eyelids,  contractions  and  distensions, 
walking  (or  motion),  urging  out  and  retention,  &c.,  all  partake  of 
the  air. 

Besides  these,  touch  and  the  sense  of  touch  are  of  the  same 
kind.2*? 

All  those  which  are  regarded  as  holes  (or  empty  spaces)  in  the 
body,  and  all  the  great  or  gross  and  the  minute  ducts,  partake  the 
property  of  space  (or  ether). 

Besides  these,  sound  and  the  sense  of  hearing  are  of  the  same 
kind. 

As  regards  Mind  and  Understanding,  they  take,  in  a  large 
measure,  the  property  of  that  particular  constituent  of  the  body 
which  they  control  or  direct  for  the  time  being.* 


*  There  occurs  a  misreading  in  this  aphorism.  The  correct  reading  is 
‘  Guna-pradhanam  ’  and  not  ‘  Sankhya-pradhanam.’  It  is  curious  to  see  how  the 
Bengali  translators  have  missed  the  sense, 

What  is  said  by  the  Rishi  here  is  this  : 

Having  stated  which  constituents  partake  of  the  nature  of  which  primal 
element,  the  Rishi  wishes  to  speak  of  the  Mind  and  the  Understanding.  Of 
what  particular  primal  element  do  these  partake,  both  being  immaterial?  The 
answer  is  that  Mind  and  Understanding  are  ‘  prayoktris,’  or  controllers,  of 


'O&ARAM  samhita. 


:8ti 

Thus  have  the  riumbefs  been  set  forth,  according  to  palpable 
'distinctions,  of  the  several  parts  ahd  constituents  of  the  body.28 

Taking  the  body  as  consisting  of  atoms,  its  ’Constituting  parts 
may  be  regarded  as  incalculable,  since  the'se  atoms  are  many, 
‘exceedingly  subtile,  and  beyond  the  ken  of  the  senses-. 

In  the  Union  and  disunion  of  these  n’toms,  the  causes  are  th'e 
Wind,  the  acts  (of  previous  lives),  artd  Nature. 

Hence,  this  which  is  called  the  body  really  consists  of  infinite 
Iparts. 

They  are,  however,  seen  to  be  united  into  one  (Co'm'pound). 
(For  this  reason)  it  is  called  ‘  Sanga  ’  or  attachment. 

When  it  cart  be  regarded  as  a  disunited  mass  of  atoms,  it  is 
Emancipation. 

Through  this-,  the  Pfadhana  (or  Self)  becomes  dissociated. 

When  all  entities  are  regarded  as  ceasing  to  exist,  the  Self 
becomes  dissociated  (from  life’s  concerns).*2® 


"directors  of  the  other  constituents  of  which  the  body  is  made  up.  They  par- 
tike,  for  the  time  being,  of  the  nature  Or  properties  of  that  particular  cons¬ 
tituent  which  they  may  control  Or  direct.  Thus,  when  the  Mind  and  the 
Understanding  direct  vision  ind  the  eye,  they  may  be  said  to  partake  of  the 
hature  of  fire,  as  vision  and  the  eye  partake  of  that  primal  element.  So  wheii 
they  direct  hearing  and  the  sense  of  hearing,  they  miy  be  said  to  partake  of 
Space  (or  ether),  as  hearing  arid  the  sense  of  hearing  partake  of  that  particular 
primal  element.— T.  .... 

*  This  is  a  very  important  aphorism  frOm  the  Rishi’s  point  Of  vieW; 
In  numbering  the  parts  of  which  the  body  is  made,  he  took  care  to  state  that 
those  are  the  parts  which  a  division  in  the  gross  (sthulatah)  would  yield.  There 
is  another  division  which  is  very  minute  (sukshihatah)  and  which  yields  a  really 
infinite  number  of  parts-.  The  body  is  a  union  Or  conglomeration  Of  atoms. 
These  are  innumerable,  exceedingly  subtile,  and  beyond  the  ken  Of  the  gross 
senses.  They  can  be  understood  and  their  infinity  in  point  of  number  grasped 
through  the  aid  of  that  inner  sense  which  is  above  all  the  grosser  senses. 

Having  explained  that  the  body  is  a  mass  of  atoms,  the  llishi  explains  the 
'cause  of  their  union  of  conglomeration  into  one  whole.  The  cause,  or,  rather, 
'causes  Ore  wind  (one  of  the  five  primal  elemerits),  acts-,  and  Nature. 

Of  wind  as  one  of  the  causes  Of  the  union,  nothing  particular  fleed  be  said: 

Of  acts,  it  should  be  observed  that  they  are  those  of  previous  lives  of 
conditions  of  existence.  It  is  those  acts  that  determine  the  particular  forth  of 
Shape  with  which  the  Self  becomes  vested.  One  becomes  a  man  ;  another,  h 
horse  ;  a  third,  a  goat ;  &c.  The  determining  factor  is  the  unexhausted  dcti  df 

103 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA . 


{Here  are  two  verses  containing  a  summary .) 

That  physician  who  knows  the  members  of  the  body  as 
regards  all  its  parts,  is  never  at  fault  in  consequence  of  ignorance 
of  this  topic.'1 

Possessed  of  knowledge,  such  a  man  is  never  confounded  by 
those  faults  which  have  their  origin  in  ignorance. 

Such  an  individual,  becoming  bereft  of  faults,  bereft  of  desire, 
and  acquiring  tranquillity,  attains  to  freedom  from  rebirth.8 

Thus  ends  the  Seventh  Lesson,  called  Carira-sankhya,  in  the 
Division  called  Carira,  of  Agniveja’s  treatise  as  revised  by 
Charaka. 


previous  states  of  life.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  when  union  and 
disunion  are  mentioned,  the  acts  of  this  life  also  may  be  regarded  as  playing  an 
important  part. 

The  increase  (by  which  is  meant  the  accession  of  new  atoms)  and  the 
decrease  (by  which  is  meant  the  loss  of  atoms)  of  ihe  body  are  certainly  due 
to  the  acts  of  this  life  also. 

‘  Ekatwena  sangah  ’  means  ‘  In  union  is  the  cause  of  attachment.’  1  Sanga  ’ 
implies,  as  explained  by  Chakrapani,  ‘  the  cause  of  sanga.’  The  sense  is,  as 
long  as  one  thinks  of  the  body  as  a  whole  and  as  something  belonging  to  one’s 
self,  one  remains  attached  to  the  things  or  concerns  of  Life.  ‘  Prithaktwena 
apavargah,’  that  is,  when  one  regards  the  body  as  really  a  mass  of  atoms  united 
together  for  some  time  and  certain  to  be  disunited  after  a  few  short  years,  one 
ceases  to  remain  attached  to  the  concerns  of  life.  This  dissociation  from 
attachment  is  ‘  apavarga  ’  or  Emancipation. 

‘  Tatra  Pradhanamasaktam  ’  is  misread  and  mis-interpreted  bgr  Gangadhara 
and  all  the  Bengali  translators.  Chakrapani  adopts  the  correct  reading  and 
correctly  explains  it.  The  final  word  is  not  ‘  asaktam  ’  but  ‘  asaktam.’  The 
sense  is  ‘  in  such  thought  does  the  soul  or  Self  become  dissociated.’  Truly,  if 
the  Soul  can  regard  the  body  as  only  a  mass  of  atoms,  beauty,  wrath,  enjoy* 
ments,  all  cease  to  affect  it. 

The  last  clause  or  sentence  is  ‘  sarva-satwa-nivrittau  nivartate.’  The  sense 
is,  ‘  when  all  entities  (are  regarded  to)  cease  to  exist,  the  soul  becomes  dis¬ 
sociated.’  This  is  another  form  of  saying  what  has  already  been  said.  When 

existent  things -existent,  that  is,  in  the  ordinary  view— are  regarded  as  non¬ 
existent,  which,  of  course,  is  the  truth  beheld  by  true  knowledge,  the  Soul 
becomes  divested  of  all  attachments. 

It  is  very  much  to  be  regretted  that  even  with  Chakrapani  as  a  guide 
Gangadhara  should  have  failed  to  understand  the  last  but  one  sentence, —T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA . 


813, 


LESSON  VI It 

After  this  we  shall  expound  the  Lesson  called  ‘  Jatisutriya  ’  m 
the  Division  called  ‘'Carira’  (of  this  treatise).* * * § 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.1, 

We  shall  now  lay  down  instructions  about  those  acts  which 
may  accomplish  the  desire  which  a  woman  and  a  man,  of  un¬ 
diseased  semen  and  blood  and  genital  organ  and  womb,  may 
cherish  for  good  offspring.-f-2 

Aministering  unto  both  the  woman  and  the  man  medicated 
oils  and  gJtees  as  also  the  (required)  processes  of  Swedana  (vapour 
baths),  and  correcting  their  constitutions  by  emetics  and  purga¬ 
tives,  the  health  of  the  couple  should  be  strengthened. 

After  correction,  they  should  be  treated  with  enemata  both? dry 
and  oily. 

After  this,  the  man  should  be  treated  with  ghee  and  milk 
corrected  by  such  medicines  as  fall  within  the  class  called  sweet, 
and  the  woman  should  be  treated  with  oils  and  the  seeds  obtained" 
from  the  beans  of  Phaseolus  radiatus ,\z 

From  the  beginning  of  the  menses,  for  three  nights  the  woman 
should  live  as  a  Brahmach&rini  (that  is,  wholly  abstain  from  sexual- 
congress),  sleeping  on  the  bare  ground,  eating  from  off  the  palms- 
of  her  hands  or  some  vessel  that  is  not  broken.  She  should  not, . 
again,  subject  her  person  to  any  sort  of  rubbing  or  cleansing 
process.§4  1 


*  ‘  Jati  ’  means  birth' ;  and ‘  sutra,’ aphorism.  The  compound  ‘jatisutriya.’ 
means  '  relating  to  the  aphorisms  about  birth.’  The  whole  of  this  Lesson  treats 
of  topics  connected  with  birth. — T. 

t  The  adjective  ‘  avyapanna  ’  qualifies  all  the  four  substantives  after  it, 
viz.,  ‘sukra’  (semen),  ‘  §onita  ’  (menstrual  blood),  ‘  yoni  ’  (the  genital- organ  of 
woman),  and  ‘  garbhasaya  ’  (womb).. 

Those  acts  which  are  calculated  to  lead  to  the  fruition  of  the  desire  which  a 
healthy  couple  may  entertain  for  good  issue,  will  be  spoken  of  in  the  subsequent 
aphorisms. — T. 

}  Chakrapani  explains  that  *  madhuraushadha  ’  may  mean  medicines 
mixed  with  honey,  or,  as  some  take  it,  those  medicines  which  fall 
under  the  class  called  ‘  Jivaniya  ’  or  strength-giving.  Honey  increases  the 
semen  of  man. — T. 

§  The  connection  of  ‘  Panibhyam  ’  is  difficult  to  understand.  Some- 


GHARARA  SAMH1TA 


On  the  fourth  day,  she  should  be  made  to  undergo,  a  process 
of  good:  washing.  She  should  also,  be  made  to  dip.  her 
whole  person  with  the  head  into  water. 

After  this,  she  should:  be  made  to.  wear  white  (glean,)  clothes. 
The  man  also  should  be  subjected,  to.  the-  sam.e  processes.6 

Both  of  them,  thus  dressed  in,  white  (clean)  robes  and 
decked  with  garlands  of  flowers,  with  cheerful  minds  and 
desirous  of  each  other,  should,  be  asked,  to  unite  with, 
each  other.8- 

If  desirous  of  procreating  a  s.on,  they  should  unite  with 
each  other  on  an  even,  day  after  the  day  of  bath.  If,  on. 
the  other  hand,  they  desire  to  haye  a  daughter,  they  should 
unite  on.  an.  odd  day  after  the.  day  of  bath.7; 

One  should  not  unite  with  a  woman  when-  the  latter 
is  lyiiJ-g;  with  her  face  d.o.wuwards,  or  when.  she  is  lying 
on  her  sides. 

take  it  as  connected  with  ‘  adhahsayini,’  in  which  case  it  would  mean 
that  the  woman  is  to  sleep  on  the  bare  ground  with  her  arms;  (by 
turns)  as  a  pillow. 

GangSdhara  takes  it  as  connected  with  ‘  bhunjana,’  in  v/hich  case  it 
Would  mean  that  the  woman  is  to  eat  from,  off  her  palms,  or  from, 
a  vessel  that  is  not  broken.  The  prohibition  as  regards  broken  vessels, 
is  intelligible.  To.  eat  off  broken  dishes  or  vessels  is  regarded  In¬ 
auspicious. 

In  that  interesting  state  when  the.  great  functional  wave  is  passing, 
over  the  system  of  woman,  nothing  should  be  done,  which  is,  regarded 
as  inauspicious.  To  eat  off  the  palms  is  a  direction  that  is  probably 
due  to  the.  desire  of  the  Rishi  to,  recommend  a  sparing  diet. 

The  first  three  days  from  the  appearance  of  the  menses  are  regarded- 
as  the.  period'  of  impurity.  The  woman  can  do.  no.  household  work. 

It  seems  that  by  declaring  this  period  as  one  of'  impurity,  the. 
Rishis  imposed  the  most  effective  check  upon  the  woman’s  propensity 
for  labour.  Absolute  rest  is  needed  by  her  at  such  a  time. 

It  is  curious  to.  see  how  the  idea  of  impurity  is  shared'  by  many 
Other  nations,  Even  the.  uncivilized'  races  entertain  the  same  notion. 
The  period  of  impurity  or  absolute  rest  differs  with  different  people. 
Among  many  hill  tribes  in  India,  not  less  than  io  days  is  the  lijnit. 
Indeed,  it  seems,  that  as  civilization  advances,  the  period  of  impurity 
becomes  shorter.  American  physicians,  complain  that  American  girls,  especially 
(hose  of  the  working  classes,  do  not  give  themselves  any  rest  during 
(he  passage  of  this  great  functional  wave  oyer  the  female  constitution.— T. 


GBARAKA  SAMH1TA. 


8*$ 

The  genital  organ  of  a  woman  who  is  lying  with  face 
downwards  is  afflicted  by  the  wind  which,  in  that  posture, 
of  the  body,  becomes  powerful 

Of  a  woman  lying  on  her  right  side,  the  phlegm,  becoming 
excited,  obstructs  the  uterus.* 

Of  a  woman  lying  on  her  ieft  side,  the  bile,  becoming; 
afflicted,  burns  the  blood  and  the  sem  en. 

Hence,  the  proper  posture  is  tying  with  the  face  upwards. 

Of  one  that  lies  in  this  posture,  the  faults  {viz.,  wind,  bile,, 
and  phlegm)  remain  in  their  proper  places.. 

After  the  act  of  congress  is  over,  the  woman  should  use. 
cold  water  to,  wash  her  face,  hands,  &c.8 

A  woman  that  has  been  gorged  with  food,  or  one  that  is 
very  hungry,  or  very  thirsty,  ov  one  that  is  under  the  impulse- 
of  fear,  or  one  that  is  cheerless  of  mind,  or  one  stricken  with 
grief,  or  one  that  is  angry,  or  on.e  that  has  set  her  heart  upon 
another  man,  or  one  whose  passion  for  congress  has  been 
excessively  inflamed;  fails  to  conceive,  or,  if  she  conceives,, 
produces  offspring  that  is  deformed  and-  defective.® 

One  should  abstain  from  a  girl  of  tender  years*  or  a  woman 
of  advanced  age,  or  one  that  rs  ailing  for  a  long  period,,  or- 
one  that  is  labouring  under  any  disease  or  deformity.10' 

The  same  are  regarded  as  faults  (or  defects)  in  males  f 

Hence,  only  a  male  and  a  female  that  are  free  from  all 
defects  should  unite  with  each  other  (for  procreating  offspring!.11 

With  the  hairs  on  their  bodies  erect  from  joy,  and  eager 
for  union,  the  couple  should  spread  out  a  comfortable  bed 
sprinkled  over  with  perfumes,  and  having,  taken  food;  that  is. 


*  Gangadhara  reads  ‘  samv-yutS  ;’  other  texts,  ‘  samchyata.’  Both  words, 
as  applying  to  the  phlegm,  seem  to  be  obscure.  Perhaps,  the  sense  is, 
collecting,  or  becoming  increased.’  At  any  rate,  it  is  safer  to  take  the  word 
as  implying  ‘  excited.’ 

‘  Obstructs  the  uterus  ’  in  the  sense  of  impeding  rts:  capacity  to  receive  the. 
semen  properly. — T-. 

f  Those  incidents  which  have  before  been  mentioned  {vide  aphorisms: 
9,  and  10)  as  defects  in  women,  such  as  satiety  from  gorging,  hunger,  thirst, 
wrath,  &c.,  are,  when  present  in -  the  male,  to  be  regarded  also  as  defects.  Such 
men  should  not  seek  to  procreate  offspring.— T. 


tSA'RAKA  ZAMMTTA. 


8  VS 

beneficial  and  of  good  relish,  the  man  should  go  to  it,  first  placing 
thereon  his  right  foot  and  the  woman  her  left  foot.  The  man 
should  then  utter  this  formula  : 

Thou  art  Ahi  1  Thou  art  A'yus  (the  period  of  life) !  Thou 
art  Fame  extending  over  the  whole  world  !  Let  Dhatri  ordain 
Thee!  Let  Vidhatri  ordain  Thee!  Endued  with  the  glory  of 
Brahma  will  it  be !  Let  Brahman,  Vrishaspati,  Vishnu,  Soma, 
Surya,  and  also  the  Agwins.  Bhaga,  and  also  Mitra  and  Varuna, 
ordain  me  a  heroic  son  ! 

Uttering  these  words,  the  man  should  unite  with  the 
woman.*12. 


*  The  commentators  avoid  explaining  this  mantra  or  formula.  It  is 
difficult  to  say  in  which  scriptures  this  mantra  occurs.  It  ought  to  be  in 
the  Grihya  sutras  ;  but  in  those  of  Agwalayana  which  we  have,  this  mantra 
cannot  be  found.  It  probably  occurs  in  the  lost  1  Ayurveda  ’  traditionally 
attributed  to  the  Grandsire,  Brahman.  Every  act  of  the  Hindus  is  sought 
to  be  regulated  by  religion. 

No  virgin  can  be  approached  without  first  performing  the  ceremony  or  rite 
known  as  ‘  GarbhSdhana  ’  or  rite  of  Impregnation.  Every  virgin  is  supposed 
to  have  a  Gandharva  as  her  guardian.  The  husband,  after  performance  of 
the  rites  of  Garbhadhana,  utters  an  invocation  to  the  Gandharva  to  leave 
his  charge. 

It  is  difficult  to  identify  all  the  deities  mentioned  in  this  mantra , 

The  first  three  invocations  are  apparently  addressed  to  the  woman, 

*  Thou  art  Ahi,’  meaning  the  Earth  or  soil.  ‘  Thou  art  Ayus  ’  or  the  period 
of  life,  for  the  child’s  life  will  be  derived  from  thee.  Ayus  is  used  in  the  sense 
of  giver  of  Ayus. 

‘Thou  art  Fame.’  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  wife  is  frequently 
styled  as  the ‘Pratishtha  ’  or  fame  of  the  husband.  It  is  through  the  wife 
that  one’s  race  is  perpetuated.  The  purity,  again,  of  one’s  race  is  entirely 
dependent  on  the  wife  or  the  purity  of  her  conduct. 

The  rest  of  the  invocation  refers  to  the  would-be  child.  As  usually  used, 
there  is  no  difference  between  ‘  Dhatri  ’  and  1  Vidhatri,’  both  the  names  being 
applied  to  the  Grandshire,  Brahman,  the  Ordainer  or  Creator  of  the  universe. 
Here  there  is  evidently  a  distinction. 

Vrihaspati  is  the  chief  priest  of  the  celestials. 

Vishnu  is  the  deity  who  preserves  the  universe.  Soma  and  Surya  are  the 
deities  of  the  moon  and  the  sun.  The  Agwins  are  twins,  They  are  the 
celestial  physicians.  Indra  had  excluded  them,  in  spite  of  their  useful  vocation, 
from  participating  the  Soma  juice  in  sacrifices.  But  through  the  powerful 
intervention  of  Ihe  Rishi,  Chyavana,.  whom  the  Agwins  had  restored  to  youth. 


■CM AS  AKA  SAMMITA, 


Si  j 

If  the  woman  desires  to  hat/e  a  son  that  is  large-bodied, 
of  fair  complexion,  of  eyes  like  those,  of  the  lion,  endued  with 
great  energy,  of  purity  of  behaviour,  and  of  powerful  mind, 
she  should  then  be  subjected  to  the  following  discipline  from  the 
day  of  the  purificatory  bath :  thick  gruel  of  barley,  well-cleaned, 
mixed  with  honey  and  ghee,  aild  combining  it  (in  a  heated 
Cauldron)  with  milk  obtained  from  a  white  cow  having  a  calf 
of  the  same  colour,  should  be  given  to  her  for  drink,  in  a  vessel  of 
silver  or  white  brass,  for  a  period  of  seven  days,  at  proper  times  i 
every  morning,  food  made  of  $ali  rice  and  powdered  barley,  mixed 
with  curds,  honey,  and  ghee,  or  with  milk,  should  also  be  given 
to  her,13 

Every  evening  she  should  sleep  in  a  good  (spacious  and  well6 
ventilated)  room  on  a  good  bed,  and  use  good  seats  and  vehicles 
and  wear  good  robes  and  ornaments,14 

Morning  and  evening  she  should  frequently  look  at  a  white 
and  large-bodied  bull  of  excellent  breed,  smeared  with  paste  of 
white  sandal. 

Her  mind  also  should  be  entertained  by  means  of  agreeable 
and  delightful  converse. 

She  should  also  see  other  women  and  men  who  are  of  agree6 
able  appearance  and  conversation  and  dress  and  conduct,  as  also 
such  objects  of  the  senses  as  are  the  best  of  their  kind, 

Her  companions  should  also  treat  her  with  all  that  is  agreeable 
and  beneficial  to  her. 

During  this  period  her  husband  should  have  no  intercourse 
with  her.*16 


Indra  was  compelled  to  recognise  the  twin  brothers  and  admit  them  td 
companionship. 

‘  Mitra  varunan,’  in  the  dual,  means  Mitra  (Surya)  and  Varuna,  the  lord  of 
waters.  The  separate  mention  of  Surya,  however,  precludes  the  supposition 
of  Mitra  being  the  same  deity.  The  fact  is,  the  earlier  conceptions  of  these 
deities,  as  derivable  from  Vedic  hymns,  underwent  considerable  modifications 
in  progress  of  time,  till  at  the  Pauranic  period,  it  became  really  difficult  to 
realise  the  individualities  of  many  of  the  deities  of  the  early  times.— T. 

*  Chakrapani  reads  ‘  atij'aneya  ’  for  ‘  ajaneya,’  Both  the  words  mean  ‘  of 
excellent  or  superior  breed.’  Some  of  the  Bengali  translators  wrongfully  take 
the  word  as  implying  a  noble  steed.  It  is  better  to  take  it  as  an  adjective  ol 
‘  rishabha.'  _ 


£bar£kA  MMtifrA, 


HaVirtg  abided,  according  to  these  ordinances,  for  seven  nights-, 
“on  the  eighth  day  she  should,  accompanied  by  her  husband-, 
perforin  h'e'r  ablutions  in  water,  dipping  her  head-,  and  then  Cover 
herself  with  a  piece  of  white  and  Untorrt  cloth*,  and  also  Weaf 
'garlands  of  White  lowers  aftd  diverse  ornaments.*10 

After  this  the  priest,  beholding  a  site  gently  inclining  towards 
‘the  east  or  the  'north,  on  the  north-east  corner  of  the  house,  and 
Smearing  it  With  cow-dung  and  water-,  and  sprinkling  it  (again) 
With  wateh,  Construct  an  altar  Upon  it. 

"then  on  the  western  side  of  that  altar,  a  pad  made  of  neW 
'(untorn)  cloths  should  be  spread. 

If  employed  by  a  Brllhmana  (householder),  the  priest  should 
hext  place  over  that  pad  the  skin  of  a  white  bullock  and  take  his 
seat  upon  it. 

If  employed  by  a  householder  of  the  royal  Caste-,  he  should 
place  Upon  it  the  skin  of  a  tiger  or  of  a  bullock  (for  sitting 
Upon  it). 

If  employed  by  One  of  the  Vaigya  caste,  he  should  place 
Upon  it  the  skin  of  a  Ruru  (deer)  or  of  a  goat  (for  sitting 
Upon  'it). 

Thus  Seated,  he  should-,  making  a  fire  With  sacred  fuel  consist¬ 
ing  of  Palaca  (a),  dr  IngUd’i  (b),  or  UdUmvara  (c),  Or  Madhuka  (<?) 
Wood,  and  sUrroUnding  it  with  Ku?a  grass,  and  making  a 
boundary  line  (with  water)  To'r  marking  it  off  spread  around  if 
fried  paddy  and  white  flowers  of  fragrant  scent. 

He  should  then  place  there  a  vessel  of  water  that  is  pure  and 
Sanctified  (with  sacred  texts),  and  then  sanctify  the  Ghee  for 


‘  MijribhSvam  ’  implies  union  for  sexual  congress. — T. 

*  The  seven  nights  are  to  be  counted  front  the  day  of  the  purificatory 
hath,  as  expressly  stated  in  aphorism  13  ante. 

Gangadhara  says  that  the  period  is  to  be  counted  from  the  first  appearance 
tof  the  menses.  He  is  not  supported  by  the  text  itself  upon  which  he 
‘comments.  Such  instances  of  fitter  carelessness  are  common  in  his  com¬ 
mentaries. — T-. 

( a)  Butea  ftondosa ,  Roixb. 

(b)  Balanites  Roxburghii ,  Planchoh  ;  syn.  Xiinenia  XLgyptiaca ,  Roxb. 

(c)  Ficus  glotherata ,  Willd ;  syn.  Cdvellia  glomerata,  Miq, 

{ d)  Bassia  latifblia^  Rbxb. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Ssg 

pouring  it  on  the  fire,  and  then  place  around  the  altar  a  bullock  of 
good  breed,  of  the  colour  already  -mentioned,  and  the  other 
articles.1’  * 

The  woman  desirous  of  having  a  son  should  then,  accompanied, 
by  her  husband, -take  her.  seat  on  the  western  side  of  the  fire  and 
the  right  hand  side  of  the  priesti' 

-  She  should  then  utter  her  wish,  for  a  (meritorious)  son. 

After  this,  the  priest  should  (with  the  aid  of  mantras')  invoke 
Prajapati  (the  Grandsire  or  Brahman,  the  creator  of  all  things) 
and  pray  him  to  inspire  the  genital  organs  of  the  mother  desirous 
of  (such)  a  son  (with  the  capacity  of  bearing  good  offspring). 

For  the  fulfilment  of  her  wish  he  should  also  pour  into  the 
sacred  fire,  the  fruit-bearing  Ishti,  uttering  this  Rich,  viz., — Let 
Vishnu  favour  the  organs  (of  this  mother)  1 

After  this,  the  rice,  cooked  in  the  ‘sthali’  should  be  mixed,  by 
means  of  an  iron  ladle,  with  the  sanctified  ghee.  The  priest 
should  then  thrice  cast  portions  thereof  into  the  sacred  fire. 

*  The  vessel  of  water  is  to  be  kept  not  on  the  altar  but  near  it.  The  shape 
of  the  vessel  is  like  that  of  a  small  canoe.  Anothor  vessel,  of  a  much  smaller 
size,  is  kept  within  it.  These  vessels  are  called  ‘koga’  and  ‘kugi’.  They  are 
directed  to  be  made  of  copper,  or  silver,  or  gold,  or  of  the  horns  of  a 
rhinoceros; 

The  water  is  sanctified  by  certain  mantras.  All  the  rivers  of  India  are 
invoked  to  come  into  it. 

The  ghee  is  sanctified  with  the  aid  of  certain  mantras.  It  is,  besides,  held 
thrice  over  the  blazing  fire. 

'  Libations  of  ghee ,  poured  on  the  Roma  fire,  are  called  ajya. 

‘  Ajaneyadin,’  of  course,  includes,  those  articles  which  are  mentioned  in 
the  first  part  of  aphorism  15,  viz.,  a  bullock,  a  quantity  of  sandal  paste,  and 
an  ornament  of  gold  for  the  upper  arm.— T. 

f  ‘  Pagchimatoagnim  ’  and  ‘  dakshinato  Brahmanam  ’  would  seem  to  imply 
that  the  woman  is  to  sit  face  eastwards,  with  the  fire  before  her,  and  the 
priest  on  her  left  side.  The  fact  is,  to  this  day,  the  performer  of  the  rite  sits, 
face  eastwards,  with  the  fire  before  him  or  her,  and  the’  priest  sits  on  his  q& 
her  left  side.  Both  the  priest  and  the  performer  of  the  rite  sit  with  faces, 
turned  towards  the  east. 

The  priest  and  the  performer  of  the  rite  may  also  sit  with  faces  turned  to 
the  north, 

AH  dalans  or  Pooja  halls  in  Hindu  houses  are  constructed  with  their  faces 
to  the  west  or  the  south,  so  that  the  worshipper  may  sit  facing  the  east  o.r 
ths  north.— T. 


820 


CHASAKA  SAMHITA. 


After  thus  sanctifying  a  vessel  of  water  with  those  Mantras  that 
may  be  hers  according  to  her  gotra  or  family,  the  priest  should 
make  it  over  to  her,  saying, — Use  this  water  for  all  thy 
purposes  1 — -18  * 

After  the  completion  of  these  rites,  the  woman  should, 
moving  her  right  foot  first,  circumambulate  the  fire. 

She  should  next  cause  a  number  of  Brahmanas  to  utter- 
benedictions  upon  her. 

With  her  husband  she  should  then  drink  the  remnant  of 
the  sanctified  ghee ,  The  husband  should  first  drink  a  portion,, 
the  wife  after  him.  Nothing  (of  the  sanctified  ghee)  should 
be  left  in  the  vessel. 

Attired  in  robes  of  the  kind  already  mentioned  (and 
observing  the  discipline  already  indicated),  the  couple  should 
then  associate  together  for  a  period  of  eight  nights. 

By  conforming  to  these  rites  and  practices  they  would 
beget  a  son  of  desirable  attributes.19-^ 

Of  that  woman  who  is  desirous  of  having  a  son.  of  a 

complexion  that  is  neutral,  of  eyes  that  are  red,  of  chest  that 
is  wide,  and  of  arms  that  are  long,  and 

Of  her  also,  who  is  desirous  of  having  a  son  of  a 

complexion  that  is  dark,  of  hair  that  is  dark,  soft,  and 


*  ‘  Ishti  ’  is  derived  from  the  root  ‘  yaj,’  whence  *  yajna  ’  or  sacrifice, 
1  fehti  ’  means  the  offerings  made  in  a  sacrifice. 

The  ‘  Ishti,’  generally  consisting  of  fried  paddy,  pure  rice,  flowers,  ghee, 
milk,  honey,  &c.,  is.  cast  into,  the  Homo,  fire  with  the  aid  of  mantras.  It  is. 
supposed  to  be  accepted  by  the  deity  to  whom  it  is  offered.  The  acceptance  of. 
the  *  ishti  ’  leads,  to  the  fructification  of  the  worshipper’s  wishes. — T. 

t  The  ceremony  of  ‘  swastivachana 1  consists,  of  making  presents  to, 
BrShmanas  and  receiving  their  benedictions. 

The  remnant  of  the  sanctified  ghee  implies,  the  portion  that  remains  in  the 
vessel  after  the  conclusion  of  the  Homa. 

There  is  no  word  in  English  corresponding  to  ‘  uchcchishta.’  What  remains, 
in  a  dish  or  vessel  after  one  has  eaten  off  it,  is.  called  ‘  uchcchishta.’ 

The  entire  contents  of  a,  vessel  may  be  made  sp  by  one’s  eating  from  it- 
even  a  very  little  portion, 

‘Yathavidhau  parichcchadau ’  implies  not  simply  ‘dressed  as  mentioned 
before’  but  ‘observant  of  the  entire  course  o/  discipline  indicated  in  the 
previous  aphorisms,— T, 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


821 


Icing,  of  eyes  that  are  White,  of  teeth  that  are  white,  of 
great  energy*  and  of  strong  mind, 

The  sariie  ordinances  apply  about  their  Hotiia :  but  as 
regards  their  environment;s,  the  colour  should  not  be  the  same. 

Those  environments  should  be  of  a  colour  accordant  with 
that  of  the  son  desired. 

Indeed,  environments  of  other  kinds,  agreeing  in  each- 
instance  with  that  of  the  soh  in  view,  should  be  resorted  to.80  * 
As  regards  a  woman  of  the  Sudra  order,  she  should  bow 
to  persons  of  the  twice-born  class,  as  also  to  the  deities, 
the  instructor  (of  the  family,  to  which  she  belongs),  to  those 
engaged  in  the  observance  of  penances,  and  to  those  who 
'have  won  (ascetic)  success.81  -f- 

Women  should  be  made  to  hear  benedictions,  corres¬ 
ponding  with  the  kinds  of  sons  they  may  desire. 

When  they  have  heard  such  benedictions  they  should  be 
made  to  sojourn  mentally  through  those  countries  which 
abound  with  children  like  "to  those  they  wish  for. 


*  fCyama  ’  is  a  colour  that  is  intermediate  between  fair  and  dark.  In 
'male  persons,  this  complexion  is  regarded  as  very  agreeable. 

It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  the  feminine  form  of  ‘  sySma,’  viz., 
'  syama  ’  is  used  as  a  substantive  and  is  applied  to  a  woihan  whose  complexion 
resembles  that  of  heated  gold. 

‘  Parivarha  ’  is  explained  as  drink,  food,  seats,  beds,  ornaments,  robes,  &c. 
To  take  as  its  equivalent  the  word  ‘  environment  ’  would  not  be  improper. 

•  What  the  Rishi  says  here  is  that  the  1  parivarha  ’  should  differ,  that  is, 
agreeably  to  the  kind  of  son  desired,  the  ‘  parivarha  ’  should  be  selected.  What 
the  ‘  parivarha  ’  should  be  in  the  different  cases  has  been  sufficiently  indicated 
in  the  aphorism. — T. 

+  What  is1  said  here  is  that  as  regards  women  of  the  Sudra  or  the  lowest  of 
the'  four  orders,  the  ordinances  about  Homa,  &c.,  laid  down  in  the  foregoing 
aphorisms,  do  not  apply. 

‘  Dwija,’  literally,  means  1  twice-born.’  As  such,  it  is  applied  to  Brahmanas, 
Kshatriyas,  and  Vaisyas.  In  such  places,  however,  only  BrShmanas  are 
implied.  The  Sudra  woman  should  btfw  unto  Brahmanas  and  obtain  their 
blessings  and  benedictions. 

'*  Guru  ’  is,  literally,  a  teacher  or 'preceptor.  The  spiritual  guide  of  a  family 
is  so  called.  Sudra  families  have  Brahmana  Gurus. 

Generally  speaking,  Sudras  are  not  competent  to  perform  the  Homa  or  have 
'  it  performed  in  their  houses.— T. 


8  a; 


CHAR-AKA  SAMHITA. 


They  Should  further  be  instructed  to  adopt  the  food  and 
■sports  and  practices  and  dress  of  those  countries  after  the 
manner  of  the  children  of  .which  they  desire  to  have  children 
of  their  own. 

Thus  have  all  the  rites  been  set  forth  which  fructify  the 
wishes  of  persons  desirous  of  having  children.22  * 

Not  only  are  the.  above  acts  ■  productive  of.  variety  of 
complexion  fin  the  child); 

But  verily,  when  the  particular  rfhatu  called  Tejas '  (fire)  is 
predominated  by  those,  two  other  d/rcvtus,  viz.,  water  and 
space,  the  complexion  (of  the  child)  becomes  fair. 

So  when  Tejas  is  predominated  by  those  two  other 
dh&tus,  viz.,  earth  and  air,  it  becomes  productive  of  a  dark 
complexion. 

When,  however,  Tejas  is  combined  with  all  the  other 
dhatus  in  equal  proportions,  the  complexion  becomes  neutral 
(or  a  mixture  of  fair  and  dark,  called  gyama).23-}" 

The  temper  of  mind  of  the  mother  and  the  father,  the 
subjects  constantly  heard  by  the  mother  during  the  period 
■of  conception,  the  acts  (of  previous  lives)  of  the  children 
themselves,  and  the  possession  of  the  kind  of  mind  (by  the 
children  in  their  previous  lives)  are  the  causes  that  deter- 


*  From  this  aphorism  it  is  evident  that  the  Rishis  understood  the  power  of 
suggestion  in  the  matter  of  children  brought  forth  my  mothers.  To  make  a 
woman  think  constantly  of  the  best  specimens  of  humanity  is  the  easiest  way 
of  making  her  bring  forth  excellent  children.  Fear  and  other  violent  emotions 
make  a  woman  bring  forth  deformed  and  monstrous  children. 

If  these  emotions  are  known  to  have  such  effect,  the  .  mind,  it  becomes 
obvious,  is  a  powerful  factor  in  determining -the  form  and  attributes  of  children 
a  woman  may  bring  forth. — T. 

t  In  the  constitution  of  the  embryo  all  the  five  primal  dhatus  or  elements, 
ytz.,  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  and  space,  enter.  The  proportions,  of  course,  are 
different  in  different  cases.  Of  these  five,  Tejas  or  fire  is  the  cause  of  com¬ 
plexion.  Under  different  circumstances,  Tejas  produces  different  complexions. 
When  mixed  largely  with  water  and  space,  Tejas  produces  a  fair  complexion. 
When  largely  mixed. with  earth  and  air,  it  produces  a  dark  complexion. 
And,  lastly,  when  mixed  in  equal  proportions  with  the  others,  .  the 
complexion  produced  is  a  mixture  of  fair  and  dark,  which  is  called 
‘  9yama.’ — T. 


CHARAKA  SAMTilTA.  823 

mine  the  differences  in  respect  of  mind  of  the  children  that 
are  born.21  * 

Conception  is  said  to  set  in  properly  when  it  results 
from  the  man  and  the  woman  uniting  in  sexual  congress 
after  the  bodies  of  both  have  been  purified  according  to  the 
ordinances  set  forth  above;  when  undiseased  semen  combines 
with  undiseased  blood ;  when  the  generative  organ  of  the 
mother  is  not  vitiated  by  any  obstruction ;  and  lastly,  when 
the  womb  also  is  perfectly  free  from  every  fault ;  even  as 
a  colouring  matter  produces  excellent  colour  by  only  falling 
upon  a  piece  pf  cloth  that  is  perfectly  white  and  free  from 
filth  .  of  every  kind. 

Verily,  the  semen  (under  the  circumstances  stated  above) 
acts  like  milk,  which,  when  mixed  with  curds,  forsakes  its 
own  nature  and  takes  the  nature  of  curds  in  consequence 
of  the  fermentation  that  sets  in.SB  -f- 

*  Having  explained  the  causes  that  determine  the  difference  of  complexion 
in  children,  the  Rishi  sets  himself  to  explain  the  difference  of  mental  tempera¬ 
ment  with  which  children  are  bora. 

The  first  cause  is  the  temper  of  mind  of  the  mother  and  the  father  both 
generally  and  at  the  time  of  procreation. 

The  second  is  the  subject  heard  constantly  by  the  mother  during  the  period 
of  gestation.  One  may  hear  high  and  ennobling  discourses  based  upon  the 
Crutis,  the  Dharma-jastras,  the  Puranas,  biographies  of  eminent  men,  &c. ; 
while  another  may  hear  scandalous  and  imnmral  discourses,  &c.  This  is  a 
powerful  factor  in  determining  the. mind  of  the  child  to  be  brought  forth. 

The  past  acts  of  the  children  themselves  are  another  factor  whose  effect 
cannot  but  be  marked. 

The  possession  of  the  kind  of  mind  by  the  child  in  his  previous  life  deter¬ 
mines  also  his  mind  in  this  life.  Minds  have  before  been  classed  as  ‘  suddham,’ 
.  ‘  Rajasam,’  and  ‘  TamaSam,’  (vide  Lesson  IV,  ante ,  of  this  Division).  The 
subdivisions  of  each  of  these  principal  heads  are  also  shown  there,  such  as 
‘  Brahma,’  1  Arsha,’  ‘  Amdra,’  &c. — T. 

t  ‘  Ranjana  ’  is  colouring  matter.  ■ 

‘  Samuditagunarti  ragam  ’  implies  colour  of  excellent  attributes. 

■  ‘  Upanipata  ’  means  falling 'or  touching. 

What  the  Rishi  says  here  is  this  :  any  colouring  matter,  if  the  piece 
of  cloth  to  be  coloured  happens  to  be  perfectly  white  and  free  from 
.filth,  succeeds  in  producing  an  excellent  colour.  If,  however,  the  cloth 
happens  to  be  filthy  and  not  white,  the  dye  used  fails  to  act  properly 
on  it.  Some  colour  is,  no  doubt,  produced,  but  it  does  not  partake 


824 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Of  the  conception  which  thus  sets  in,  the  causes  that 
determine  manhood  or  feminity  have  been  declared  before.*6  * 

Even  as  seeds,  whose  productivity  has  'liot  been  burnt  by 
fire,  when  sown,  reproduce  their  respective  natures,  so  that 
paddy  produces  paddy  and  barley  produces  barky,  so  the 
heads  of  causes  laid  down  above  produce  male  and  female 
offspring.**  *|- 

Instructions  will  be  laid  down  aboUt  'those  Vedic  rites  by 
Which  the.  sex  of  the  child  (in  the  Womb),  before  its 
manifestation,  may  be  changed.28]; 

Verily,  of  rites  duly  performed  and  characterised  by 
propriety  of  time  and  place,  the  capacity  to  produce  desirable 
fruits  is  Ordained!  of  all  that  are  otherwise,  the  result  is  otherwise. 


the  colour  of  the  dye  used.  So  the  father’s  semen,  combining  with  good 
menstrual  blood,  (the  generative  organ  and  the  womb  being  both  unvitiated  by 
disease  of  very  kind)  produces  an  excellent  child. 

The  example  of  milk  and  curds  also  is  good.  Good  milk,  mixed  with  good 
•curds,'  abandons  its  own  nature  and  in  consequence  of  the  ‘  abhishavana  ’  or 
fermentation  that  sets  in,  abandons  its  own  nature  and  partakes  the  nature  of 
•curds  with  which  it  has  been  mixed. — T. 

*  Vide  Lesson  IV  ante ,  called  ‘  Mahati-Garbhavakr5nti,’  of  this  very 
Division. — T. 

f  *  Anupataptam  ’  means  ‘  not  heated,’  or  ‘  not  burnt.’  Of  course,  the  sense 
:is  ‘  whose  productivity  has  not  been  burnt  by  fire? 

*  Vrihi  vrihitwam  ’  means  ‘  paddy  produces  that  which  partakes  the  nature  of 
■paddy.’  The  English  reader  unacquainted  with  Sanskrit  will  have  some  idea  of 
its  terseness  when  the  above  is  reproduced  in  its  Sanskrit  garb,  -viz.,  ‘paddy 
(produces)  that  Of  which  faddiness  is  affirmed? 

The  different  heads  of  causes  that  determine  the  sex  of  the  child  have  beeh 
laid  down  in  Lesson  IV,  ante. 

If  semen  predominates,  the  child  becomes  a  male  ;  if  (menstrual)  blood 
predominates,  the  child  becomes  a  female. — T. 

J  Rites  are  actually  laid  down  in  the  Vedas  for  performance  by  the  mother 
and  the  father  with  a  view  to  give  the  child  in  the  womb  the  sex  that  is  desired. 
These  rites  are  called  ‘  Pungsavana?  The  etymology  of  the  word  is— ‘Pung’ 
(male)  ‘  suyate  ’  (is  produced)  ‘  anena  ’  (by  this) ;  'in  other  words — ‘  the  male- 
producing  rite?  'Whether  their  meaning  is  understood  or  not,  these  rites  are 
’performed  to  this  day  by  every  orthodox  Hindu  of  the  superior  orders. 

*  Pungsavana  ’  is  performed  just  after  the  expiration  of  three  months  from 
.  the  date  of  conception.  It  should  be  observed  that'  these  rites  are  accompanied 
■by  the  admiriistr'afioh  of  some  medicines  to  the  mother.— T. 


CHAR AKA:  SAM  HIT  A,  825 

Heoce,  observing  that  a  woman  has  conceived,  the  medi-. 
dries  (with  proper  rites),  called  ‘  Pungsavana,’  should  be  ad¬ 
ministered  to  her  before  the  manifestation,  of  the  sex  of  the 
child  in  the  womb.2®'* *• 

Obtaining  two  unbroken  buds  from  two  t\vigs.  procured 
from  the  eastern  and  northern  sides  of  a  banian  ( Ficus. 
Indica,  P,inn.\  growing  in  a  cowpen,  as  also  a  single 
grain  of  paddy  and  a  single  seed,  of  ‘Masha’  (Pfaseolus, 
radiatus,  Roxb ),  both  well  developed,  or  two  seeds  of  white 
mustard,  and  throwing  them  into  a  quantity  of  cprds,  the- 
woman  (that  has  conceived)  should  be  made  to  drink  it 
Under  the  eighth  henar  asterism,  called  ‘  Pushy  a.’30’ 

Another  ‘  Pungsavana  ’  m.edic.ine  consists  of  the  following :: 

The  halka  or  paste  of  all  these,  viz.,  Jivaka  {a),  Risha-. 
bhaka  ( b ),  Apamfirga  (d>  and  Sahachara  ( d ),  or  of  each,  if 
desirable,  ft  should  be  boiled  with  milk  (and  given  to  the 
woman  to.  drinh).3^ 

Or,  a  Ku.dda-kitaka  (e)y  or  a  little  §sh,  thrown  into  a 

*  ‘  Desakala-sampatupetanam,’ literally,  ‘  endued  with  the  wealth  (in  the 
sense  of  propriety,  or  fitness,  or  efficiency)  of  place  and  time.’ 

The  rites,  to  be  effective,  must  be  performed  in  proper  time  and  at  the 
proper  place.  If  considerations  pf  tfme  and  place  are  disregarded,  the  result 
will  be  otherwise. 

For  the  meaning  of  the  word  ‘  Pungsavana,’  vide- note  aboye. — T. 

f  ‘  Cunga  ’  means  a  bud.  Here  i,t  implies  the  end  or  sprout  of  a  twig.. 

*•  Anupahata  ’  is  ‘  abhagna,’  that  is,  unbroken. 

*  Sampatupet5bhyam  ’  is  ‘  endued  with  wealth  (of  development).’ 

‘  Pushya’ is  the  eighth  lunar  asterism.  It  consists  of  three  stars,  of  which, 
one  is  the  Cancer.— T, 

a.  One  of  the  constituents  of  what  is  known  as  the  ‘  Group  of  Eight  ’  01;- 
‘•Ashtavarga,.,  It  is  no  longer  identifiable  or  procurable.  Hindu  physicians, 
find  a  substitute  in  Guduchi  or  pinaspora  Cqrdifolia,  Miqs.  ;  syn.  Metiis- 
permuni  Cordifolium,  IVilld. 

b.  This  also.  is.  included  in  the  ‘  Group  of  Eight  ’  or  *  Ashtavarga.’  Like 
Jivaka,  Rishabhaka  also,  is  either  not  identifiable  or  obtainable.  Its  substitute  is. 
Yangjalochana  or  Bamboo,  manna. 

c.  Achyaranthqs  asfiera,  Linn, 

d.  Otherwise  called  Jhinti,  that'is,  Barleriq  cristata,  Linn. 

( 'e )  ‘  Kudda  ’  is  a  mud  wall,  and  1  kitaka  ’  or  ‘  kita,’  an  insect.  Gangadhara 
identifies  it  with  the  insect  called  ‘Valli.’  Wilson  gives  no  such  word. 
Chakrapani  takes  it  as  another  name  of  ‘  Jyesthi 1  .which  in  the  North  West. 


CHAR  AKA  SAMHITA. 


826 

palmful  of  water,  may  be  given  to  the  woman  to  drink 
when  the  eighth  lunar  asterism,  Pushya,  is  ascendant.3'" 

Or,  the'  likeness  of  a  man,  of  very  small  proportions, 
made  of  gold,  or  silver,  or  iron,  made  red-hot  in  fire  and- 
then  dipt  into  a  measure  of  curds,  or  milk,  or  water,  should 
be  swallowed,  .  without  leaving  any  remnant  (in  the  vessel), 
under  the  eighth  lunar  asterism  called  Pushya.38.* 

Under '  the  same  asterism,  the  woman  may  be  made  to 
inhale  the  hot  vapour  of '  a  cake  that  is  being  baked  (on 
the  fire),  and  then  dissolving  that  cake  in  a  measure  of 
water,  '  the  mixture  should  be  cast  over  the  threshold  of  the 
door  (of  the  house  where  the  woman  resides).  This  water 
the  woman  should  then,  using;  a  stick  of  cotton,  apply  to 
her  right  nostril.8'4  + 


is  called  ‘  Bhith-matsya  ’  or  1  wall-fish.’  Of  course,  it  is  the  small  house-lizard', 
called  in  Bengal  ‘  Tiktiki  ’  from  the  sound  ‘it  makes,  viz.,  ‘  tik,’  ‘tik,’  ‘'tik.’ 
Although  women  do  much  for  getting  a  male  child,  yet  it  is  difficult  to  believe 
that  anyone  will  be  found  willing  to  swallow  a  house-lizard,  even  if  small,  with  a 
quantity  of  water. 

One  of  the  Bengali  translators  remarks  that  the  practice  is  actually  observed’ 
to  this  day  by  the  lower  classes  as  also  some  of  the  wild  tribes  in  India. — T. 

*  In  order  to  enable  the  woman  to  swallow  it,  the  likeness  of  a  man  must 
be  made  very  small.  The  adjective  used  is  1  anupram2nltm,’  that  is,  of  propor¬ 
tions  as  small'  as  possible.— T. 

f  ‘  Pishta  ’  or  ‘  pishtaka  ’  is  a  cake. 

Of  cakes  there  is,  of  course,  a  very  large  variety.  What  particular  kind  of 
cake  is  meant  is  not  clear. 

Probably,  the  ordinary  kind,  made  of  ppwdered  rice  and  cocoanut  mixed 
together  and  then  dissolved  in  a  little  v/ater. 

'  '  A  small  cupful  of  this  mixture  is  thrown  into  an  earthen  vessel  placed  upon 
the  hearth-fire.  Two  or  three  minutes  suffice  to  bake  or  cook  the  cake.  A 
savoury  steam  curls  upwards,  from  the  cake  white  the  process  of  cooking- 
continues; 

It  is  this  steam  that  is-  directed  to  be  inhaled. 

*  Dehali 1  is  an  old  Sanskiit  word,  meaning  the  word  that  forms  the  bottom 
of  a  door-frame.  It  corresponds  exactly  with  the  English  word  ‘  threshold’ 
which,  etymologically,  signifies  the  wood  that  is  threshed  (or,  thrashed)  by  the 
feet  of  persons  going  in  and  coming  out.  In  Bengali,  ‘  Dehali  ’  is  called 
‘■Gobrat,’  probably  a  contraction  of  ‘  Gobar  kat,’  meaning  the  wood  on  which 
(dissolved)  cow-dung  is  daily  sprinked  for  purification.  This  etymology  of 


[  2  ] 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.  Director  of  Public  Instruction ,  Bengal  : — 
I  have  been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination  in  part  iv  of 
all  the  things  which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts 
and  such  a  guide  to  life  cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 

James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister ,  Maryland,  U.  S.  A.  . — You  have 
undertaken  a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves 
the  aprobation  and  encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of 
the  past  ages  thought  and  tought  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation 
of  health  and  the  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emette  Coleman  Esq.  San  Francisco  California.— 

As  each  successive  part  is  issued  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is 
apparent.  There  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  aud  value  to  the  Western 
mind.  Occidental  medical  science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical 
science  has  much  to  learn. 

Cbas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  are  entitled  to  the 
greatest  praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite— a  journal  under  my  editori¬ 
al  management — will  begin  to  review  books  etc.  and  one  of  the  first  to  be 
taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas,  0.  Courtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Ohio  U.  S.  A.  :— The  work  interests 
me  very  highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night,  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of 
one  of  our  medical  societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively 
curiosity  and  expression  of  interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical 
journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical  monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowell,  Cambridge — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient 
work  will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may 
succeed  in  translating  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when 
finished. 

R.  G.  Eccless,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York  :...The  matter  is  certain¬ 
ly  of  great  interest  to  me. 

E.  P-  Davis,  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences, 
Philadelphia  :  Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the 
Medical  literature. 

P.  A.  Castle,  Esq  , •••Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with 
ifs  importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  oportunity  for  bring¬ 
ing  it  to  the  attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  medicine. 

Dr.  H.  C-  Wood,  Philadelphia...I  have  found  it  exceegingly  interesting  and 
sincerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will 
be  one  of  the  happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written 
quite  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I  expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medi¬ 
cal  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the  greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mittra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  of  Cashmere :... No  medical  man’s 
library  should  be  without  Charaka  ;  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless 
he  has  nut  studied  this  great  work  of  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar,  Oldsberg.  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North- 
Western  University  ;  Secretary  to  the  Congress]  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exhi¬ 
bition  .-...I  am  already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I 
shall  take  occasion  to  speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S,  A.  ... 
Be  assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  un¬ 
dertaking.  I  regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  19  East  38fh  Street,  New  York:. ..Wish  you  a  success 
in  your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mods.  T.  Gebbard.,  Derselhofber  Traise  Dramstadt  ...The  difficulties  you 
speak  of  in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb 
says  what  takes  much  time,  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph,D.  G.  M.  D-  F.  R.  M.  S.  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brother  Druggist  :...I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  it  in  our  columns 
and  advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire 


[  3  ] 


English  writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at 
their  disposal.  The  work  is  certainly  highly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  general 
interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le.  Soudor-  Librarie  Entrangere  174  Boulevaise  Saint  Germain:— 
Be?  to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of 
Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  :...  Wish  every  success  that  can  recompense 
you  for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  re¬ 
view  which  I  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.  PHILADELPHIA-.- As  1  go  over  each 
fasciculus  I  always  arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians 
of  the  present  day  would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  modern  Drugs  and 
Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients  according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there 
would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and  fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world. 
I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of  the  work,  for  I  am  anxious 
to  have  it  all. 

W-  c.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.  6  Park  street,  Calcutta My  dear  pundit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya,...I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  two  noblemen 
of  whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise 
to  you  [about  drawing  their  attention  to]  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again, 
some  time  after,. ..An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note  *  *  *  considerable  praise  is  due 
to  you  for  your  efforts  to  defuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholom,  M.  D-  Philadelphia  :... I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with 
the  profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  any  thing  that 
I  have  ever  met  before  in  Medical  literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord 
Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D-  Phillips,  Esq.  C  s.  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Maimensing The 
translation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C-  Dutta,  Esq.  C.  S-,  C.  I.  E.  Magistrate  and  Collector  :  ..Your  patriotic 
labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun.  *  *  * 
You  deserve  the  especial  acknowledgements  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  H,  Skrine,  Esq.  I-  0  S.  ; — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest. 
It  is  marvellously  like  Hypprocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful 
to  note  the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country 
and  how  completely  they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter 
ourselves  are  due  to  the  enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G-  A.  Grierson,  Esq.  C  S  Gya  :...It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall 
be  obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith,  Evans,  M.  D,  Brynkynall,  Bangor  North  Wales. ..The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the 
origin,  growth  and  development  of  medical  science,  also  illustrates  some  ancient 
social  customs  of  India. 

The  Honourable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  S.  I.  Your  English 
translation  of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures 
of  a  great  work  before  a  large  class  of  readers.  Nothwithstanding  the  inevitable 
difficulty  of  identifying  a  large  number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text, 
the  translation  must  be  accepted  as  possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected, 
under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning  to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the 
laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every  system  of  education  They 
could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is  a  work  that  should 
be  in  the  hand  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerjee.  The  work  is  not  only  of 
value  to  the  physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the 
general  reader  as  well.  Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support. 
I  wish  you  all  success. 


fit 


PART  XXVII. 


4735  7 


■ 


OHARAKA-SAMHITA 


(  TRAN  SLA  TED  INTO  ENGLISH ). 


PUBLISHED 

BY 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

Editor  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  of  Susruta-Samhita 
(in  original)  with  Commentaries  ;  Bengali  and 
Hindi  Translator  of  Charaka-Samhita 
and  of  Susruta-Samhita  ;  Editor  of 
Chikitsa-Sammilani  (Medical  Journal 
in  Bengali) ;  Practitioner  of  the 
Hindu  System  of  Medicine, 

&c.,  &c.,  &c.,  &c., 


Published 

AT 

200,  Cornwallis  Street, 


{The  Right  of  Translation  is  Reserved )) 


Herald  Printing  Works. 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

(Extract  from  their  Letters.) 

Professor  Maxmuller  S— I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English 
translation  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very 
glad  to  help  you  in  any  way  you  may  wish — Writing  again  in  November 

1893,  he  says — .  I  am  surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful 

translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention  .  Our  Regius  Professor 

of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested  in  it. 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E. : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of 
the  successive  parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susrata  Samhitas.  I  regard  them 
as  a  valuable  addition  to  my  library.  No  doubt,  an  Euglish  translation  would 
be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  K-C-I.E-  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office —  *  *  * 

your  excellent  translation  .  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  works 

which  will  not  fail  to  make  ancient  Hindu  Medicine  better  understood  and 
appreciated  in  the  West  *  *  *  I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental 
scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work  *  *  0  Many  important 
additions  to  our  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from  your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York  U.  S.  A. : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure 
the  first  fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very 
glad  to  receive  the  rest  of  the  work.  It  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest 
to  the  medical  profession,  which  will  be  under  great  obligation  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren  Esq-,  Gothenburgh ,  Sweden  : — I  am  deeply  interested  in 
anything  Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to 
obtain  whatever  insight  I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable 
translation. 

Professor  A.  V-  Williams  Jackson.,  Colutnbia  College ,  New  York , 
U.  S.  A. — I  must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts. 
I  should  very  much  like  to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the 
praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing.  Be  assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and 
appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and  antique  lore. 

Mons  A.  Birth..  Paris : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the 
readers  of  ancient  literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the 
Oriental  and  scholars  and  to  the  men  of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and 
I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice  of  the  French  public,  or,  at 
least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B- St.  Hilaire,  Paris  -. — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and 
wish  you  all  success.  The  work  of  interest  to  all  learned  man  and  to- 
medical  men  and  the  commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility. 

I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the  Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be 
happy  to  do  your  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University  Gertnany  The  work  you  have 
undertaken  will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for 
the  History  of  their  science.  I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of 
some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally,  to  the  ancient  work  of 
Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  G-arbe,  Prinzenstram  Keningburgh,  Germany  1 The  English 
translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  is  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  paint 
of  view,  the  most  important  work  of  the  medicinal  literature  of  your 
country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M-  A.,  C- 1-  E-  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal-.— 
4l  have  been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination  in  part 
IV  of  all  the  things  which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand 
he  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life  cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS. 


The  contents  of  this  Part  are  highly  interesting. 

The  practices  are  first  explained  which  ensure  the 
preservation  of  the  Conception  from  injuries  of  every  kind 
which  tend  to  destroy  it.  (pp.  827 — 828.) 

Those  incidents  which  are  injurious  to  Conception  are 
then  laid  down.  (pp.  828—829). 

Next  occur  those  indulgences  and  habits,  on  the  part 
of  the  mother,  which  lead  to  vitiated  offspring,  (pp.  829 — 830). 

The  Rishi  then  explains  the  manner  in  which  a  woman 
should  be  treated,  when  subject  to  disease,  during  the 
period  of  gestation,  (pp.  831 — 841). 

What  should  a  woman  do  during  the  successive  months 
of  her  pregnancy  is  then  laid  down.  (pp.  841 — 844). 

How  should  the  lying-in-room  be  constructed  and  what 
its  equipments  should  be  are  then  explained,  (pp.  844 — 847). 

The  symptoms  that  manifest  themselves  at  the  time 
of  delivery  are  then  laid  down.  (p.  848). 

What  should  the  woman  do  when  labour-pains  set 
in,  and  how  she  should  be  treated,  are  then  explained, 
(pp.  848 — 850). 

What  should  be  done  when  delivery  has  taken  place, 
and  how  the  placenta  should  be  extracted  if  it  has  not  come 
out,  have  next  been  laid  down.  (pp.  850 — 853). 

How  the  new-born  child  should  be  treated,  is  then 
explained,  (pp.  853 — 854). 

Then  occur  directions  as  to  how  the  umbilical  cord  should 
be  cut.  The  ailments  that  may  arise  if  the  umbilical  cord 
be  not  properly  cut  are  laid  down.  (pp.  854 — 55). 

How  the  protection  of  both  the  child  and  the  mother 
should  be  provided  for,  is  then  explained,  (pp.  856 — 857). 

The  especial  treatment  of  the  mother  after  delivery  is 
then  laid  down,  (p.858). 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  Rishis  fully  understood  the 
topics  mentioned  above. 


CPARAK4  SAM  It  IT  A.  827 

Even  these  are  the  diverse  ‘  Pungsavan  ’  rites  and  medicines. 

Women  should  observe  and  use  those  other  ‘Pungsavanas’  also 
which  inspired  Brahmans  may  declare  as  beneficial.38  * 

After  this,  we  shall  expound  the  practices  which  ensure  the 
preservation  of  the  conception  (from  injuries  of  every  kind  tending 
to  destroy  it. 

Aindri  (a),  Brahmi  ( b ),  Cataviryya  ( c ),  Sahasraviryya  (if), 
^mo'gha  (e),  Avyathi.  (/),  'Civa  tg),  Bala  (A),  Arishti  (*),  Vatya- 
pushpi  (_/'),  and  ViswaksenakSinta  (k) : 


‘  Gobrat  ’  is  supported  by  that  of  ‘  Dehali  ’  which  is  derived  from  ‘  Deha  ’ 
(cow-dung)  and  the'  root  ‘  li  ’  meaning  to  lave  or  plaster.— ^T. 

*  Having  especially  'mentioned  some  kinds'  of  ‘  Pungsavanas,’  the  Rishj 
generally  directs  'that  :oth>er  kinds  of  ‘  Pungasavana,’  laid  down  by  the  wise, 
should  be  observed  and  used. — T. 

*  a.  Chakrap5ni  explains  that  by  ‘  Aindri  ’  is  meant  ‘  Gorakshakarkati,.’  It  is 
called  in  Bengali,  ‘  Rakhala-sasa  ; 1  a  variety  of  ‘karkati’  or  ‘  kankur,’  i.e. 
'Cucumis  Melo,  Linn  ;  syn,  Cucumis  utilissimus,  Roxb. 

6.  Gangadhara  explains  that  ‘Brahmi’  means'  ‘  Brahma-yashthi.’  It  is/ 
called  in ‘Bengali,  ‘  BUmanhat}.’  Clerodendron  Siphonanthus  ;  syri.  Sip/ionantltuSk 
'Jtidic'a,  Laitik.  '  /  = 

c.  White  Durva  grass.  i~ 

d.  Black  (or  dark-green)  Durva  grass.  Both  c  and  d  are  varieties  of 

Panicuni  Dactylon,  Linn syn.  Cynodon  Dactylon,  Pers.  .  v 

‘  e.  Otherwise  called  '1  Patala  ’  or  ‘  Parula.’  Stereospermum  suave-olens,  DC ; 
syn,  Bignonid  suave:dlens,  Rokb. 

f.  Otherwise  called  Guduchi  ;  Tinospora  Cordifolia ,  Miers  ;  syn.  Menisper- 
mum  Cordifolitim.' 

g.  Another  name  of  Haritaki.  Chebulic  myrobolans  ( Terminali  ckebula, 
Retz.)  ' 

‘  '  h .  Sida  cordifolia ,  Linn.  It  has  other  names  such  as  Vatyapushpi, 
SamangS,  &c. 

' '  i.  -Otherwise  called  Katurohim  or  Katuka,  as  explained  by  the  commenta¬ 
tors.  Piirdrtdiiza'kitrrbd',  R'oyle. 

j.  'A 'variety  of 'Hals'.'  The  yellow  variety  is  implied,  as  observed  by  both 
Chakrapani  and  GangSdhara. 

'  k.  '  C haik ra pani  explains  that  this  means  Priyangu  or  Agtaia  Roxburghiana, 
IV.  A. 

GangSdhara  takes  it  as  another  name  of  Catamuli  or  Asparagus  racemosus , 
Willd.  ’  !‘"  1  ’  :  •'  ;  ■’  •  =  ■ 

‘  AyurvedSrtha  ChandrikS,’  on  the  authority  of  Amara  Singha,  takes  Viswa-k- 
senakSnta  (or  Viswaksenapriya)  as  another  name  of  VSrShi,  called  in  Bengali, 
Phubri-Siu,  i.e.,  Didscorea  globosa,  Roxb.  '  '  '  s 

IOS 


S?8 


CHAR  AKA  SAMJTITA. 


These  herbs  should  be  held  with  the  right  hand  on  the  head. 

Boiling  these  with  milk,  or  ghee,  the  woman,  should  drink  (the 
decoction). 

Under  every  successive  ascendency  of  the  lunar  asterism  called 
Fushya,  the  woman  should  bathe  in  water  in  which  these  have 
been  dipt. 

Pounding  these  and  reducing  them  to  a  soft  paste,  she  should 
also  frequently  use  it  as  an  ointmeut  for  rubbing  her  person  with 
it.  * 7 

The  uniform  use,  according  to  the  ordinances  laid  down  for 
regulating  it,  of  all  those  herbs  which  are  included  in  the  class 
called  ‘  Jivaniya,’ explains  the  (topic  of  the)  preservation  of  con* 
ception  (when  it  has  set  in,  from  injuries  of  every  kind  tending  to 
destroy  it).  9 

The  following  incidents  ar,e  injurious  to  .conception  (when  it 
has  set  in)  : 

They  are  these  : 

The  foetus  of  one  who  sits  on  her  haunches,  or  on  a  spot  that 
is  uneven,  or  on  a  seat  that  is  hard  ; 

or  of  one  who  suppresses  the  urgings  .of  wind,  urine,  and 
Stools »; 

or  of  one  who  practises  hard  and  improper  physical  exercises  ; 

or  of  one  who  takes,  in  a  large  measure,  keen  and  hot  food  and 
drink.; 

or  of  one  who  takes  very  frugal  fare  ; 

dies  outright  in  the  womb,  or  is  expelled  prematurely  it? 
point  of  time,  or  is  dried  up.  S8-f 

So  also  the  foetus  of  one  that  has  conceived  is  expelled  pre.- 
fnaturely  by  these  acts,  viz,  violent  knocks  or  blows  as  also  violent 
pressure  (on  the  womb), -and.  frequent  sight  of  deep  p/ts  and  walls 
and  high  precipices  ■, 


*  The  herbs  included  in  the  class  called  Jiyan.iya  ’  are  ten  in  pumber,  . 
Vide  p.  30,  Sutrasthana,  ante. — T,  ■ 

t  ‘.Hard  and  improper  physical  exercises J  are  explained  hy  the  Cpmmenta-- 
t 3rs  thus  :  Hard  exerqise,  such  as  running  with  great  speed,  &c. 

Improper  exercises  imply  those  to  which  the  woman  is  not  all  habituated, 

1  Tikshna  ’  or  keen  food  implies  food  that  is  pungent  on  which  produce? 
•?lent  effects  on  the  body,  such  as  excessiye  yom.iting  or  purging,  &c. — T, 


ClIARAKA  SAMHITA. 


82  § 

hlsb  (riding  on)  vehicles  that  move  the  body  violently  ;. 

or  the  hearing  very  often  of  sounds  that  are  disagreeable. 

Then*  again,-  of  a  worhart  that  always  lies  on  her  back,  the 
Umbilical  cord  of  the  foetus  twines  rounds  its  neck.4®* 

A  worriari  that  sleeps  in  an  uncovered  place,  and  rambles  at 
night,  brings  forth  a  child  that  becomes  insane. 

One  that  is  accustouled  to  constant  wordy  warfare  brings  forth 
a  child  subject  to  fits  of  epilepsy. 

One  that  is  excessively  fond  of  sexual  congress  brings  forth 
a  child  that  is  deformed  of  limb  (ugly),  or  shameless,  or  hen¬ 
pecked. 

One  that  always  indulges  in  grief  brings  forth  a  son  that  be¬ 
comes  timid,  lean  of  flesh,  and  short-lived. 

One  that  always  covets  the  possessions  of  others  brings  forth  a 
child  that  becomes  an  oppressor  of  others  or  is  a  afflicted  at  the 
sight  of  other  people’s  prosperity,  or  is  hen-peckcd, 

One  that  is  endued  with  thieving  habits  brings  forth  a  child 
that  becomes  averse  from  every  kind  of  exertion,  or  excessively 
malicious,  disposed  to  injure  others,  or  addicted  to  evils  deeds. 

One  that  is  wrathful  brings  forth  a  child  that  becomes  exceed¬ 
ingly  irascible,  or  disposed  to  hypocracy,  or  malicious. 

That  woman  that  constantly  sleeps  brings  forth  a  child  that  i3 
disposed  to  sleep,  foolish,  and  endued  with  a  weak  digestive  fire. 

The  woman  that  constantly  drinks  spiritous  liquors  brings  forth 
a  child  that  becOrhes  always  thirsty  and  that  has  a  mind  destitute 
of  firmness. 

The  woman  that  is  fohd  of  the  flesh  of  the  igtiana  brings 


*  ‘  Abhighata  ’  implies  knacks  and  blows  (on  the  womb).  So  also 
‘  prapidana  ’ — pressure — has  reference  to  the  womb.  The  sight  of  deep  pits 
and  wells,  as  also  of  high  precipices  when  one  stands  on  thetii,  produces  a 
dizziness  of  the  head  that  is  sure  to  affect  the  foetus  in  the  womb. 

Disagreeable  Sounds  imply  sudden  and  loud  sounds  as  well,  The  suddeh 
toar  of  artillery  has  been  known  to  produce  miscarriage. 

In  Sanskrit  literature  (Mahabharata  in  particular),  passages  frequently  Occur 
in  which  the  loudness  of  d  sound  is  described  as  capable  of  producing 
tniscarriaget 

There  is  d  fail  stop  after  ‘vl1  and  before  *  pldtata 1  iri  dll  the  cOfiect 
texts. -Ty  , 


830  CHARAKA  SAMBITA. 

fortli  a  child  that  gets  the  disease  called  Me/ia  of  any  of  these 
descriptions,  viz.,  with  sugar,  or  with  calculus,  or  dripping  urine.* 
'i’he  woman  who  is  fond  of  pork  brings  forth  a  child  that  is  of 
bloody  eyes,'  or  that  becomes  subject  to  asthma,  or  that  has  hairs 
exceedingly  hard. 

The  woman. who  is  addicted  to  fish  brings  forth  a  child  whose 
eyes,  wink  slowly,' or  seem  to  be  stupefied. 

The  woman  who  is  addicted  to  sweets  brings  forth  a  child  that 
becomes  subject  to  Prdmeha,  or  dumbness,  or  obesity  of  form. 

The  woman  ,vho  is  addicted  to  sour  food  and  drink  brings 
forth  a  child  that  becomes  subject  to  bilious  hemorrhage,  ot 
diseases  of  the  skin  and  the  eye.  . 

The  woman  who  is  addicted  to  sal ive  food  and  drink  brings 
forth  a  child  that  becomes  soon  subject  to  wrinkles,  whiteness  of 
hair,, or  baldness.  ,  ,  .  ,  .  , 

The  woman  who  is  addicted  to  pungent  food  and  drink  brings 
forth  a.  child  that  becomes  weak,  or  endued  with  scanty  semen,  or 

incapable  of  begetting  offspring.  . 

Th.e  vvoman  who  is  addicted  to  bitter  food  and  drink  brings 
fdrth  a  chiid  that  becomes  subject  to  consumption,  or  weakness,  or 
leanness.1  ....... 

The.  \toman  who  is.  addicted  to  astringent  food  and  drink 
brings  forth  a  child  that  becomes  of  a  smoky  colour  of  subject  to 
epistasy,  or  suppression  of  urine  and  stools.  *l 

If  the  woman  that  has  conceived  indulges  largely,’  during  the 
period  of  conception,  in  those  articles  (of  food  and  drink)  which 
bdve .  beeri  la,id  down  as  the  inducing  causes  of  particular  diseases, 
she  brings  forth  children  that  become  subject  to  those  very 
diseases.  ** 

The  faults  of  the  father’s  semen  are  explained  by ,  the  (above) 
explanation  about  the  mother’s  improper  indulgences.-^ 


*  Meha  or  Pr'ameha  is  of  twenty  kinds.'  It  includes  all  diseases  of  the 
urinary  organs.  .  To  render  it  as  Diabetes  would  be  inaccurate,  for  it  includes 
many  ailments  unconnected  with  diabetes. — T. 

f  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  having  explained  those  indulgences  of  the 
other  which  lead  to  diverse  diseases  and  defects  of  the  offspring,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  explain  the  indulgences  that  vitiate  the  father’s  semen. 


CHAR  AKA  SAMHITA.  831 

Even  thus  has  the  topic  bean  explained  of  the  incidents  that 
are  injurious  to  or  destructive  of  the  foetus  conceived.  48  ty 
j  Hence,  the  woman  who  desires  the  \yelfare  of  her  offspring 
should  take  particular  care  to  avoid  such  food  and  sports,  a^  ate 
baneful.  She  should  serve  herself  with  food  and  sports  .  that ,  are 
beneficial,  observing  all  sorts  of  healthy,  pious  and  auspicious 
practices* 

If  the  woman  becomes  subject  to  any  disease  during  the 
period  of  gestation,  she  Should  be_  treated  with  med.icines  that  are 
mild,  sweet,  cooling,  agreeable,  and  iucaple  of  producing  any  kind 
of  pain.  .  ...  ,  M  .. 

Emetics  and  purgatives  and  errhines  should  not  be  adminis¬ 
tered  to  her. 

She  should  not  be  subjected  to  the  process  of  blood  letting. 

Except  in  diseases  which  have  become  very  dangerpus,  she 
shahid  never  haver  en.emata  of  either  of  the  dry  or  of  the  oily 
variety  administered  to  her. 

If,  when  the  eighth  month  of  gestation  has  come,  she  should 
be  subject  febany  dangerous  disease  which  is  incapable  of  being 
Cured  except  by  emetics  and  the  rest,  she  should  have  emetics  and 
the  rest  of  the  mildest  description,,  or,  such  medicines  whose  action 
reseipbles  that  of  these,  administered  to  her.-)*1* 

^  4  woman  during  the  period  of  gestation  should  be  treated  in 
thiesame  way  as  one  treats  a  vessel  that  is  full  tq  the, brim. with  oil 
and' that  is,, on  that  account,  not  to  be.  shaken  in  the  least.):. 

,  If  she  through  injurious  food  and  fpractices,  menstruates  in 
the  second  Or  the  third  month  (of  gestation),  it  should  be  known 
that  the  conception  would  not  last. 

The  foetus,  at  such  an  early  stage  of  pregnancy,  does  not  be- 

...»  The  same  acts  which  vitiate  the  mother’s  capacity  to  produce  good  offspring 
vitiate  the  father’s  capacity  also  to  procreate  good  offspring. — T. 

,  ‘  SSdhvachara,’  is  explained  by  the  commentators  as  including  all 

practices  that  are  healthy,  pious,  and  auspicious.— .T. 

t  Medicines  whose  action  resembles  th  t  of  emeries  and  the  rest  are  those 
which,  for  example,  produce  excessive  salivation.  Medicines  whose  action 
resembles  that  of  purgatives  are  such  as  certain  fruits  of  which  enemata  of  the 
mildest  kind  are  made.  Thus  the  commentators. — T. 

,  +  The  sense  is  that  she  should  not  be  subjected  to  any  treatment  that  may 
do  violence  to  her  constitution,  or  give  it  any  violent  shock.  She  is  incapable 


83: 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


become  endued  with,  arty  any  firmness  (and,  therefore,  strength  (of 
resisting  any  kind  of  hostile  influencs).*7 

If  after  conception  has  set  in,  the  woman  menstruates  in  the' 
fourth  or  any  subsequent  month,  in  consequence  of  excessive4 
indulgence  in  wrath,  grief,  malice,  envy,  apprehension,  fear,  sexual 
congress,  physical  exercise,  acts  that  shake  the  body,  supression  of 
the  urgings  of  nature,  food  made  of  hostile  ingredients,  uneven 
beds  and  seats,  and  hunger  dnd  thirst,  or  owing  to  bad  food*  there 
are  certain  courses  of  treatment  which  tend  to  preserve  the  foetus. 
These  we  shall  now  lay  down.4' 

After  the  appearance  of  the  menses  she  should  be  told, — 

“  Make  a  bed  overlaid  with  a  soft  and  cool  coverlet,  and  lie' 
down  on  it,  placing  the  head  a  little  lower  than  usual" 

Then  dipping  a  soft  pencil  made  of  cotton  into  a  mixture  made' 
of  liquorice  and  ghee  which  has  been  kept  fot  sometime  exposed 
to  the  night  dew  (or  in  cold  water),  it  should  be  placed  upon  the 
genital  organ.* 

After  this,  taking  a  quantity  of  ghee  that  has  been  washed  a 
hundred  times,  and  some  that  has  been  washed  a  thousand  times,- 
it  should  be  laved  upon  the  whole  of  that  part  of  the  abdomen  of 
the  woman  which  is  below  the  navel.*}* 

Then  taking  up  a  quantity  of  vaccine  milk,  or  of  cold  infusion1 
bf  liquorice,  or  of  the  astringent  infusion  known  as  ‘  Nyagrodhadi,’ 
it  should  be  sprinkled  upon  the  woman  (on  that  part  of  the 
abdomen  which  is)  below  the  navel.}; 

of  bearing  it,  even  as  a  vessel  full  of  oil  is  incapable  of  bearing  any  shock  or 
shake  if  the  oil  is  to  be  protected  from  spilling. — T. 

*  1  Mixture  made  of  liquorice  and  ghee  The  commentators  explain  that 
the  liquorice  should  be  boiled  in  ghee. 

‘  CisirabSri  ’  implies  either  the  night  dew  or  cold  water.  The  night  dew 
is  preferable  ;  if  it  cannot  be  availed  of,  cold  water  is  regarded  as  a  good 
substitute.— T. 

t  Ghee  is  washed  in  water  repeatedly  before  it  becomes  fit  to  be  used  as  a 
tnedicine  in  certain  cases.  The  process  consists  in  throwing  a  quantity  of  water 
Upon  the  ghee  placed  in  a  flat  plate  of  earth,  and  then  rubbing  it  with  the  palm 
inoving  in  a  circular  motion. — T. 

}  The  astringent  infusion  known  as  'Nyagrodhadi1  is  well  known.  The 
infusion  is  taken  of  the  following  which  are  all  more  or  less  astringents  : 

Nyagrodha  ( Ficus  Bengalensis,  Linn  ;  syn.  Ficus  Indica ,  Roxb,  ),  U clumvard 
(■Ficus  glome rafa,  Willd ;  syn,  Covellia  glomerata^  Miq.),  Aswattha  (Ficus 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


833 


,  or,  she  should  be  made  to  bathe  (by  dipping  her  whole  body) 
In  cold  water,  or  rags  soaked  In  the  expressed  piece  of  those  plants 
which. fall  within  the  class  called  Kshirins  (endued  with  milky 
juice)  as  also  of  those  which  are  kashayas  (astringents),  should  be- 
Used  as  plugs  (for  preventing  the  copious  discharge  of  blood).* 
or  boiling  milk  or  ghee  in  the  infusion  known  as  ‘  Nyagrodha- 
dhi  ’  and  dipping  a  pencil  of  cotton  therein,  it  should  be  inserted 
ill  the  genital  organ.f 

pr,  taking  a  measure  of  2  tolas  of  the  above  liquid  ( viz milk  or 
ghee  boiled  in  the  infusion  called  ‘  Nyagrodhadi,’)  it  should  be 
given  to  the  woman  to  drink. 

or,  taking  a  measure  of  2  tolas  of  (pure)  milk  and  ghee,  jt 
should  be  given  to  the  woman  to  drink.* ’J 

Taking  the  filaments  of  Padma  (a),  Utpala  (b), 

religiosa ,  Linn.),  Plaksha  (Ficus  inf ectoria,  WillcL),  Madhuka  (liquorice), 
JCapitana  (otherwise  called  Ajnrgttaka,  i.e.,  Spondias  mangifera,  Pens.),  Kokobhq 
{otherwise  called  Arjuna,  i.e.,  Pentaptera  Arjuna,  Roxb.),  Amra  (Mangifera 
India,  Linn. ),  Keshamra  ( Mangifera  sylvatica,  Roxb.),  Charaka  (difficult  to 
identify,  probably,  a  kind  of  pot-herb),  Patra  (the  leaves  of  Cinnamomum 
famala ),  Jambudwaya  (the  two  varieties  of  Jamvu,  i.e.,  Eugenia  Jambolana, 
Lamk,  and  a  smaller  or  wi)d  variety  of  the  same,  known  in  Bengal  as  Van-jam); 
Piyala  (Bhuclianania  latifolia,  Roxb.),  Madhuka  (Bassia  latifolia,  Roxb.), 
Rohini  (a  name  applied  to  Gambhari,  i.e.,  Gmelina  arborea ,  Linn.,  also  to 
Haritaki,  i.e.,  chebulic  myrobalans  ;  also  to  Cirisa,  i.e..  Mimosa  Sirissa.,  Roxb.  ; 
(when,  hpw.ever,  astringents  are  spoken  of,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  chebulic 
jnyrobalans  q.rp  intended)  ;  Vanyula  (a  name  applied  to  Tinisa,  i.e.,  Ougenia 
dalbergioides,  Bentham  ;  or  to  A9oka,  i.e.,  Saraca  Indica,  Linn.  ;  or  to  Vetasa, 
i.e.,  Calantfts  Rotang,  Linn  ;  )t  1$  difficult  which  of  these  three  is  intended, 
^11  being  astringents,  more  or,  less);  Kadamva  (Naucha  Cadamba,  Roxb.)  ; 
Vadara  ( Zizyphus  Jujubfi,  Lamk.)  ;  Tinduka  ( Diospyrus  gluiinosa,  Kceriig .)-, 
Sallaki  ( Boswellia.  thurifera,  or  Bpsiyellia  serrata,  Colebr.)  ;  Lodhra-?avara 
(white  variety  of  Syjfiphcos  racempsa ,  Roxb.) ;  Lodjira  (the  ordinary  variety  of 
Symplocoss  racemosi/.,  Roxb.)  ;  Bhallataka  (Semecatpus  Anacardium,  Linn.)  j 
Pala?a  ( Butea  frondosa,  Roxb.)  ;  and  Nandivriksha  (  Cedrela  Toona,  Roxb.). — T, 
f  ‘  Kshirins  ’  are  a  group  of  well-known  plants  which  yield  a  pnilky  juice. 

The  ‘  Kashayas  ’  here  referred  to  are  five  jn  number.  They  are  Vata, 
JJdumvara,  Aswattha,  Plaksha,  and  Kapitana.  (  Vide  note  above). — T. 
t  Vide  note  above. 

t  An  ‘  aksha  ’  is  a  measure  consisting  of  2  tolas,  as  explained  by  the 
Commentators. — T. 

a.  Nelumbium  speciosum,  Linn, 
p.  Nymphcea  stellata,  Linn. 


834  CHAR  AKA  SAMHIIA, 

and  kumuda  ( c )  and  mixing  them  with  honey  or  sugar,  these 
should  be' given  to  the  woman  to  suck. 

Cringathka  (rf),  Pushkaravija  (g),  and  Kajeruka  (/)  should  be 
given  to  her  to  eat. 

or  mixing  (the  paste  of )  the  buds  of  Gandha-Priyangu  (g ), 
Asitolpala  (//),  Caluka  (*'),'  Udumvara  (_/),  Calatu  ( k ),  and  Nyagro: 
dha  (/)  with  goat’s  milk,  she  should  be  made  to  drink  it  (a  little 
at  a  time). 1,0 

Milk  boiled  with  ValSt  \vi),  Ativala  (7/),  Cali  (0),  Shastika  (j>), 
IkshunVula  {gj*  and  K&koli  (rj,  or  red  rice'  boiled  in  water,  and 
mixed  with  honey  or  sugar,  and  made  soft  anc}!,cbol  "agreeable  to 
t'he'scent,  should  be  given  to  her  to  cat. .  ' '  *  ‘ 

or,  correcting  the  decoction  of  the  meat  of)  Lava  (j),  Kapin- 
jala  (/),‘  Kuranga  (*/),  Camvara  ( v ),  Caga  (re),  Hanna  (x),  EtW(y]ij 
and  Kal  tpuchccha  (a)  by  means  of  ghee,  it  should  be  given  ' to  her 

c.  Nympho? a  Lotus ,  Linn. 

d.  Trapa  bispinosa,  Roxb\ 

e.  The  seeds  of  Nelumbivm  speciosum. 

f.  Scyrpus  Kysoor ,  Roxb. 

g.  Aglaia  Roxburghiana,  W.  A.,  of  the  scented  variety. 

■h.  The  Same  as  Nilotpala.  Vide  note  b  above. 

i.  Roots  of  'different  species  of  Nymphcea. 

j.  Ficus  glomerata,  Willdi 

k.  Dried  pieces  of  unripe  fruits,  reduced  to  powder.  Particularly  applied 

to  dried  fruits. of  AEgie  marmeios  reduced  to  powder.  v ,  • 

'  /.  FicUs  Bengalensis,  Linn. 

m.  Sida  cot-difolia,  Linn.  ■' 

n.  Sida  rhombifolia,  Linn. 

0.  Paddy  of  good  Species.' 

p.  The  paddy  which  ripens  in  60  days.  Otherwise  called  Aus  in  Bengali, 

q.  The  roots  of  the  sugar-cine.  .  .  . 

r.  A' root 'brought  from  Nepal  or  Morung. 

s.  A  Sort  of  iguill.  'Perdix  chincnsis.  • 

t.  Fran'coline  partridge.  (Chataka). 

u.  A  variety  of  deer.  '  ' 

V.  Ditto. 

w.  Hare  or  rabbit. 

x.  The 'ordinary  deer  of  India. 

y.  A  variety  of  deer  or  antelope,  described  as  of  black  colour, 

eyes,  and  short  legs.  '  '  ‘  ‘ 

1  z.  The  black-tailed  deer. 


beautiful 

•••-  J.V  M'- 


CHARAKA  SAMHlTA.  835 

to  eat,  making  her  sit  down  on  a  spot  that  is  agreeable  and  coo! 
and  where  cool  breezes  blow.61 

She  should,  again,  be  protected  against  everything  that  may 
excite  wrath  or  grief,  against  every  kind  of  toil,  sexual  -congress* 
and  physical  exercise. 

She  should  also  be  treated  with  amiable  and  agreeable 
discourses. 

It  is  by  these  methods  that  the  foetus  in  the  womb  can  be 

preserved  (from  premature  delivery).58 

When  a  woman,  again,  who,  during  pregnancy,  menstruates 
owing  to  indigestion,  it  is  generally  seen  that  that  menstrual  flow 
proves  destructive  of  the  foetus,  in  consequence  of  the  incom- 
patability  of  the  two.55* 

When  a  woman,  during  that  period  of  gestation  at  which  the 
womb  has  become  large  and  the  substance  of  the  foetus  has 

become  compact  or  solid,  has  the  menstrual  or  any  other  kind 
of  discharge  owing  to  food  and  drink  of  hot  and  keen 
properties,  her  foetus  ceases  to  grow  in  consequence  of  such 
discharge  and  remains  in  the  womb  longer  than  usual. 

Some  call  such  a  conception  ‘  upavishtakam  ’  (protracted). 6  4 -j1 

If  a  woman,  again,  during  the  period  of  gestation  be¬ 
comes  observant  of  fasts  and  vows  and  other  religious  acts 

(involving  penances),  or,  if’ she  indulges  in  bad  food  and 
drink,  or,  if  she  abstains,  through  aversion*  from  oil  or  oily 
substances*  or,  if  she  indulges  in  such  articles  of  food  and 

drink  as  are  said  to  excite  the  wind,  the  foetus  in  her 

womb  does  not  grow  in  consequence  of  its  being  dried  up 
(through  want  of  proper  nourishment). 

*  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  the  menstrual  blood  and  indigestion  are  hostile 
to  each  other. '  The  treatment  in  respect  of  food  and  drink  laid  down  above* 

for  stoppage  of  blood,  if  followed  in  such  a  case*  is  sure  to  increase  the 

indigestion.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  indigestion  be  sought  to  be  treated,  the 
fcetus  is  sure  to  be  expelled  by  the  time  the  indigestion  is  cured.— T. 

t  ‘  Mahati,’  locative  of  ‘  mahat,’  implies  large.  The  sense  is  ‘when  the 
womb  has  become  large.’ 

‘  Sanjatasara,’  as  applied  to  ‘  Garbha*’  implies  ‘  when  the  foetus  has  become 
Compact  or  consistent"’  At  first,  the  substance  is  liquid.  It  gradually  thickens 
and  becomes  compact  or  solid. 

When  the  gestation  is  protracted,  it  is  called  1  upavishtaka.’— T; 

106 


836 


CHARAKA  SAMH1IA. 


The  foetus,  In  such  circumstances  also,  remains  in  the  womb 
for  more  than  the  usual  period,  It  becomes  also  motionless. 
Such  a  conception  is  called  ‘  Nagodara.’6  6* 

We  shall  now  lay  down  instructions  for  the  treatment  of 
both  these  classes  of  women.6® 

The  first  should  be  treated  with  Ghees  boiled  with'  such 
drugs  as  keep  off  evil  spirits,  or  such  as  are  Jivaniya  (*.*., 
as  prolong  life),  or  such  as  are  Viinghaniya  [i.e.,  as  promote 
nutrition),  or  such  as  are  Madhura  (sweet),  or  such  as  are 
Vatahara  (destructive  of  wind). 

In  the  case  of  ‘Nagodara’  that  treatment  should  be 
followed  which  has  been  laid  down  in  Yonivyapanna  (or 
diseases  of  the  genital  organs  of  females).  The  woman  may 
also  be  given  milk,  or  raw  foetus,  or  all  things  that  help 
the  growth  of  the  foetus. 

She  may  also  be  given  Ghees  boiled  with  these,  when 
her  appetite  has  been  strongly  excited. 

She  may  also  have  proper  vehicles  inanimate  and  animate 
(for  locomotion),  baths  and  wash,  and  agreeable  and  encouraging 
conversation  and  everything  that  conduces  to  the  comfort  of 
body  and  mind.6 7  + 


*  The  correct  text  is  ‘  aspandanam  ’  and  not,  as  in  some  Bengal  editions 
‘  spandanam.’  Being  dried  up,  the  foetus  does  not  move  as  under  conditions  of 
‘health  and  growth.  . 

‘  Nagodaram  ’  is,  probably,  ‘  after  the  manner  of  a  snake’s  conception.’  The 
commentators  do  not  explain  this  expression. — T. 

t  In  the  first  sentence,  ‘  sarpisham  ’  is  used  in  the  plural.  Gangadhara 
correctly  explains  that  different  kinds  of  Ghee  are  intended,  viz..  Ghees  boiled 
with  each  separate  kind  of  drug  mentioned. 

‘  Bhautika  ’  are  drugs  that  keep  off  evil  spirits  ;  such  as  the  scent  called 
Guggulu  or  Balsamodendron  Mukul,  &c.  The  word  may  also  imply  a  group 
of  drugs  beginning  with  Bhutika  (otherwise  called  Yamani  or  Ptychotis 
Ajowan  ). 

‘  Madhura  ’  is  applied  to  a  ‘  Gana 1  or  group  of  particular  sweets  beginning 
with  milk.  (  Vide  Vimana-sthana). 

‘  Vatahara  ’  includes  a  particular  group  of  drugs  which  alleviate  the  excited 
wind.  (  Vide  Vima.ia-sthana). 

For  ‘yor.i  ^Epat’  or  diseases  o.‘  the  generative  organs  of  females,  vide 
Chikitsa  sthana. 


CHARAKA  SA  M  HIT  A . 


837 


If  the  foetus  in  the  womb  of  a  woman  seems  to  sleep  and  does 
not  move,  that  woman  should  have  for  food  boiled  rice  of  red 
paddy,  mixed  with  the  juice,  boiled  with  ghee,  of  (the  meat  of) 
the  hawk,  fish,  gayal,  francoline  partridge,  hen  (or  cock),  and 
peacock,  or  with  the  juice,  mixed  with  ghee,  of  the  seeds  of  Pha- 
seolus  radiatus,  or  with  the  juice,  largely  mixed  with  Ghee,  of  the 
garden  radish. 

Such  rice  should  be  soft  (well-boiled),  sweetened,  and  cooled. 

Her  abdomen,  pubic  regions,  thighs,  waist,  flanks,  and  back, 
should  also  be  rubbed  with  oil  slightly  heated.58' 

If  a  woman  during  the  eighth  month  of  gestation  gets  suppres¬ 
sion  of  urine  and  stools,  and  if  the  disease  cannot  be  cured  by 
oily  enemata,  the  physician  should  administer  to  her  dry  enemata 
for  the  alleviation  of  her  disease. 

If  such  suppression  of  urine  and  stools,  be  neglected,  it  will 
cause  the  destruction  of  the  fcetus  in  the  womb,  or  of  the  woman 
herself  with  the  foetus.59 

The  dry  enemata  that  should  be  administered  to  her  under 
such  circumstances  should  consist  of  the  following: 

The  decoction  of  the  roots  of  Virana  (a),  Cali  ( b ),  Shastika  (c), 


‘  Ama-garbha  ’  is  raw  fcetus,  implying  eggs  of  birds,  fish-roe,  and  the  fcetus 
of  goats,  sheep,  &c.  It  is  believed!  that  these  help  the  growth  of  the  human 
foetus. 

‘  Ghees  boiled  with  these,’  z',«.,  with  milk,  raw  fcetus,  and  all  things  which 
help  the  growth  of  the  foetus. 

‘  Y5na  ’  means  vehicles  such  as  cars,  carriages,  &c.  ;  and  ‘  vahana  ’  such 
vehicles  as  horses  and  mules  and  oxen,  &c.  The  former  are  inanimate  ;  the 
latter  animate.  Vehicles  proper  for  women  during  gestation  are  boats  which 
glide  softly,  &c.  As  regards  ‘  vahanas  ’  that  are  proper,  probably  palkees 
borne  on  the  shoulders  of  men  are  implied. 

‘  Apamarjjana  ’  includes,  both  wash,  and  rubbing  the  body  with  oris,  &c. 

‘  Avajrimbhana  ’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  including  converse  which  is 
agreeable  and  which  encourages  and  consoles,  as  also  other  acts  that  conduce 
to  the  comfort  of  both  body  and  mind. — T. 

a.  Andropogon  musicatum,  Rets. 

b.  Ordinary  paddy. 

c.  The  paddy  which  ripens  in  60  days  from  the  day  of  scattering  it  on  the 
ground. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


*3  8 

Kuga  {d),  KSiga  (*),  Ikshuvalika  (/),  Vetasa  (g),  and  Pari- 
yyadha  ( h ),  or 

The  decoqtion  of  Bhutika  (z),  Ananta  (J),  Kagmarya  (k), 

Parushaka  (/),  Madhuka  ( m ),  and  Mridvika  («),  should  be 
boiled  with  milk  mixed  half  and  half  with  water. 

This  should  then  be  mixed  with  a  paste  made  of  the 
kernel  of  Piyala  ( o ),  and  of  Bibhitaka  (/),  and  Tila  (g). 

A  little  ’salt  should  be  mixed  with  the  preparation. 

It  '.should  then  be  applied  while  lukewarm.60 

When  the  suppression  of  stools  and  urine  has  been 
alleviated,  she  should,  have  her  whole  person  washed  with 

water  of  agreeable  warmth.  > 

She  should  then  be  fed  with  such  food  as  is  preservative 

of  the  embryo  and  as  does  not  produce  a  burning  sensation* 

She  should  then,  in  the  evening,  have  administered  to 

her  enemata  made  of  oils  (and  oily  substances)  boiled  with 
the  group  of  drugs  called  Madhuraka  (sweets).-f- 

It  should  be  stated  that  while  administering  enemata 
both  of  the  oily  and  the  dry  kinds,  she  should  be  made  to 
lie  down  with  her  face  downwards.61 

d.  £”  Poa  cynosuroides,  Linn. 

e.  Saccharum  spontaneum,  Linn. 

f.  A  variety  of  Saccharum  officinarum ,  Linn, 

g.  Calamus  rotang ,  Linn. 

h.  A  variety  of  the 'above.  Gangadhara  takes  it  as  a  variety  of  the  above 
that  grows  in  water. 

i.  Otherwise  called  Yamani.  Ptychotis  Ajowan,  D.C ;  syn.  Ligusticum  "■< 

Ajawan,  Flem. 

j.  Hemidesmus  Indicus ,  R.  Br ,  ;  syn.  Asclepias  pseudosarsa ,  Roxb. 

k.  Otherwise  called  Gambhari.  Gmelina  arboreay  Linn. 

l.  Grewia  Asiatica ,  Linn. 

m.  Liquorice. 

n.  Uva passes.  Viiis  vinifera ,  Linn.  Dried  grapes. 

o.  Buchanania  latifolia ,  Roxb. 

p.  Terminalia  Bellerica ,  Roxb. 

q.  Sesamum  Indicum ,  Linn.  Sesame  seeds, 

*  ■  Sthairyakara  ’  is.  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  ‘  Garbhasthapanakara,’ 

i.e.,  preservative  of  the  embryo. 

‘  Avidahi  ’  is  ‘  not  burning,’  i.e.,  *  as  does  not  produce  acidity.’ — T. 

-j-  For  the  group  known  as  1  Madhuraka  ’  or  ‘  Madhura,’  vide  foot-note 
p.  836  ante. — T, 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


839 


That  woman  whose  embryo  dies  in  the  womb  through 
excessive  increase  of  the  faults  (wind,  bile,  and  phlegm), 

Or,  through  indulgence,  in  a  large  measure,  in  food  and 
drink  that  are  of  keen  and  heating  properties, 

Or,  through  suppression  of  the  urgings  of  wind,  urine, 
and  stools, 

Or,  through,  indulgence  in  food  made  of  hostile  ingre¬ 
dients,  or  use  of  uneven  beds  and  seats,  or  through  pressure 
(upon  the  womb), 

Or,  in  consequence  of  wrath,  grief,  envy,  malice,  fear, 
apprehension,  and  the  rest, 

Or,  other  acts  (which  are  destructive  of  the  embryo),  discovers 
the  following  symptoms : 

Her  womb  looks  moist  (like  a  piece  of  cloth  soaked  in  water)  ;* 
becomes  stupefied  (or  paralysed) ;  extended;  and  cold.  Besides, 
she  feels  as  if  a  heavy  stone  is  within  her  ; 

The  embryo  becomes  motionless  ; 

Severe  pains  are  felt,  yet  they  are  not  like  the  pains  of  labour ; 

No  discharge  takes  place  from  the  genital  organ  ; 

Her  eyes  droop  down  ; 

She  sees  darkness  all  around ;  feels  very  uneasy,  her  head 
swims  ;  she  breathes  hard  ;  and  she  finds  no  pleasure  in 
anything ; 

She  feels  no  urgings  for  evacuations  as  at  other  times. 

The  woman  who  discovers  such  symptoms  should  be  known  as 
one  whose  embryo  is  dead  in  the  womb.6  8 

Some  say  that  for  the  alleviaton  of  the  pain  in  the  womb 
(caused  by  the  dead  embryo)  the  expulsion  of  the  embryo  is  the 
only  means. 

Some  say  that  the  mantras  ordained  in  the  Atharva  Veda  (are 
the  means). 

Some  say  that  extraction  (of  the  embryo)  by  an  experienced 
accoucheur  (is  the  means). t6  8 

*  ‘  Stimitanr’  is  explained  by  the  commentators  as  ‘  looking  moist  or  like  a 
piece  of  cloth  soaked  in  water. 

‘  Avi ’  (plural — ‘  Avyah  ’).  means  throes  or  labour  pains. 

‘  Srasta,’  with  reference  to  eyes,  means  ‘  drooping’  or  *  hanging  down”’ — T. 

t  1  Garbha-9alya  ’  is,  literally,  ‘  the  dart  in  the  womb,’  meaning  the  cause  of 
pain  in  the  womb,  viz.,  the  dead  embryo. 


840 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


To  the  woman  of  premature  pregnancy  whose  dead  embryo 
has  been  removed,  any  one  of  the  following  wines  should  be  first 
given  to  drink  in  measure  suited  to  her,  vis.,  Sura,  Sidhu,  Arishta, 
Madhu,  Madira,  and  Asava,  for  correcting  the  womb,  alleviating 
pain,  and  making  her  cheerful.*' * 

After  this,  she  should  be  treated  with  such  medicines  as  belong 
to  the  class  called  ‘  Vringhana’  (*.  e.,  those  that  promote  nutrition 
and  add  flesh),  and  such  as  support  the  strength  of  the  body  ; 

Or,  with  gruels  of  barley  and  other  articles,  mixed  with  (medi¬ 
cated')  oils  ; 

Or,  with  such  food  (and  drink)  as  is  well  suited  to  her  at  that 
time. 

This  should  be  continued  till  the  faults,  the  Dhatus,  and  the 
discharges  are  dried  up.-f-65 

After  this  she  should  be  treated  with  drinks  of  (medicated)  oils, 
enemata,  such  food. (and  drink)  as  would  suit  her  at  that  stage,  and 
with  such  drugs  as  are  ‘Dipaniya’  (provocative  of  the  digestive 
fire),  ‘Jivaniya,’  ( i.e .,  medicines  that  prolong  life),  ‘  Vringhaniya,’ 

Among  the  four  Vedas,  the  Atharvan  only  contains  mantras  for  incanta¬ 
tions  of  all  sorts.  It  contains  also  the  whole  of  the  Ayurveda  or  Science  of 
Life.  Of  course,  this  is  only  a  tradition,  for  the  Science  of  Life  as  contained 
in  the  Atharvan,  if  it  was  ever  contained  in  it,  has  long  ago  been  lost.  All  that 
we  have  of  the  Atharvans  is  rules  about  incantations  for  effecting  all  sorts-  of 
objects,  such  as  ‘Marana’  or  the  destruction  of  foes,  ‘  Uchatana  ’  or  depriving 
foes  of  their  reason  or  sanity,  ‘  Vajikarana  ’  or  bringing  an  enemy  under  control 
or  subjection,  &c.  '  Indrajala  ’  or  magic  also  forms  a  part  of  the  Atharvans. 

‘  Paridrishtakarman  ’  is  one  who  has  experience,  i.e.,  one  who  has  performed 
the  operation  with  success  several  times. 

‘  Calyahartri  ’  is  an  accoucheur  ;  or  one  who,  with  the  aid  of  instruments,  if 
needed,  performs  the  operation  of  extracting  children,  dead  or  alive,  from  the 
womb. — T. 

*  Three  classes  of  women  are  taken  :  first,  ‘  amagarbhS,’  i.e.,  she  who  is 
not  in  a  mature  state  of  pregnancy  ;  seeond,  ‘  paripakkagarbha,’  i.e.,  she  who  is 
in  a  mature  state  of  pregnan  y  ;  and,  third,  ‘  Vimu  :  '  grrbl  a/  i.e.,  she  who  has 
been  delivered  at  the  proper  ime.  Unto  the  first,  when  her  embryo  has  been 
removed,  the  wines  mentioned  here  ought  to  be  administered.  The  treatment 
of  the  two  others  occurs  lower  down. 

Sura,  Sidhu,  Arishta,  &c.,  are  wines  of  different  descriptions.  See  Lesson  on 
Wines,  in  Sutras ana,  ante.—  T. 

t  ‘Vilep?  adibhih  ’  is  added  in  some  texts,  after  ‘  Yav5gw5dibhih.’  This  is 
clearly  incorrect.  GangSdhara  tightly  omits  it. — T. 


CHARAKA  SAMH1TA. 


841 


(«.g.,  those  that  promote  nutrition),  ‘Madhura,’  ( he .,  those  that 
belong  to  the  group  of  sweets),  and  ‘  Vatahara,’  {i.e.,  those  that 
alleviate  the  wind).' ' 

Unto  the  woman  whose  embryo  is  dead  at  an  advanced  stage  of 
gestation  (and  has  been  expelled  or  extracted),  as  also  unto  her 
that  is  delivered  (in  course  of  nature)  at  the  proper  time, 
(medicated)  oils  may  be  administered  the  very  day.6' 

After  this  we  shall  lay  down  the  treatment  which  should  be 
observed,  month  by  month,  in  the  case  of  the  woman  whose 
embryo  grows  without  obstruction  of  any  kind  (caused  by 
disease).8  ’* 

If  it  is  suspected  that  the  woman  has  conceived,  then,  during 
the  first  month,  she  should  drink  milk  that  is  unmedicated,  in 
proper  measure,  in  a  cold  state. 

She  should  also,  morning  and  evening,  eat  such  food  as  may 
readily  be  assimilable." 

In  the  second  month  her  diet  should  consist  of  only  milk 
boiled  with  the  group  of  drugs  called  sweets. 

In  the  third  month,  (her  diet  should  be)  milk  mixed  with 
honey  and  Ghee. 

In  the  fourth  month,  it  should  be  cheese,  churned  out  of  milk, 
of  the  measure  of  an  Aksha  (2  tolas).-)* 

In  the  fifth  month,  it  should  be  Ghee  raised  from  milk  { 

In  the  sixth  month,  it  should  be  Ghee  raised  from  milk,  boiled 
with  the  group  of  drugs  called  sweet3. 

In  the  seventh  month,  the  same  diet  is  prescribable.70 

Women  say  that  the  hair  of  the  child  grows  in  the  seventh 
month  and  that  this  causes  the  mother  a  burning  sensation. 

The  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said, — This  is  not  so.  What  really 
takes  place  is  this:  owing  to  the  pressure  caused  by  the  embryo, 
wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  reaching  the  chest,  cause  the  burning 
sensation. 


*  1  Nirvik5ram 1  implies  ‘  without  vikara,’  i.e.,  without  disease  or  ailment 
of  any  kind.  What  is  implied  is,  those  cases  in  which  the  gestation  goes  on 
without  obstruction  of  any  kind. — T. 

t  Gangadhara  explains  that  cheese  churned  out  of  milk,  and  not  that  raised 
from  curds,  is  prescribed. — T. 

I  Ghee  from  milk  and  not  that  raised  from  curds  is  what  is  meant  here.^T, 


842 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


From  this,  a  sensation  of  itching  arises,  in  consequence  of 
Which  the  skin  (of  the  chest)  becomes  torn  (through  the  scratching 
that  becomes  a  necessity).* 

If  this  happens,  she  should  be  given  a  palmful  of  cheese  boiled 
with  the  group  of  drugs  called  sweets,  mixed  with  the  decoction 
of  Kola  (. Zizyphus  Jujiiba,  Lamk). 

With,  again,  the  paste,  dissolved  in  water,  of  Chandana  (a)  and 
Mrinala  ( b ),  her  bosoms  should  be  rubbed ;  or,  they  may  be  rubbed 
with  Cirisha  (<?),  Dhataki  ( d ),  Sarshapa  ( e ),  and  liquorice  powdered 
together;  or,  with  the  paste,  dissolved  in  water,  of  Kutaja  (/),. 
the  seeds  of  Arjjaka  (g),  Musta  (//),  and  Haridra  (*),  or,  with  the 
paste,  dissolved  in  water,  of  Nimva  (/),  Kola  (k),  Surasa  (/),  and 
Manjishta  ( m ). 

Or,  it  should  be  washed  with  the  infusion  of  the  triple  fruit 
(viz.,  Haritakl  or  Ckebiilic  myrobalans ,  Vibhitaka  or  Terminalia 
Bellerica,  Roxb.,  and  Amlaki  or  Phyllanlhus  Emblica ,  Linn  '. )  mixed 
with  the  blood  of  the  Ptishat  deer  and  the  hare.t 

Or,  the  part  should  be  rubbed  With  oil  boiled  with  the  leaves  of 
Karaviraka  («),. 

Or,  it  should  be  washed  also  with  water  boiled  with  Malati  ( 0 ) 
and  liquorice. 


*  ‘  Kikkasa  ’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  *  Charmadarana.’  The  sensa¬ 

tion  of  itching  becomes  so  violent  that  the  scratching  it  necessitates  leads  to  ths 
Skin  (of  the  chest  as  also  of  the  breasts)  being  actually  torn. — T. 

а.  Santalum  album ,  Linn. 

б.  Stalk  of  the  Lotus. 

c.  Mimosa  sirisa,  Roxb ,  ;  syn.  Albizzia  lebbek ,  Betith. 

d.  IVoodfordia  floribunda ,  Salisb.  ;  syn.  Grislea  tomentosd,  Roxb. 

e.  Mustard  seeds. 

f.  Hola?-rhena  Untidy senterica ,  Roxb.  ;  syn.  E chiles  antidysenterica ,  Wall: 

g.  A  variety  of  Ocimum  Sanctum ,  Linn. 

h.  Cyperus  rotundus ,  Linn. 

i.  Circunia  longa ,  Roxb. 

j.  Melia  Azadirachta,  Linn. ;  syn.  Azadirachta  Indica. 

k.  Zizyphus  jujuba ,  Lamk. 

l.  Ocimuvt  Sanctum,  Linn. 

m.  Rubia  cordifolia,  Linn.  ;  syn.  Rtibia  Miinjistd,  Roxb-. 

‘f  The  porcine  deer. — T. 

n.  Nerium  odorum  ;  the  sweet-scented  oleander, 

o.  Aganosma  Caryophyllata,  G.  Don-.  ;  syn.  Echites  caryophyllata,  Roxb: 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


843 


The  woman,  when  she  feels  the  sensation  of  itching,  should 
abstain  from  scratching  the  part  for  avoiding  the  disfigurement  due 
to  sores  on  the  skin.  ' 

If  the  itching  be  irresistible,  she  may  (without  scratching) 
knead  and  rub  the  part  for  subduing  the  sensation. 

She  should  have,  in  small  measure,  all  kinds  of  food  that  are 
regarded  sweet  and  alleviative  of  wind.  Such  food  should  have  very 
little  of  oil  and  salt. 

After  taking  such  food,  she  should  have  for  drink  a  small 
measure  of  water.'1 

In  the  eighth  month  she  should  take,  at  proper  intervals,  every 
day,  milk  mixed  with  gruel  of  barley  and  boiled  with  ghee. 

Such  diet  is  not  proper  for  her,  said  Bhadrakapya,  for,  by  taking 
such  diet,  her  child  may  catch  the  defect  of  having  brown  eyes.* 

Let  the  defect  of  brown  eyes  take  place,  said  the  illustrious 
Punarvasu  of  Atri’s  race. 

To  have  recourse  to  such  food  cannot  be  improper,  since  she 
who  takes  it  brings  forth  an  offspring  that  is  endued  with  wealth  of 
health,  strength,  complexion,  voice,  and  frame,  and  that  becomes 
the  foremost  of  his  kinsfolk.'2 

In  the  ninth  month,  she  should  have  administered  unto  her 
enemata  made  of  oils  boiled  with  that  group  of  drugs  which  is 
called  sweet. 

She  should  have  also  sticks  of  cotton,  soaked  in  oil,  inserted 
into  her  genital  organ  in  order  to  make  the  passage  oily  for 
facility  of  delivery.'8 

All  those  acts  which  have  been  laid  down,  regarding  a  woman 
that  has  conceived,  touching  the  commencement  of  her  conception 
and  the  period  of  gestation  beginning  with  the  first  month  and  end¬ 
ing  with  the  ninth,  help  to  soften  her  abdominal  cavity,  loins,  flanks, 
and  the  back. 

The  wind  also  in  her  body,  in  consequence  of  those  acts, 
moves  in  the  normal  or  usual  directions. 

The  urine  and  stools  also,  remaining  in  their  normal  condition, 
reach  their  channels  of  outlet  without  obstruction  of  any  kind. 

Her  skin  and  nails,  too,  become  soft, 


*  In  India,  from  very  ancient  times,  black  eyes,  that  is,  eyes  with  black 
pupils,  are  regarded  beautiful  in  both  males  and  females.  Tawny,  or  brown, 
or  cat-like  eyes  are  regarded  as  a  defect.  Manu  says  that  a  girl  with  tawny 
or  brown  eyes  should  not  be  wedded.— T. 

107 


344 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Her  strength  and  complexion  also  grow. 

In  consequence  of  all  this,  she  brings  forth,  without  pain 
at  the  proper  time,  a  superior  child  that  becomes  happy  and  endued 
with  wealth  of  attributes*74 

Before  the  ninth  month,  the  lying-in- room  should  be  caused 
to  be  erected  for  her. 

It  should  be  constructed  upon  a  spot  that  is  free  from  bones, 
gravels,  and  fragments  of  earthen waref 

The  '  place  selected  should  be  foremost  in  respect  of  sight, 
taste,  and  smell.j 

The  construction  should  have  its  entrance  facing  the  east 
or  the  north.75 

In  that  building  should  be  collected  a  sufficient  quantity  of 
wood  qf  Vilwa  (a),  Tinduka  ( b ),  Inguda  ( c ),  Bhallataka  (d),  Varuna 
(e),  Khadira  (/),  and  wood  of  other  kinds  which  Brahmanas  versed 
in  the  Atharva  Veda  may  declare  to  be  beneficial. 

It  should  also  be  equipt.  with  abundance  of  cloths,  plasters 
and  liniments,  covers,  and  coverlets. 

With  the  aid,  again,  of  the  essence  of  the  science  of  buildings 


*  What  advantage  is  gained  by  the  skin  and  the  nails  becoming  soft  it 
is  hot  easy  to  see.  The  wind  moves  in  its  usual  or  normal  direction,  and 
keeps  up  her  health.  During  the  period  of  gestation,  it  is  the  wind  that  is 
most  likely  to  become  vitiated. — T. 

t  ‘  Asthi’  is  bones,  These  are  regarded  as  inauspicious.  Frequently, 
to  this  day,  in  India,  if  a  succession  of  misfortunes  overtakes  a  family, 
particularly  in  the  form  of  deaths,  priests  and  astrologers  are  employed 
to  find  out,  by  incantations,  the  bones  buried  in  the  land  whereon  the  family 
dwelling  house  is  built. 

‘  Qarkara  js  gravels;  and  ‘kapala’,  fragments  of  earthenware.  These 
also  are  directed  to  be  removed  from  the  spot  whereon  the  lying-in-room  is 
to  be  erected.— T. 

J  The  site  should  be  on  a  piece  of  land  that:  is,  in  respect  of  sight, 
taste,  and  smell,  foremost.  No  barren  spot,  or  no  spot  which  does  not 
command  a  good  scenery,  should  be  selected.  Brahmanas  learned  in  the 
scriptures  bearing  upon  buildings  and  other  constructions,  are  employed. 
In  selecting  sacrificial  compounds,  the  same  rules  are  observed  as  in 
selecting  sites  of  lying-in-rooms. — T. 

a.  AZgle  marmelos,  Corr. 

b.  Diospyros  Embryopteris ,  Pers.j  syn.  Diospyros  gluiinosa,  Koenig. 

c.  Balanites  Roxburgii ,  Planchon. ;  syn.  Ximenia  /Egyptiaca,  Boxb. 

d.  Semecarpus  Anacardium,  Linn.; 

e.  Cratmva  religiosa,  Forst.  ;  syn.  Capparis  trifoliata ,  Roxb. 

f.  Acacia  Catechu ,  Linn.  \  syn,  Mimosa  catechu ,  Linn. 


Char  aka  samhita.  '  845 

the  sites  should  be  designed  of  fire,  water,  mortars  and  pestles,  privy, 
bathing,  and  cooking. 

It  should  meet  the  requirements  of  the  season/0* 

There  should  be  kept  the  following  : 

Ghee,  Oil,  Honey,  Saindhava  salt,  Sauvarchala  salt,  Kala  salt, 
Vidanga  (a),  treacle,  Kushtha  (b),  Kilima  (c),  Nagara  (d),  Pippali  (e) 
Pippalimula  (/).  Hastipippali  (g),  Manduparni  (k),  Ela  (i),  Langaliki 
(y),  Vacha  (k),  Chavya  (/),  Chitraka  (m),  Chiravilwa  («),  Hingu  (o) 


*  This  aphorism  has  been  mistranslated  by  the  Bengali  translators. 
Gangadhara  also  has  not  succeeded  in  explaining  it  correctly.  The  first 
clause  consists  of  the  names  of  the  several  trees  which  occur  in  the  genetive 
plural ;  then  comes  the  second  clause,  beginning  with  ‘  va  yani,  &c/  and 
ending  with  ‘  Atharvavedavidah’  ;  after  the  last  word  occurs  ‘  tat.’  This 
‘  tat’  is  evidently  connected  with  1  Tatra’  at  the  outset,  ‘  Tatra  tat’  implies 
‘there  these  should  be  kept'.  Then  comes  the  adjective  clause  ‘Vasana  &c. 
sampadupetam.’  After  this,  the  correct  reading,  which  Chakrapani  gives, 
is  ‘  Vastu-vidya-hridaya-yogme.’  Chakrapani  explains  ‘hridaya’  as  ‘tattwa.’ 
‘  Vastuvidya’  is  the  Science  of  Building.  (Gangadhara  gives  the  incorrect 
reading — ‘Vastu  vidyat.’  It  is  pure  nonsense.)  In  consequence  of  the 
incorrect  reading  he  adopts,  Gangadhara  has  been  obliged  to  take  the 
words ‘Vasana’,  ‘  alepana’,  ‘ achcchadana’,  and ‘apidhana’ in  very  far-fetched 
senses.  By  adopting  Chakrapani’s  reading,  all  these  words  may  be  taken 
in  their  well-known  ordinary  senses. 

The  two  last  adjective  clauses  qualify  ‘  Sutikagaram’  in  the  previous 
aphorism. 

a.  Embelia  Ribes ,  Bunn.  syn‘  Embelia  Glandulifera,  Wight. 

b.  Saussurea  auriculata  ;  syn.  Aplotoxis  auriculata,  D.  0. 

c.  Another  name  of  Devadaru  as  explained  by  the  Commentators. 
Cedrus  deodara,  Loud  ;  syn.  Pinus  deodara,  Roxb. 

d:  This  word  is  sometimes  used  for  .  dry  ginger.  The  Commentators 
are  silent.  Ordinarily  it  implies  the  Qyfierus  fiertenuis,  Roxb. 

e.  Piper  longum,  Linn. 

f.  The  roots  of  the  above. 

g.  Otherwise  called  Gajapippali.  Scindaspus  officinalis ,  Roxb. 

h.  Hydrocotyle  Asiatica,  Linn. 

i.  Elettaria  Cardamomum. 

j.  Gloriosa  suberba ,  Linn. 

h  A  corns  Calamus ,  Linn. 

l.  Also  called  Chavika.  Piper  ch  aba,  Hunt.  ;  syn.  Chivica  officinarum, 
Miq. 

m.  Plumbago  Zeylanica ,  Linn. 

n.  Otherwise  called  Ka^anja  or  Dahar-Karanja.  Pongamia  glabra, 
Ventr.-,  syn,  Galedupa  Tndica,  Lamk. 

o.  Ferula  Assafcetida,  Linn.  (The  exudation  is  used  ,)  "  ' 


846 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Mustard  seeds,  garlics,  Kana  'a),  Kanika  (b),  Nipa  (c),  Atasi  (d), 
Vallipa  (e),  Bhurya  (f\  Kulattha  (g),  Maireya  (//),  Sura  (z),  and 
Asava  (J). 

Also  two  pieces  of  stone  (currystone  and  imillar) ; 

Two  large  pestles  ; 

Two  mortars*  ; 

One  mule ; 

One  ox ; 

Two  sharp-pointed  needles,  one  of  gold  and  the  other  of  silver, 
and  two  skeins  of  threads,  with  needle-like  ends  ;f 

A  few  keen-pointed  (surgical)  instruments  of  steel  ; 

Two  bed-steads  made  of  the  wood  of  AEgle  marmelos  ; 

Some  (well-dried;  fuel  of  Diospyros  glut  in  >s.i  and  Balanites. 
Roxburghii  for  (readily)  igniting  fire. 

Many  woman  should  be  kept  in  attendance,  who  have  each 
brought  forth  many  children  ;  who  are  well-disposed  towards 
the  woman  that  is  about  to  be  a  mother,  and  much  attached  to 
her  ;  who  are  expert  in  all  acts,  skilled  in  understanding  all 
sorts  of  directions,  whose  nature  is  affectionate  ;  who  are  always 
cheerful  and  capable  of  bearing  hardship  and  pain,  and  towards 


a.  The  Commentators  take  it  as  another  name  of  Kundaka.  Thin  or 
small  fragments  of  rice. 

b.  Thicker  fragments  of  the  above. 

c.  Otherwise  called  Kadamba.  Anthocephalus  Cadamba,  Benth  and 
Hook.,  syn.  Nauclea  Cadamba ,  Roxb. 

d.  Linum  usitatissimum,  Linn. 

e.  Another  name  of  Kusmanda.  Cucurbita  pepo,  Roxb.  syn.  Benincasa 
cerifera ,  Savi. 

f.  Betula  Bhojpatra ,  Wall. 

g.  Dolichos  uniflorus ,  Lamk.,  syn.  Dolichos  biflorus,  Roxb. 

h.  A  variety  of  wine. 

i.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

j.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

*  Those  of  the  larger  kind,  generally  used  of  wood  or  stone,  are  meant. 
Chakrapani  observes  that  some  texts  have  1  Kunda-mushala’,  meaning  small 
pestles. 

t  Chakrapani  explains  ‘  tikshnan’  as  ‘  suchvakaran’,  i.e.,  of  the  form  of 
the  needle  ;  in  other  words,  having  needle-like  ends  ‘  Suchi-pippalakau’ 
may  also  mean,  according  to  him,  two  thimbles  with  needle  like  ends.  I  think 
Chakrapani  does  not  explain  the  passage  correctly.  I  think  ‘  Suchi’  in  the  dual 
number  as  given  by  Gangadhara  is  correct.  Hence,  two  ‘  Suchis’  and  two 
‘  pippalakas’ are  meant.  ‘  Sauvarnarajatau'  is  misplaced  in  some  texts. 
It  comes  after  ‘  Tikshnau’. — T. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA.  .847 

whom  the  woman  who  is  about  to  become  a  mother  is  herself 
well-disposed. 

Brahmanas  conversant  with  the  Atharava-veda  ; 

Everything  else  that  may  be  regarded  useful  in  view  of 
the  occasion  ;  and 

All  else  that  Brahmanas  and  women  of  venerable,  years 
may  direct. 

All  these  should  be  attended  to.7" 

Then  when  the  ninth  month  has  set  in,  on  an  auspicious 
day,  when  the  deity,  Chandramas,  (viz.,  the  moon,)  is  in  con¬ 
junction  with  an  auspicious  asterism,  when  the  karana  also 
is  favourable,  at  an  early  hour  of  the  morning  (called  Maitra), 
having  poured  libations  on  the  sacred  fire  for  dispelling  all  evils 
and  obtaining  prosperity,  having  also  first  caused  a  cow  and 
Brahmanas  and  fire  and  water  to  be  admitted  therein,  having 
given  grass  and  water  and  honey  and  fried  paddy  unto  some 
kine  (kept  in  readiness',  having  presented  unto  Brahmanas 
sun-dried  rice  in  full  measure,  as  also  flowers  and  such  other 
articles  as  are  productive  of  prosperity  arid  agreeable  fruits, 
having  worshipped  in  the  first  instance  a  vessel  of  water  and 
then  saluted  the  Brahmanas  seated  son  the  seats  (spread  out 
for  them),  and  causing  them  to  perform  the  rite  of  ‘  achamaria,’ 
she  should  induce  them  to  utter  benedictions  upon  her. 

When  the  Brahamanas  are  repeating  the  word  ‘  Punnyaha’, 
she  should,  following  the  Brahmanas  and  kine,  herself  enter 
the  lying-in-room. 

Residing  therein,  she  should  wait  for  the  time  of  delivery.*73 


*  '  When  the  karatia  is  favourable  j  ’  ‘  karana’  is  an  astrological 
division  of  time.  They  are  11  in  number,  7  moveable  and  4  fixed  ;  two  of 
them  are  equal  to  a  lunar  day. 

*  Muhurta’  is  a  division  of  time  equal  to  48  minutes.  ‘  Maitra  muhurta’ 
is  otherwise  called  ‘  Brahma  Muhurta.7  It  is  that  hour  of  the  dawn  when 
the  Sun  has  just  risen  above  the  horizon. 

‘  Akshata,’  literally,  is  that  which  has  undergone  no  deterioration.  Hence, 
a  measure  of  rice  given  to- a  Brahman  a.  The  basket  or  vessel  in  which 
the  rice  is  given  should  be  full  to  the  brim.  In  performing  vraddhas  and 
other  sacred  rites,  only  sun-dried  rice  can  be  given,  and  not  that  rice 
which  is  prepared  from  boiled  paddy. 

All  articles  productive  of  merit  when  offered  to  Brahmanas  and  Pitris  are 
called  Nandimukha.  ‘Udakapurvam’ is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  worship¬ 
ping  water  first.' — T. 


848 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Verily  the  following  are  the  symptoms  that  manifest  them¬ 
selves  at  the  time  of  delivery.  They  are, — 

Physical  langour  or  lassitude  ; 

Sensation  of  heaviness  of  all  the  limbs  ; 

Flabbiness  of  the  face  and  the  eyes  ; 

Absence  of  tightness  of  the  chest ; 

Falling  of  the  abdomen  downwards  ; 

Sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  abdomen'; 

Sensation  like  that  of  a  pricking  with  needles  in  the  groins, 
the  pubic  regions,  the  waist,  the  sides  of  the  abdomen,  flanks, 
and  the  back  ; 

Discharges  from  the  genital  organ;  and 

Unwillingness  to  take  food  ; 

After  these,  the  labour-pains  manifest  themselves,  and  the 
discharge  of  water-  from  the  uterus.*80 

When  the  labour-pains  manifest  themselves,  the  woman 
should  be  directed  to  lie  down  on  the  ground,  spreading  a  soft 
bed  over  it. 

While  thus  lying  down,  women  possessed  of  the  qualities 
spoken  of  above  should  sit  around  her. 

They  should  comfort  her  with  agreeable  discourses  of 
import  already  laid  down.81 

1  f  delivery  does  not  take  place  while  she  is  suffering  under 
labour-pains,  she  should  be  directed  to  rise  up  and  seizing  one 
of  the  large  pestles  to  strike  it  repeatedly  into  the  mortar  full 
of  paddy. 

She  should  also  be  directed  to  stretch  out  her  arms  and  legs 
repeatedly. 

She  should,  at  intervals,  be  made  to  walk. 

Even  this  is  what  some  (physicians)  say.82 

The  illustrious  son  of  Atri’s  race  said  that  all  this  is  not 
proper.  For  it  is  always  directed  by  the  wise  that  a  woman 
who  has  conceived  should  never  indulge  in  violenb  physical 
exercise,  especially  at  the  time  of  delivery.  Of  a  woman, 
who  is  delicate  by  nature,  when  all  her  ‘dhatus’  and  faults 


*  ‘  Klama’  is  a  sensation  of  fatigue  or  general  exhaustion,  or  langour, 
or  lassitude. 

‘  Glani,’  generally  implies  pain  or  the  absence  of  ease.  Here,  heaviness. 
*  Absence  of  tightness  of  the  chest’  implies  a  sensation  like  that  of  the 
bonds  of  the  chest  being  slackened.— T. 


CHAR  AKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


849 


are  in  a  constant  state  of  motion,  the  wind,  excited  by  such 
an  exercise  as  that  with  the  pestle,  gets  an  opportunity  to 
destroy  her  very  life. 

The  woman  that  has  conceived  becomes,  especially  at  the 
hour  of  delivery,  exceedingly  difficult  to  treat  if  afflicted  by 
any  disorder.  Hence,  sages  think  that  without  taking  up  the 
pestle,  the  woman  may  have  recourse  to  the  stretching  out  of 
her  arms  and  legs  and  to  walking.'3 

At  such  a  time  she  should  be  given  the  pulv  of  the  following 
to  smell  repeatedly  :  Kushtha  (a),  Ela  (b),  Langaliki  (c),  Vacha  ( d ), 
Chitraka  ( e ),  and  Chiravilwa  (f). 

Also  the  smoke  of  Bhurjjapatra  (g •),  or  of  the  pith  of 
Cinsapa  ( h ),  may  be  given  to  her  at  intervals  to  smell. 

Her  waist,  flanks,  back,  and  thighs,  may  also  be  rubbed 
with  oil  slightly  heated. 

The  rubbing  should  be  continued  gently  so  as  to  give  her 
as. much  pleasure  as  possible. 

By  means  of  this  act,  the  child’s  head  comes  downwards. 
When  she  feels  that  the  child,  leaving  her  chest,  has  fallen  down 
into  the  abdomenal  region  and  reached  the  head  of  the  pubic 
region,  her  throes  become  violent  and  she  ardently  desires  to 
deliver  her  burden. 

At  that  time,  the  child’s  head  comes  downwards. 

When  she  has  reached  this  stage,  she  should  be  placed 
uppn  a  bedstead,  and  directed  to  strain  (for  expelling  the  child). 

The  well-disposed  women  in  attendance  upon  her  should  then 
whisper  into  her  ears  the  following  Mantras  : 

May  Earth,  Water,  Ether,  Fire,  Wind,  Vishnu,  and  Prajapati, 
always  protect  thee  that  art  with  child  in  thy  womb  ! 

May  they  see  that  thou  art  delivered  of  thy  burden  !  O  thou 
of  fair-  face,  do  thou,  without  pain, .  bring  forth  a  happy  child 
endued  with  the  splendour  of  Kartikeya,  and  may  the  god, 
Kartikeya,  protect  that  child ! 


a.  Saussurea  auricalata  j  syn,  Aplotaxis  auriculata ,  DC. 

b.  Elettaria  Cardamomum. 

c.  Gloriosa  Superba,  Linn. 

d.  Acorus  Calamus,  Linn. 

e.  Plumbago  Zeylanica,  Linn. 

f.  Pongamia  glabra ,  Vent.,  syn.  Galedupa  Indica ,  Lamk. 
g  Betula  Bhojapatra,  Walld. 

h.  Dalbergia  Sissoo,  Roxb. 


45° 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


Even  this  (is  what  we  direct)  !** 

She  should  then  be  directed  by  the  women  -  endued  with  the 
aforesaid  qualities  who  are  in  attendance  upon  her  in  this  way  : 

Do  not  strain  when  there  are  no  pains  ! 

.  She  who  strains  when  the  pains  have  ceased  finds  her 
exertions  fruitless ! 

The  offspring  brought  forth  by  such  a  one  becomes  deformed 
and  afflicted  with  diseases,  or  these  diseases  (in  especial)  may 
come  upon  an  offspring,  viz.,  asthma,  consumption,  phthisis, 
and  enlargement  of  the  spleen.  Just  as  one,  however  one  may 
try,  does  not  succeed  in  bringing  about  the  urgings  for,  sneezing 
and  eructations  and  wind  and  urine  and  stools,  before  the  urgings 
therefor  come  in  course  of  nature,  or  if  one  succeeds,  by  strong 
efforts,  in  bringing  on  the  urgings  for  those  acts,  one  only  exposes 
oneself  to  various  diseases,  even  so  is  the  case  with  a  woman  who 
indulges  in  straining  before  the  exact  time  comes  for  delivery. 

As  the  suppression  of  the  urgings.  for  spittle  and  the  rest 
becomes  productive  of  injury,  even  so  is  the  avoidance  of  strain¬ 
ing  when  the  time  has  come  for  delivery. 

She  should  be  addressed  (by  the  women  in  attendance)  in 
these  words  :  Do  thou  bear  thyself  as  we  say. 

Desirous  of  following  their  advice,  she  should  at  first  strain 
gently,  and  then  with  greater  force. 

While  she  indulges  in  such  straining,  the  women  in  attend¬ 
ance  •  should  exclaim, — Delivered,  Delivered  !  Praise,  Praise  ! 
It  is  a  such  child  ! 

At  these  words,  her  heart  will  be  filled  with  joy.!5 

When  the  woman  has  delivered,  some  one  amongst  the 
women  in  attendance  should  see  whether  the  placenta  has  come 
out  or  not. 

If  the  placenta  has  not  come  out,  some  one  among  the 
attending  women  should  forcibly  press  with  her  right  hand 
the  part,  just  above  the  navel,  of  •  the  woman  who  has  just 
delivered,  supporting  her  the  while  by  the  left  hand  placed  against 
her  back,  and  continuously  give  her  a  good  shake. 

Her  loins  should  also  be  pressed  by  some  one  using  her 
heels. 

Her  lips  also  should  be  seized  and  pressed  with  force. 

The  (end  of  the)  braid  of  the  hair  on  her  head  should  also 
be  inserted  into  her  mouth.85 

Then  taking  up  some  leaves  of  Be  tula  Bhojapatra  and 


'CEARAKA  SAMH1IA 


Kashamani  and  the  cast  off  slough  of  a  snake,  these  should 
be  set  on  fire  and  the  vapour  applied  to  the  genital  organ  •  of 
the  woman  that  has  delivered. 

Or,  taking  the  paste  of  Kushtha  (a),  and  Taliga-  ( b ),  and 
dissolving  it  in  the  decoction  of  Valwaja  ( c ),  or  the  yeast  of 
Maireya  (d),  or  the  decoction  of  Kulattha  (e),  or  that  of  Manduka- 
parni  (/)  and  Pippali  (g),  it  should  be  given  to  the  woman 
to  drink.87 

Also  the  paste  of  Sukshma-Ela  (It),  Kilima  (z),  Kushtha  (/), 
Nagara  (k),  Vidanga  (l),  Kala-vit  (in),  Gura  (n),  Chavya  (o), 
Pippali  ri>),  Chitraka  (q),  and  Upakunchika  ( r ) ,  dissolved  in 
the  yeast  of  Maireya  or  in  any  of  the  decoctions  mentioned 
before,  may  be  given  to  her  to  drink. 

Or,  cutting  off  the  right  ear  of  an  old  bull-ass,  and  pounding 
it  on  a  stone,  throw  it  into  any  of  the  aforesaid  decoctions, 
viz.,  of  Valwaja  and  the  rest ;  then  taking  it  up  after  a  brief 
space  of  time,  the  decoction  (from  which  it  is  taken  up)  should 
be  given  to  the  woman  to  drink.*88 


a.  Saussurea  auriculata  j  syn.  Aplotaxis  auriculata,  DC. 

b.  Pinus  Webbiana,  Lindl.  .  syn.  Abies  W ebb iana,  Loud. 

t.  Intperata  cylindrica  ;  syn.  Saccharum  cylindricum ,  Lamk. 

d.  A  Variety  of  wine.  :It  should  be  noted  that  ‘  Suramanda’ 
implies  the  yeast  of  wine  or  the  froth  or  scum  that  comes  to  the  top  of 
any  vinous  liquor  in  course  of  fermentation. 

e.  Bolichos  uniflorus,  Lavik  j  syn.  Dolichos  biflorus ,  Roxb. 

f.  Hydrocotyle  Asiatica,  Linn.  Gangadhara  takes  Mandukaparni  here, 
on  what  authority  it  does  not  appear,  as  indicating  Danti ,i.  e.,Baliosperum 
montamm  ;  syn.  Croton  polyaruirum,  Roxb. 

g.  Piper  longum,  Linn.  The  decoction  recommended  is  that  of  Mandu¬ 
kaparni  and  Pippali  taken  together. 

h.  Elettaria  Cardamomum  ; 

i.  Another  name  of  Devadaru.  Cedrus  deodara,  Loud.,  syn.  Pinus 
deodara,  Roxb. 

j.  Saussurea  auriculata  ;  syn.  Aplotaxis  auriculata,  DC. 

k.  Another  name  of  dry  ginger. 

t.  Embelia  ribes,  Burnt.-,  syn.  Embelia glandulifera,  Wight. 

in.  Vit  salt  of  the  black  variety. 

it.  Treacle.  (Old  treacle  is  used  in  medicine). 

o.  Piper  chaba,  Hunter  :  syn.  Chavica  officinarum,  Miq. 

p.  Piper  longum,  Linn  ;  syn.  Chavica  Roxburghit. 

q.  Plumbago  Zeylanica,  Linn. 

r.  Another  name  of  Krishna-jiraka.  Nigella  sativa,  Linn. 

*  ‘  Khara-Vrishabha’  is  explained  correctly,  I  think,  by  Gangadhara, 
as  a  bull  or  male  ass.  Chakrapani  takes  it  as  a  '  Chanda- Valivardda,’  that 
IOS 


852 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


A  stick  of  ^cotton,  soaked  in  oil  that  has  been  boiled  with 
Qatapushpa  ( a ),  Kushtha  (b),  Hingu  (c),  and  Madana  (d),  may 
be  inserted.'9 

The  same  oil  may  be  administered  unto  her  as  enemata. 

Taking,  again,  the  paste  of  these,  vis.,  Phala,  (e),  Jimuta  (r), 
Ikshaku  (g),  Dhamargava  (h),  Kutaja  (*),  Kirtavedhana  (f),  and 
Hastiparni  (k),  and  dissolving  it  in  the  decoctions  already 
mentioned  (viz.,  those  of  Valwaja  and  the  rest),  a  dry  enemata 
may  be  made  for  administering  unto  her.90 

The  enemata  (prescribed)  forces  out,  along  with  the  (accu¬ 
mulated)  wind,  urine,  and  stools,  the  attached  placenta,  in 
consequence  of  the  downward  motion  which  it  brings  about  of 
the  wind. 

The  fact  is,  wind,  urine  and  stools,  and  other  execretions 
having  an  outward  motion,  (when  accumulated  within  the  body), 
prevent  the  placenta  from  coming  out.*91 


is,  an  angry  bovine  bull.  This  can  hardly  be  the  sense.  Although 
Charaka  prescribes  beef,  yet  he  does  not  readily  do  so.  Only  when  other 
remedies  have  failed,  beef  comes  in,  probably  for  those,  again,  that  are 
accustomed  to  it. — T. 

a.  Otherwise  called  Misreya.  Pucedanum  Sowa. 

b  Saussurea  auriculatcr,  syn.  Aplotoxis  auriculata,  DC. 

c.  Assafcedita. 

d.  Randia  dumetorum ,  Lamk  ;  syn.  Prosoqueria  dumetorum ,  Roxb. 

e  Whenever  the  word  Phala  (fruit)  occurs  in  medical  literature,  it 
implies  Madana-phala,  i.  e.,  the  frui  ts  of  Randia  dumetorum. 

f.  Jimuta  is  explained  as  a  variety  of  Ghosaka,  Dhamargava  being 
another  variety  of  the  same.  Ghosaka  is  identified  with  Luffa  pentandra 
or  Luffa  acutangula.  The  former,  which  has  a  synonym,  viz.,  Laffa 
cylindrica  (Roem),  is  called  in  Bengali,  Dhundul.  The  latter  is  Jhinga. 

g.  A  kind  of  bitter  gourd.  Called  in  Bengali  Tit-talu. 

k.  Vide  note  / above. 

i.  Holarrhena  antidysenterica,  Wall  ;  syn.  Echites  antidysenterica , 
Roxb. 

j.  Otherwise  called  Koshataki  (a  variety  of  Ghosaka  or  Ghosalata)  Luffa 
amara,  Roxb. 

k.  A  variety  of  Memordica  mixta. 

*  The  sense  is  ‘  asaktam  amaram  vatadih  (saha)  nirharati,1  i.e.,  the 
enemeta  administered  brings  out  the  placenta  along  with  the  wind,  the 
urine,  and  the  stools  in  a  state  of  constipation. 

What  is  said  in  the  second  part  of  the  aphorism  is  that  the  ‘  vahirmukha’ 
excretions,  such  as  wind,  urine,  and  stools,  when  accumulated  within  the 
body,  ‘  amaram  antahsajjanti’’  i.e.,  cause  the  placenta  to  be  attach  ed  ;  in 
other  words,  prevent  it  from  coming  out,— T, 


CHARAKA  BAMH1TA. 


853 


Verily,  while  these  acts  are  being  done  for  the  eduction  of 
the  placenta,  the  following  acts  should  be  done  with  respect 
to  the  child,  as  soon  as  it  has  come  out  of  the  Womb.  They  are, — 
Two  pieces  of  stone  should  be  rubbed  against  each  other 
near  the  ears  of  the  babe. 

The  babe  should  be  washed  in  either  cold  or  warm  water 
whichever  may  be  regarded  agreeable  to  it  (according  to  the 
season). 

By  this,  the  babe’s  life-breaths,  injured  by  the  pain  caused 
in  course  of  its  coming  out  from  the  'womb,  are  restored  to 
vigour. 

The  child  should  then  be  fanned  with  a  winnow  made  of 
reeds. 

Besides  these,  whatever  else  is  needed  for  restoring  the  life- 
breaths  of  the  baby,  injured  by  the  pain  of  its  eduction  out 
of  the  womb,  should  also  be  done.*92 

When  it  is  seen  that  the  child  has  got  back  its  life-breaths 
and  been  restored  to  the  normal  condition  of  a  living  being, 
it  should  be  treated  with  a  bath  and  wash  with  water. 

Some  one  then  should,  with  her  (fore)  finger,  from  which 
the  nail  has  been  properly  pared,  and  which  is  covered  with 
a  stick  of  well-washed  cotton,  begin  to  gently  wipe  the  child’s 
palate,  lips;  throat,  and  tongue. 

Having  first  wiped  the  mouth  (in  this  way),  the  crown  of  the 
child’s  head  should  be  covered  with  a  pad  of  cotton  soaked  in  oil, 


*  ‘  Karmani  kriyamani,’  in  the  progressive  form,  evidently  means 
‘  while  the  acts  (for  the  expulsion  of  the  placenta)  are  being  done.’  Some 
of  the  Bengali  translators  have  misunderstood  the  passage. 

Two  pieces  of  stone  are  directed  to  be  rubbed  against  each  other  to 
produce  a  harsh,  grating  noise  which  quickly  rouses  the  babe  into  life. 

ChakrSpani  explains  that  cold  water  or  warm  water  should  be  used 
according  as  it  may  be  regarded  agreeable  to  the  babe  in  view  of  the 
season.  If  it  is  winter,  warm  water  should  be  used.  If  it  is  summer,  cold 
water  should  be  used.  Some  texts  read  ‘  mukha-pariseka’  for  1  Sukha- 
pariseka  if  the  former  reading  be  preferred,  it  would  mean  that  cold  or 
warm  water  should  be  used  for  washing  the  mouth  of  the  babe.  That  this 
reading  is  plausible  appears  from  the  direction  in  the  next  aphorism  about 
washing  the  babe.  I  think,  however,  that  ‘  Sukha-pariseka’  is  correct.  The 
fact  is,  it  is  the  babe’s  resuscitation  that  is  directed  to  be  brought  about 
Babes,  abandoned  as  dead,  have  been  revived  by  skilful  physicians  by 
resorting  to  the  simple  process  of  dipping  them  successively  in  cold  and  warm 
water.  The  direction  about  washing  the  child,  in  the  next  aphorism,  therefore, 
does  notnecessarily  settle  the  reading.— T 


854  CHABAKA  SAMHITA.  , 

After  this,  using  a.  little  ghee  mixed  with  Saindhava  salt,  the 
child  should  be  made  to  vomit.*33 

We  shall  now  lay  down  instructions  about  the  cutting  of 
the  child’s  placenta. 

Leaving  a  space  of  eight  fingers  from  the  root  of  the  navel, 
and  setting  a  mark  there,  and  reaching  the  place  where  the 
umbilical  cord  is  to  be  cut,  it  should  be  cut  off  between  two 
knots  or  nodes,  with  a  sharp  knife  made  of  gold  or  silver  or 
iron,  with  edge  turned  upwards. 

Without  losing  any  time,  a  string  should  be  tied,  at  any 
point,  round  the  uncut  portion  of  the  cord,  and  it  should  then  be 
loosely  attached  to  the  neck  of  the  child.!94 

If  the  child’s  navel  begins  to  rot,  it  should  be  anointed 
with  oil  boiled  with  the  paste  of  these,  viz.,  Lodhra  (a), 


*  ‘  Udaka-grahana’  is  a  technical  term  ;  literally,  it  means  ‘  taking 
of  water,’  the  sense  being  ‘  washing  of  the  private  parts  ’  It  corresponds  with 
‘  washing  of  hands’  in  English. 

This  bath  is  a  different  process  from  the  dipping  of  the  child  in  cold 
or  warm  water,  adverted  to  in  the  aphorism,  for  restoring  the  life-breaths. 
The  dipping  may  be  dispensed  with,  in  the  case  of  a  babe  which  does  not 
lie  in  a  dormant  state  after  birth.  The  bath  recommended  here  is  obligatory. 

‘  Anguli,’  in  the  singular,  may  mean  any  finger.  It  is,  .however,  the 
forefinger  that  is  intended. 

‘  Suparilikhita’  implies  ‘  well  cut  off.’  The  child,  after  birth,  is  fre¬ 
quently  seen  to  have  its  throat  almost  choked  with  phlegmonous  matter. 
It  is  to  cause  these  to  be  expelled  that  the  mild  emetic  (ghee  mixed  with 
Saindhava  salt)  is  prescribed. — T 

t  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  beginning  from  the  root  of  the  navel, 
measure  the  umbilical  cord.  In  measuring  small  lengths,  the  ordinary 
unit  of  measurement  is  the  breadth  of  a  finger.  When  the  breadth  of 
eight  fingers  has  been  reached,  a  mark  is  to  be  set  at  the  place.  The 
portion  of  the  cord  beyond  the  mark  thus  set  is  called  ‘  CchedanavakSsa,’ 
meaning  the  place  where  it  is  to  be  cut.  When  the  ‘  CchedanavakSsa’ 
has  been  thus  ascertained,  the  cord  is  to  be  cut  at  a  point  between  two 
knots  or  nodes,  as  otherwise  there  may  be  hemorrhage.  After  the 
cord  has  been  cut  off,  a  string  is  to  be  tied  at  any  point  of  the  uncut 
portion  between  the  root  of  the  navel  and  the  mark  at  the  end  of  the 
length  measured  by  the  breadth  of  eight  fingers  This  string  should  then 
be  attached  loosely  to  the  neck  of  the  baby,  for  preventing  the  uncut 
portion  of  the  cord  from  being  bruised  or  otherwise  injured.  1  Urddha- 
dharena’  implies  that  the  knife  should  be  placed  with  its  edge  upwards. 
Chakrapani  reads  ‘  ardhadharena,’  meaning  ‘  with,  the  edge  placed  trans¬ 
versely,  as  in  the  case  of  an  Indian  ‘  Banti.’— T. 

a.  Syviplocos  racemosa,  Roxb. 


CHARAKA  BAM  HIT  A. 


855 


Madhuka  (b),  Priyangu  (c),  Haridra  (d),  and  Daruharidra  (e). 

These  very  drugs  whose  paste  is  directed  to  be  boiled  in 
oil  may  also  be  reduced  to  pulv,  and  such  pulv  may  be  applied 
to  the  rotten  navel. 

Thus  has  been  expounded  fully  the  ordinances  on  the  subject 
of  the  cutting  of  the  umbilical  cord.95 

If  the  umbilical  cord  be  not  properly  cut,  there  may  be 
fear  of  the  following  diseases  of  the  navel  arising,  viz.,  Uttundita 
of  large  proportions  (/),  Pindalika  (g),  Vinamika  ( h),  and 
Vijrimbhika  (Y). 

In  case  these  diseases  appear,  considering  the  gravity  or 
lightness  of  the  case,  the  child  should  be  treated  with  such 
alleviatives  of  wind  and  bile  as  do  not  cause  any  burning 
sensation,  as  also  with  ghee.  The  tumorous  growth  should  be 
rubbed,  or  chafed,  or  drenched  over  with  these  remedies. 

Before  this  act  (the  cutting  of  the  umbilical  cord),  Jata  rites 
of  the  child  should  be  performed. 

At  the  conclusion  of  these  rites,  honey  and  ghee  sanctified 
with  mantras  according  to  the  particular  Veda  of  the  child’s 
parents,  should  be  given  to  the  child. 

After  this,  agreeably  to  these  very  ordinances,  the  right 
breast  (of  the  mother)  should  be  first  presented  (for  suck) 
to  the  child. 

Then  a  vessel  full  of  water,  sancitified  with  proper  mantras 
should  be  placed  at  the  head  of  the  child.*96 


b.  Liquorice. 

c.  Aglaia  Roxburghiana.,  w.a. 

d.  Circuma  tonga,  Roxb. 

e.  Bcrberis  Asiatica,  D.C. ;  syn.  Berberis  aristata,  D.C. 

f.  Gangadhara  explains  that  by  1  Uttundita’  is  meant  a  tumorous  growth, 
of  large  proportions,  having  the  shape  of  a  ball  (Gudaka).  (The  Bengali 
word  1  Gond’  is  evidently  a  corruption  of  ‘  Gudaka’). 

g.  According  to  Gangadhara,  this  means  a  flat,  circular  tumour.  It 
is  not  so  elavated  or  globular  as  the  above. 

h.  A  circular  tumour  with  elevated  edges  and  th\s  central  portion 
depressed. 

i.  A  tumour  that  continually  increases. 

t  ‘  Tatra’  implies  ‘  if  the  diseases  mentioned  make  their  appearance.’ 

1  Avidahi’,  literally, 1  not  burning’,  i.e.,  ‘  not  painful  in  their  application.’ 

‘  Abhyanga’  is  gentle  rubbing.  ‘  Utsadana’  is  chafing ;  it  is  not 
so  gentle  as  the  previous  operation.  ‘  Pariseka’  implies  drenching  or 
sprinkling. 


856 


CEARAKA  8 AMHITA. 


The  protection  of  the  child  should  then  be  provided  for. 

The  physician  should  cause  the  lying-in-room  to  be  encom¬ 
passed  by  branches  of  Adani  ( a ),  Khadira  (<5),  Karkandhu  {c), 
Pilu  (at),  and  Parusha  (e). 

All  around  that  room  mustard  seeds,  linseeds,  and  broken 
grains  of  rice  should  be  scattered. 

Also  the  auspicious  Homo,  with  oblations  of  rice  should  be 
caused  to  be  performed  every  day,  morning  and  evening. 

Before  the  rites  are  performed  in  connection  with  the  naming 
of  the  child,  a  pestle  (iron  or  heavy  wood)  should  be  placed  at 
the  entrance  of  the  lying-in-apartments,  in  an  inclined  posture.* 

Next,  having  made  a  pellet  (with  a  piece  of  cloth)  of  Vacha 
(/,)  Kushtha  (g),  Kshaumaka  (h),  Hingu  (*),  Sarshapa  (j),  Atasi  (k), 


1  Jata-karma’,  literally,  ‘  acts  or  rites  relating  to  birth.’  These  rites 
are  laid  down  in  the  1  Grihya-Sutras.1  The  ‘  Girhya-Sutras  ’  are  regarded 
as  part  of  the  Vedas.  Each  sect  has  its  own  Veda.  For  ‘  Jata’  rites,  vide 
1  Girhya-Sutras’  of  Gobhila,  Prapathaka  2,  Khanda  7,  Sutras  18 — 22.— T. 

a.  A  variety  of  Ghoshaka,  or,  Luff  a  amara ,  Roxb. 

b.  Acacia  Catechu.  Linn.,  syn.  Mimosa  Catechu,  Linn. 

c.  A  variety  of  Vadara  or  Kola.  Zizyffhus  Jujuba ,  Lamk. 

d.  Salvadora  Persica,  Linn.,  syn.  S alvadora  Indica ,  Wight. 

e.  Grewia  Asiatica,  Linn. 

*  ‘  Mangala-homa’  is  Homa  undertaken  for  securing  some  auspicious 
end.  Among  the  ‘  nitya’  or  obligatory  acts  of  a  Brahmana  is  the  Homa. 
It  must  be  performed  because  the  Scriptures  have  said  so.  When,  however, 
the  homa  is  performred  for  securing  any  auspicious  end,  it  is  generally 
called  ‘  mangala-homa.’  The  ‘  mangala-homa’  here  referred  to  is  directed 
to  be  performed  with  oblations  of  rice  (Tandula-vali). 

The  rites  in  connection  with  the  naming  of  a  child  are  numerous.  For 
full  particulars,  vide  Prapathaka  2,  Khanda  8,  Sutras  8—18,  of  the  ‘  Grihya- 
Sutras’  of  Gobhila.  The  choice  of  names  is  determined  by  astrological 
conditions  The  sign  of  the  Zodiac' under  which  one  is  born  determines  the 
letters  of  the  alphabet  which  must  form  the  initial  letters  of  the  names  which 
may  be  selected.  Thus  one  born  under  the  sign  Capricornus,  can  have  such 
names  only  as  begin  with  the  letters  Klia  and  Gha.  Then,  again,  a  child 
must  have  two  names.  The  true  name,  determined  by  the  sign  of  its  birth, 
requires  to  be  kept  secret.  It  is  used  in  religious  rites.  The  second  name  is 
conferred  for  all  other  purposes.  It  is  by  this  name  that  one  is  known  to  the 
world.  There  is  no  rule  for  determining  its  selection. 

f.  Acorus  Calamus ,  Linn. 

g.  Saussurea  auricalata  ;  syn.  Afflotaxis  auriculata,  DC. 

h.  A  kind  of  perfume,  called  in  Bengali,  Choar. 

i.  Assafoetida. 

j.  Mustard  Seeds. 

k.  Linseeds. 


CHARAKA  SAMHITA. 


857 


Laguna  (a)  and  Kanakanika  (b),  and  other  herbs  and  plants 
which  are  said  to  keep  off  Rakshasas,  it  should  be  placed  upon 
the  threshold  of  the  northern  entrance  of  the  lying-in-apartments.*97 

Similar  pellets  should  be  tied  to  the  neck  of  the  mother 
as  also  of  the  child  ;  also  to  the  cauldron,  the  water-jar,  and  the 
bedsteads. 

Pellets  of  the  same  drugs  should  also  be  placed  on  both 
sides  of  the  door  (leading  to  the  room). 

Broken  grains  of  rice,  full  of  water,  fire-wood,  fire,  fire-wood  of 
Tinduka  (a),  and  fire  made  of  that  wood,  are  always  to  be  kept 
within  the  lying-in-apartments.  * 

For  ten  or  twelve  nights  (after  delivery)  women  of  the 
qualities  already  mentioned,  as  also  friends  (of  her  own  child) 
should  be  in  attendance  without  going  to  sleep. 

For  the  days  the  mother  stays  within  the  lying-in-apartments, 
gifts,  auspicious  rites,  and  the  utterance  of  blessings,  hymns, 
(to  the  deities),  songs,  and  instrumental  music,  and  feasting,  and 
drinking,  should  ceaselessly  go  on  within  those  apartments. 

They  should  also  be  always  filled  with  cheerful  people  who 
are  devoted  to  the  mother  (or  the  good  of  the  family  to  which 
she  belongs). 

A  Brahmana,  well  versed  in  the  Atharva-Veda,  should, 
morning  and  evening,  perform  the  ganti -Homa  for  the  good  of 
both  the  child  and  the  mother. 

The  ordinances  relating  to  the  protection  (of  the  mother 
and  the  babe)  have  thus  been  expounded.98 


a.  Garlics. 

b.  Broken  grains  of  rice. 

*  As  regards  the  herbs  and  plants  referred  to  in  the  text  as  capable  of 
keeping  off  Rakshasas  and  evil  spirits,  the  Commentatries  mention  Guggula 
( Balsamodendron  Mukul)  and  other  kinds  of  incense  used  in  worshipping 
the  deities.  The  fact  is,  mustard  seeds,  inspired  with  mantras ,  are  very  often 
used  for  keeping  off  evil  spirts.  With  the  aid  of  mantras  each  seed  becomes 
as  strong  as  a  cannon  ball.— T. 

a.  Dyosfiyros  Embryofitens^  Pers. 

*  ‘  In  dh  an  a’  is  any  kind  of  fire-wood.  ‘  Tinduka- Kashtendhana1  is 
fire-wood  of  Tinduka.  The  mention  of  fire  twice  indicates  that  fires  of  any 
wood,  and  fire  of  Tinduka  wood  should  be  kept.  What  is  intended  is  that 
not  only  fires,  but  fire-wood  in  sufficient  quantity  should  be  kept  ready.— T, 


858 


GHARAKA  SAM  HIT  A. 


When  the  physician  notices  that  the  mother  has  become 
hungry,  he  should,  without  regarding  the  consideration  of 
assimilability,  give  her  as  much  of  ghee  and  oils  and  fat  and 
marrow  as  she  can  drink. 

After  she  has  drunk  some  oil  mixed  with  the  powder  of 
these,  viz.,  Pippali  (a),  Pippali-mula  (< b ),  Chavya  ( c ),  Chitraka  ( d ), 
and  Qringavera  (<?),  her  abdomen  should  be  gently  rubbed  with 
ghee  and  oil,  and  then  it  should  be  bandaged  with  a  large  piece 
of  cloth. 

By  this,  the  wind,  within  her  womb,  will  not  be  vitiated 
in  consequence  of  the  absence  of  space  to  move  about.* 

When  the  oils  taken  have  been  digested,  gruel  of  barley,  in 
which  have  been  boiled  Pippali  (/)  and  the  rest,  well  mixed 
•  with  oils,  should  be  given  to  drink,  morning  and  evening,  in 
a  liquid  state  and  in  proper  measure. 

The  mother  should  be  washed  with  tepid  water  before  she 
is  given  the  oils  or  the  gruel  of  barley. 

Having  observed  this  course  (of  treatment)  for  five  or  seven 
nights,  the  mother  should  then  be  gradually  nourished  (to  health). 

This  is  the  course  of  treatment  for  the  mother  when  she 
is  in  health." 

The  diseases  which  come  upon  the  mother  are  either  difficult 
of  cure  or  incurable,  in  consequence  of  the  following  reasons  : 

The  waste  and  relaxation  of  all  the  constituting  ingredients 
of  the  body  brought  about  by  growth  of  the  fcetus  : 

The  emptiness  of  the  body  brought  about  by  the  pains 
due  to  straining,  the  discharge  of  extraneous  matters  and  blood, 
and  the  drying  up  of  all  humours  : 


a.  Piper  longum ,  Linn.,  syn.  Chavica  Roxburghii,  Miq. 

b.  The  roots  of  the  above. 

c.  Piper  Chaba ,  Hunter  ;  syn.  Chavica  officinarum ,  Miq. 

d.  Plumbago  Zeylanica ,  Linn. 

e.  Dry  ginger. 

*  By  rubbing  ghee  and  oil  on  the  abdomen  and  then  bandaging  it  with 
a  large  piece  of  cloth,  the  wind  is  checked.  ‘  Anavakagatwat’  implies  ‘  from 
absence  of  space.’  The  fact  is,  the  bandage  presses  down  the  vacant  spaces 
between  the  nerve-cells,  and  keeps  the  part  from  exposure  to  chilling 
winds. — T. 

/.  ‘  Pippali  and  the  rest1  implies  the  pulv  made  of  Pippali-rootS, 
Chavya,  Chitraka,  and  dry  ginger. 

For  the  equivalents  of  these,  vide  notes  a  to  e  above. —T, 


[  2  ] 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister,  Matyland,  U.  S.  A. You  have 
undertaken  a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves 
the  approbation  and  encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise 
men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and  taught  on  a  topic  so  important  aB  the 
preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco ,  California.—*  *  * 
As  each  successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is 

apparent .  There  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the' 

Western  mind,  occidedtal  medical  science,  therapeutic.  American  and  Europe¬ 
rn  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  are  entitled  to 
the  greatest  praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my 
editorial  management — will  begin  to  review  books,  etc,  and  one  of  the  first 
to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  0.  Courtman  Esq.,  St.  Louis ,  Ohio  U.  S.  A.  .-—The  work  interests 
me  very  highly,  and'  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of 
one  of  our  medical  societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively 
curiosity  and  expressions  of  interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical 
journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical  monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowell,  Cambridge.. .A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient 
work  will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may 
succeed  in  translating  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when 
finished. 

R.  G-.  Eccless  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brookyn,  New  York. ..The  matter  is  certainly 
of  great  interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis,  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences, 
Philadelphia  :  Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the 
Medical  literature. 


F.  A.  Castle,  Esq  ,... Even  a  superficial  examinatien  of  it  impresses  me  with 
its  importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bring¬ 
ing  it  to  the  attention  of  the  Librarian  ot  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Philadelphia... I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and 
sincerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be 
one  of  the  happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a 
long  notice  of  it  which  I  expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine, 
the  de  mi-official  organ  of  the  greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mittra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  of  Cashmere.. .No  medical  man’s 
library  should  be  without  Cliaraka ;  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed 
unless  he  has  studied  this  great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 


Dr.  Oscar  Oldsberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North- 
Western  University  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian 
Exhibition. ..I  am  already  deeply’  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation. 
I  shall  take  occasion  to  speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S  A. 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble 
undertaking,  I  regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck  Esq,  19  East  38th  Street,  New  York. ..Wish  you  a  succe  ss 
in  your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons-  T.  Gebbard.,  Derselhofber  Traise  Dramstadt...The  difficulties  you 
speak  of  in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German 
proverb  says  what  takes  much  time,  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley  PM.  G.  M-  D.  F-  R-  M.S.  Saint  Louis,  U  S.  A. 
Editor  Meyer  Brothers  Druggist. ..I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  it  in  our 
columns  and  advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it  The  medical  profession 
of  the  entire  English  writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for 
placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal.  The  work  is  certainly  highly  scientific 
and  as  well  as  of  general  interest. 


[  3  ] 


Mons  H.  Le-  Soudor.  Librarie  Etrangere  174.  Boulevaise.  Saint  Germain 
...Reg  to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation 
of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York. ..Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recom¬ 
pense  you  for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of : 
a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark  M.  A.  M.  D.,  PHILADELPHIA  As  1  go  oyer  each 
fascicu  lus  I  always  arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  that if  the  physicians 
of  the  present  day  would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs 
and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  .p.atients  according  to  the  method  of  Charaka, 
there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and  fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the 
world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of  the  work,  for  I  am 
anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C-  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6  Park  street,  Calutta,...My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya...I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two 
noblemen  of  whom  I  spoke;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget 
promise  to  you  about  [about  drawing  their  attention  to]  your  excellent  work. 

Writing  again,  something  after.. .An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note  . 

considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts  to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the 
scriptures  of  your  professidn. 

Faul  Burtholom,  M-  D.  Philadelphia1... I  have  been  exceedingly  struck 
with  the  profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond 
anything  that  I  have  ever  met  before  in  Medical  literature  and  find  their 
parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacons’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D-  Phillips,  Esq.,  C-  S.  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Maimensing\..The 
■translation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a 
layman. 

R.  0.  Dutt,  Esq.  C.  S.  C.  I.  E-  Magistrate  and  Collector".. .Your  .  patriotic 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun . 

You  deserve  the  especial  acknowledgements  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  H.  Skrine,  Esq-,  I.  C.  S.  : — I  have  read  Charaka-Semhita  with  interest. 
It  is  marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form  It  is  wonder¬ 
ful  to  note  the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country 
and  how  completely  they  had  anticipated  discoveries  wnich  we  modern  flatter 
ourselves  are  due  to  the  enlightment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Grierson.  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Gya1... It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall 
be  obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr-  Griffith  Evans,  M  D,  Brynkynall,  Eangor  North  Wales1.. .The  book 
is  exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the 
origin,  growth  and  development  of  medical  scieuce,  also  illustrates  some  ancient 
social  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.E. Your  English  tran¬ 
slation  of  Charaka -Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of 
a  great  work  before  a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable 
■difficulty  of  identifying  a°large  number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit 
text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as  possibly  the  best  that  could  be 
expected  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning  to  find  that  a 
knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every  system 
of  education.  They  could  look  far  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It 
is  a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  yonng. 

The  Hon'ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji.  The  work  is  not  only  of  value 
to  the  physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the 
general  reader  as  well.  Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support. 
I  wish  you  all  success. 


PART  XXVIII. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


(TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH.) 


PUBLISHED  BY 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

DITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  original)  WITH  COMMEN¬ 
TARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 

susruTa-samhita  ;  editor  of  chikitsa-sammilani  (Medical 
journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  the  Hindu' 

SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C„  &C.,  &C, 


CALCUTTA : 

PUBLISHED  AT 

200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


1902. 


is  reserved: ) 


( The  right  oj  translation 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters .) 

Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shal  be  very  glad  to  help  you  in 
any  way  you  may  wish — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says — .  Iam  sur¬ 

prized  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested  in  it. 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhitas.  I  regard  hem  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Libiarian  to  the  India  Office — . Your 

excellent  translation  ...  .  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  Medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West  ...  ,... 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work  . 

Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from  your 
translation. 

Austin  Flint  Esq.,  New  York  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka-Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the  rest 
of  the  work.  It  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
|  be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgh ,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
\  Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight  I 
may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A. — I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like  to 
make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing.  Be  as¬ 
sured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India 
|  and  antique  lore. 

Mons  A.  Birth.,  Paris : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris : — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men  and  the  com¬ 
mentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the  Journal 
des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany  . — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  History  of  their  science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsburyh,  Germany  • — English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medicinal  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M  A.,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal .-—I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination  in  part  IV.  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life 
cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS 

OF 

PART  XXVIII. 

The  contents  of  this  Part  are  extremely  interesting. 

The  subject  is  concluded  of  the  manner  in  which  a  woman  who 
has  just  delivered  should  be  treated,  (pp.  859 — 60). 

Instructions  are  then  laid  down  about,  the  names  that  should 
be  bestowed  upon  the  new-born  child,  (p.  860). 

As  pointed  out  in  the  foot-notes,  those  instructions  appear  to 
have  become  obsolete,  as  few  names  of  even  ancient  times  corres¬ 
pond  with  them. 

Indications  are  then  set  forth  of  longevity  of  new-born  children. 
These  are  most  interesting,  (pp.  861 — 63). 

Then  come  instructions  about  the  examination  of  the  Nurse  to 
be  appointed  for  the  child.  What  should  be  her  character,  what 
should  the  qualities  be  of  her  milk,  what  should  her  food  and  drink 
be,  what  medicines  should  be  given  to  her  for  correcting  the  defects 
of  her  milk,  are  laid  down.  (pp.  863 — 66). 

Then  are  laid  down  the  ordinances  about  the  apartments  in 
which  the  new-born  child'  should  be  housed. ;  the  beds,  coverlets, 
sheets,  &c.,  that  should  be  used  ;  how  these  should  be  cleaned  and 
fumigated  ;  and  what  toys  should  be  given  to  it. 

The  child  should  never  be,  frightened. 

If  ill,  prompt  steps  should  be  taken  for  curing  it.  (pp.  866 — 69). 
The  Division  called  £arira  is  concluded,  (p.  870). 


The  Division,  called  “  Indriyasthanam,”  begins  at  page  871.  In 
this  Division  of  the  work,  the  Rishi  expounds  the  premonitory 
indications  of  dissolution  long  before  the  dissolution  actually  sets 
in.  These  indications  are  all  connected  with  changes  of  condition 
in  respect  of  Complexion,  Voice,  &c.  It  will  be  seen  that  amongst 
the  various  incidents  which  the  physician  is  directed  to  observe  for 
ascertaining  the  measure  of  one’s  life,  mention  is  not  made  of  the 
Pulse,  (jlugruta  also,  like  Charaka,  is  silent  on  the  subject  of  the 
Pulse.  It  is  true,  later  physicians  came  to  regard  the  pulse  as  a 
determining  factor  of  great  importance,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt 


that  the  works  on  the  pulse  are  all  very  modern.  European  physi¬ 
cians  also  have  come  to  regard  the  pulse  as  not  of  much  import¬ 
ance.  The  truth  is,  those  Hindu  physicians  who  set  a  high  value 
on  the  pulse  are  untrue  to  Charaka  and  £ucruta.  It  is  a  mere 
pretence  and  nothing  else  for  a  Kaviraja  to  examine  the  pulse 
repeatedly  and  assure  the  friends  of  the  patient  that  his  pronounce¬ 
ments  about  the  latter’s  condition  are  all  based  upon  his  observa¬ 
tion  of  the  pulse. 

What  particulars  should  be  examined  by  the  physician  in  order 
to  ascertain  the  remnant '  of  one’s  period  of  life,  are  set  forth. 
These  are  Complexion,  Voice,  Smell,  Taste,  Touch,  Eyes,  Ears,  &c. 
(pp.  871—72). 

The  six  aspects  under  which  the  normal  condition  of  a  person’s 
constitution  should  be  considered  are  then  set  forth.  These  are 
the  class  to  which  he  belongs,  his  family,  his  country,  the  age 
(Krita,  Treta,  &c.)  to  which  he  belongs,  the  years  he  counts,  and 
the  nature  of  his  soul. 

The  first  topic,  viz.,  Complexion,  is  then  taken  up.  What  com¬ 
plexions  are  normal  and  what  abnormal  are  set  forth. 

The  complexions  that  indicate  death  or  its  near  approach  are 
then  noticed,  (pp.  .875 — 76). 

Then  is  taken  up  the  topic  of  Voice. 

What  voice  is  normal,  what  abnormal,  and  the  kinds  of  voice 
that  indicate  the  nearness  of  death,  are  explained,  (pp.  876 — 77). 

Some  indications  are  then  set  forth  about  both  Complexion  and 
Voice,  which  indicate  the  approach  of  death,  (pp.  877 — 78). 

Lesson  II.,  called  ‘  Pushpitam,’  commences  here.  The  heading 
is  .poetical.  It  means  a  person  who  has  blossomed  ;  that  is,  one 
whose  death  is  near. 

The  various  indications,  called  1  Arishtas,’  about  Smell  and 
Taste,  of  the  approach  of  death,  are  set  forth,  (pp.  878 — 81). 

Then  comes  Lesson  III.  In  it  are  set  forth  the  indications, 
bearing  upon  Touch,  of  the  approach  of  death,  (pp.  881 — 84). 

Then  comes  Lesson  IV.  It  treats  of  the  indications,  connected 
with  all  the  senses,  of  the  approach  of  death,  (pp.  884 — 88). 

Here  begins  Lesson  V.  It  lays  down  certain  premonitory 
symptoms  of  death.  (888—90). 


NOTICE. 


Our  Subscribers  will,  no  doubt,  be  glad  to  learn 
that  we  have,  at  last,  established  a  Printing  Press 
of  our  own.  We  intend  to  bring  out  a  Part  every 
month.  Hitherto  we  could  not  do  it  as  we  were 
obliged  to  depend  upon  others.  We  have  laid  out 
a  good  sum  on  our  Printing  Press.  Part  XXVIII. , 
which  we  now  issue,  has  been  printed  in  our  Press. 
That  the  work  has  been  executed  in  a  superior  style 
will  at  once  be  manifest.  To  satisfy  our  Subscribers 
has  all  along  been  our  chief  aim.  Now  that  we  have 
got  a  Press  of  our  own,  subscribers  may  rely  upon 
our  word  that  the  work  will  be  completed  as  quickly 
as  possible. 


IMPORTANT. 

We  have  dispensed  with  the  services  of  Agents 
in  the  matter  of  collecting  subscriptions.  Sub¬ 
scribers  are  requested  not  to  pay  the  arrears  of  their 
subscriptions  to  any  one  who  visits  them.  They 
should  remit  their  dues  directly  to  the  head-office  at 
200  Cornwallis  Street,  Calcutta,  by  Postal  Money 
Orders  or  in  Registered  Covers  addressed  to  the 
undersigned.  Our  last  Agents  were  Babu  Narendra 
Nath  Roy,  Babu  Kalidas  Sircar,  and  Babu  Hem 


Chandra  Dutt,  L.  M.  S.  The  first  was  ‘doing’  Behar, 
the  Central  Provinces,  and  Bombay  City.  The  second 
was  ‘doing’  East  Bengal  and  Assam.  The  third  was 
travelling  in  Nuddea  and  the  contiguous  Districts. 
Our  relations  with  all  the  three  have  been  suspend¬ 
ed.  If  we  appoint  Agents  in  future,  we  shall  publish 
their  names  duly. 

18-6-1902.  |  AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA. 


INSTITUTION  FOR  THE 
DIFFUSION  OF  AYURVEDIC  KNOWLEDGE. 

An  Association  of  Kavirajes  has  been  established  in  Calcutta 
under  the  name  of  “  Ayurvedic  Institute.”  The  immediate 
object  is  a  diffusion  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Hindu  Medical  Scrip¬ 
tures  by  means  of  popular  lectures.  The  proceedings  of  the  first 
meeting  are  circulated  herewith.  The  ultimate  object  of  the  Insti¬ 
tute  is  the  establishment  of  an  Ayurvedic  College,  with  an  Hospital 
attached  to  it  where  patients  may  be  treated  according  to  the 
Ayurvedic  method  and  the  results  published  in  a  journal.  A  garden 
for  the  cultivation  of  the  plants,  &c.,  which  furnish  the  ingredients 
of  Ayurvedic  medicines,  is  also  in  contemplation. 

We  respectfully  invite  expressions  of  opinion  from  the  thinking 
portion  of  the  Indian  community.  We  shall,  indeed,  be  greatly 
obliged  if  men  of  culture  kindly  communicate  their  views  to  us  on 
this  all-important  subject. 

Calcutta,  I 

200  Cornwallis  Street, \  AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA. 
18-6-1902.  J 


AYURVEDIC  INSTITUTE. 

Under  the  above  name  an  Association  has  been  organised 
having  for  its  object  the  diffusion,  by  popular  lectures,  of  a  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  Ayurveda  or  the  medical  literature  of  ancient  India. 
A  meeting  was  convened  under  the  auspices  of  the  Institute 
at  5-30  P.  M.  of  Friday,  the  16th  of  May,  at  No.  200  Cornwallis 
street,  Calcutta.  Among  those  present  were  Maharajah  Bahadur 
Sir  Jotindra  Mohan  Tagore,  K.  c,  S.  L,  Rai  Yatindra  Nath  Chow- 
dhury,  M,  A.,  B.  L.,  Babu  Rama  Nath  Ghose,  Babu  Narendra  Nath 
Sen,  Babu  Nilamvar  Mukerjee,  M.  A.,  Mr.  R.  N,  Mukerjee  (of  Messrs. 
Martin  &  Co.),  Babu  Bhola  Nath  Pal,  M.  A.,  Pandit  Bireswar  Pande, 
Kaviraj  Dwarika  Nath  Sen,  Kaviraj  Bijaya  Ratna  Sen,  Kaviraj 
Baranasi  Gupta,  Kaviraj  Jogendra  Nath  Sen,  M.  A.,  Kaviraj 
Nogendra  Nath  Sen,  Kaviraj  Debendra  Nath  Sen,  Kaviraj  Hari 
Nath  Vidyaratna,  Kaviraj  Tara  Prasanna  Sen  Gupta,  Babu  Gooru 
•Das  Chatterjee,  Babu  Kisori  Mohan  Ganguli,  Pandit  Tejas  Chan¬ 
dra  Vidyananda,  Dr.  Kherod  Chandra  Datta,  M.  B.,  Babu  Sarada 
Prasad  Chatterjee,  Babu  Amrita  Lai  Banerjee,  Kaviraj  Shyam 
Kishore  Sen,  Gobinda  Chandra  Ghosh,  pleader,  High  Court  and 
others  of  note. 

Maharaja  Bahadur  Sir  Narendra  Krishna  Deb,  K,  C.  I.  E,  attend¬ 
ed  the  meeting  but  the  state  of  his  health  and  prior  arrangements 
prevented  him  from  remaining  in  it.  In  accordance  with  the 
desire  of  Maharaja  Sir  Jatindra  Mohan  Tagore,  K.  C.  S.  I.,  Dr. 
Kherod  Chandra  Datta,  M.  B.  moved  that  Kaviraj  Dwaraka  Nath 
Sen  take  the  chair.  The  motion  was  carried  by  acclamation.  The 
inaugural  address  was  delivered,  extempore ,  by  Kaviraj  Avinash 
Chandra  Kaviratna,  the  editor  and  publisher  of  Charaka,  Susruta, 
Chikitsa-sammilani  and  other  works.  The  speaker  dwelt  upon  the 
importance  of  Charaka  as  a  work  on  morbid  pathology,  theraputics, 
and  hygeine  with  fervid  eloquence  and  emotion.  Charaka  has  now 
begun  to  be  translated  into  English.  Seeing  only  a  few  fasciculi, 
Oriental  Scholars  of  world-wide  celebrity,  and  some  of  the  most 
.eminent  medical  men  of  both  Europe  and  America,  have  expressed 
a  unstinted  admiration  of  the  wisdom  of  the  Rishis  of  ancient  India. 
Some  of  those  grand  truths  whose  discovery  has  shed  a  brilliancy 
on  the  century  which  has  just  passed  away  and  which  are  regarded 
as  veritable  gems  in  the  crown  of  modern  science,  were,  it  seems, 
well  known  to  the  Rishis.  The  testimony  offered  by  credible 


(  2  ) 


witnesses  would  bear  repetition.  Professor  Max  Muller  says, — ■“  I 
am  surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has 
not  attracted  more  attention.  *  *  *  Our  Regius 

Professor  of  Medicine,’  Sir  Henry  Edward,  is  much  interested 
in  it.”  Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  late  Librarian  of  the  India  Office, 
said, — “  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not 
fail  to  make  ancient  Hindu  Medicine  better  understood  and 
appreciated  in  the  West.”  Dr.  Austin  Flint  of  New  York,  U.  S.  A., 
said, — “  It  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  Medical  profes¬ 
sion  which  will  be  under  great  obligations  to  you.”  Mons.  A.  Barth, 
the  celebrated  scholar  of  Paris,  says,  “  Your  efforts  to  place  within 
reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient  literature  a  work  of  so  interesting 
a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  Scholars  and  to  men  of  medicine,  are 
very  praiseworthy.”  Mons.  Berthelemy  St.  Hilaire,  the  translator 
of  Aristotle  and  editor  of  the  Journal  des  Savants,  says, — “  The 
Work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men.”  The 
late  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal,  Sir  Alfred  Croft,  says, 
— “  I  have  been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  exa¬ 
mination  in  Part  IV.  of  all  the  things  which  a  man  shall  not  do.” 
Professor  James  W.  Reese,  of  Westminster,  Maryland, says, — “You 
have  undertaken  a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems 
to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and  encouragement  of  all  who  care 
to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and  taught  on  a 
topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  the  cure  of 
disease.”  Dr.  A.  Mitter  of  Cashmere,  says, — “  a  work  of  practical 
and  philosophical  medicine.  No  medical  man’s  education  can  be 
complete  unless  he  studies  it.”  Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  St.  Louis, 
Editor  of  an  important  Medical  Journal,  says, — “  The  work  is  cer¬ 
tainly  highly  scientific  and  as  well  of  general  interest.”  Dr  Paul 
Burtholm,  M.D.,  of  Philadelphia,  says, — “  I  have  been  exceedingly 
struck  with  the  profound  meaning  of  many  passages  which,  indeed, 
go  beyond  anything  that  I  have  ever  met  before  in  medical  litera¬ 
ture  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord^Bacon’s  reflections.”  George 
H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia,  says, — “  As  I  go  over  each 
fasciculus  I  always  arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  :  If  the 
physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopia 
all  the  modern  drugs  and  chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  on  the 
undertakers,  and  fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.”  Mr.  F.  H. 
Skrine,  of  the  Indian  Civil  Service,  says,— “  I  have  read  Charaka 
with  interest.  •  It  .is  marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in 


(  3  ) 


spirit  and  form.'  It  is  wonderful  to  note  the  comparatively  acb 
vanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  complete-, 
ly  they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  our¬ 
selves  are  due  to  the  enlightenment  of  this  age.”  The  Indian 
Medical  Review  of  November,  1893,  says, — “  The  book  is  of  pro¬ 
found  interest,  and  will  be  read  by  modern  physicians  with  some 
profit.”  The  Satellite ,  of  -  New  York,  observes, — “  It  is  a  very  valu 
able  work.”  Science ,  an  influential  Journal  of  U.  S.  A.,  says, — "  The 
physician  . of  .our  day  will  find  in  Charaka  and  other  works  of  an¬ 
cient  India  many  views  of  health,  disease,  and  remedies  which  he 
fondly  imagined  were  jewels  in  the  crown  of  Modern  Science.” 
Again,  in  a  subsequent  number, — “This  great  monument  of  ancient 
Hindu  wisdom  and  learning.”  “The  student  of  Hindu  literature 
must  be  prepared  for  glimpses  and  magnificient  views  of  learning 
and  wisdom  which  will  astonish  and  delight  him  at  every  turn.” 
Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist ,  of  St.  Louis,  U.  S.  A.,  a  Journal  of  repu¬ 
tation,  says, — “We  are  surprised  to  find  that  much  we  now  consider 
new  was  well  known  to  the  physicians  who  administered  to  the 
ancient  citizens  of  India.” 

Such,  the  speaker  said,  is  the  work  of  Charaka,  the  Xarach  of 
the  Arabians,  who  translated  him  in,  as  is  believed,  the  seventh 
century  after  Christ.  It  is  a  matter  of  great  regret  that  few  edu¬ 
cated  persons  in  India  know  anything  of  Charaka’s  great  work. 
Most  people  think  that  it  teems  with  technicalities  about  disease 
and  medicaments,  and  that,  therefore,  it  should  be  studied  by  those 
only  whose  profession  is  the  study  and  cure  of  disease.  The  truth 
is,  there  is  much  in  Charaka  that  is  addressed  to  laymen  as  well. 
No  scheme  of  liberal  education  in  India  can  be  complete  that  does 
not  embrace  a  study  of  at  least  those  portions  of  Charaka  which 
bear  only  on  the  general  principles  of  hygiene  and  on  those  truths 
about  disease  and  its  causes  which  are  incapable  of  being  modified 
by  time.  So  simple  are  the  rules  of  conduct  laid  down  by  Charaka, 
and  withal,  so  practicable,  that  there  is  no  difficulty  in  following 
them.  The  speaker  said  that  anybody  who  lived  according  to  those 
rules  might  expect  to  live  a  hundred  years  without  ever  catching 
any  disease.  Such  being  the  case,  it  is  desirabe  to  take  up  the 
study  of  Charaka  and  Susruta  and  similar  other  works.  An  asso¬ 
ciation  has  been  formed,  called  the  “  Ayurvedic  Institute”  with  the 
object  of  promoting  that  study.  Although  the  establishment  of  a 
large  college  for  the  teaching  of  Charaka,  Susruta  and  other  works 
and  of  a  hospital  where  patients  might  be  treated  according  to 


(  4  ) 


Charaka’s  method,  and  the  planting  of  a  large  tract  of  land  with 
such  herbs  and  trees  as  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  medicines 
mentioned  by  Charaka  are  indispensably  necessary  and  mainly  in 
view,  still  without  going  the  length  of  doing  so  much  at  the  outset 
we  shall  at  present  rest  content  with  a  series  of  popular  lectures  on 
particular  chapters  of  Charaka,  Susruta  &c.  There  are  many  Kavi- 
rajes  in  Calcutta  who  are  perfectly  competent,  by  education  and 
experience,  to  do  this.  The  Ayurvedic  Institute  offered  an  excel¬ 
lent  organisation  for  bringing  together  such  Kavirajes.  It  offered 
a  good  platform  from  which  to  address  the  lay  public. 

The  speaker  adverted  with  regret  to  another  topic.  The  British 
Government  has  done  so  little  for  the  ancient  learning  of  India, 
and  is  really  so  little  acquainted  with  its  ’  ancient  medical  system, 
that  although  millions  of  people  are  being  cured  by  that  system  of 
treatment,  still  the  Indo-Sanskrit  medical  system  is  not  recognised 
as  a  science.  But  the  real  truth  will  best  appear  from  the  opinions, 
already  quoted,  of  competent  judges,  Those  opinions,  it  may  be 
confidently  asserted,  are  not  dictated  by  the  desire  of  paying  com¬ 
pliments  to  a  brother  physician  who  is  engaged  in  a  laudable 
undertaking.  On  the  other  hand,  they  are  characterised  by  plain 
sincerity. 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  address,  Babu  Kisori  Mohan  Ganguli 
addressed  the  meeting.  He  said  that,  there  are  passages  in  Charaka 
whose  poetical  excellence  would  challenge  admiration.  He  could 
quote  a  few  lines  from  Charaka  which  really  represented  the  quin¬ 
tessence  of  the  entire  literature  of  love  in  the  line  of  poetry  or 
novels  that  he  had  read.  There  is,  again,  a  chapter  on  the  im¬ 
portance  of  progeny  or  offspring  the  like  of  which  it  is  difficult  to 
instance  in  any  literature.  Emerson  has  a  fine  passage  on  what 
he  does  not  hesitate  to  say,  the  omniscience  of  the  ancients.  Their 
writings  teem  with  illustrations  drawn  from  every  branch  of  know¬ 
ledge,  and  every  department  of  human  action. 

In  truth,  the  Rishis  were  inspired  men.  They  had  “yoga” 
power,  otherwise  called  “genius”  which  sees  by  intuition  or  the  inner 
light.  There  are  many  truths  in  Charaka  which  we  moderns  fondly 
■  imagine  to  be  the  discoveries  of  our  age.  The  “Ayurvedic  Institute”, 
by  working  on  the  lines  laid  down,  will,  it  is  hoped,  achieve  impor¬ 
tant  work. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MH I TA. 


859 


Hence  she  should  be  treated  according  to  the  ordinances  laid 
down  above. 

She  should,  in  especial,  be  treated  in  accordance  with  the  ordi¬ 
nances  laid  down  in  respect  of  food  and  drink  and  of  rubbing  and 
chafing  and  washing  and  bathing  with  the  paste,  boiled  in  oil  or  dis¬ 
solved  in  water  (or  used  otherwise),  of  the  drugs  that  fall  within  the 
classes  called  Bhautika,  Jivaniya,  Bringhaniya,  and  Vatahara.* * * § 

It  should  be  remembered  that  women,  after  delivery,  become 
empty-bodied  in  a  great  measure.fi°o 

On  the  day  after  the  expiration  of  the  tenth  night,  the  mother 
with  the  child,  should  bathe  in  water  mixed  with  those  drugs  which 
fall  under  the  class  called  ‘sarvagandha’  (all  the  scents),  and  into 
which  has  been  thrown  some  mustard  seeds  of  the  white  variety 
and  some  wood  of  Symplocos  racemosa. 

She  should  then  wear  a  light  and  untorn  piece  of  cloth,  and  a 
few  clean,  agreeable,  light,  and  beautiful  ornaments. 

She  should  then  touch  the  (usual)  auspicious  articles. 

Next  she  should  worship  those  deities  that  are  proper  to  be 
worshipped  at  such  a  time.j 

After  this  she  should  cause  some  Brahmanas  who  have  coronal 
locks,  who  are  clad  in  white  garments,  and  who  are  not  defective  of 
any  limb,  to  utter  benedictions  upon  her.§ 


*  For  an  explanation  of  these  terms,  vide  note  to  aphorism  57  of  this  Lesson,  ante.  As 
regards  Bhautika,  it  should  be  here  taken  as  standing  for  Bhutika  (Ptychotis  Ajowan, 
syn.  Legusticum  Ajowan)  and  the  other  articles  included  in  the  group  called  after  it. — T. 

t  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  diseases  to  which  women  become  subject  after  delivery 
are  either  those  which  are  difficult  of  cure  or  those  which  are  incurable  ;  in  other  words, 
such  diseases  seldom  come  to  them  as  are  easy  of  cure. 

The  reason  why  the  diseases  of  women  after  delivery  become  difficult  is  that  the  growth 
or  increase  of  the  fcetus  produces  the  inevitable  result  of  attenuating  many  ingredients  of 
the  body.  (Increase  of  one  ingredient  is  followed  by  the  decrease  of  others).  When, 
again,  the  fcetus,  or,  rather,  the  child,  comes  out  of  the  womb,  various  kinds  of  kletha, 
and  much  blood  also,  come  out.  The  woman  becomes  empty-bodied.  Her  vital  forces 
become  weakened.  Hence  any  disease  that  arises  then  becomes  either  difficult  of 
cure  or  incurable. — T 

t  Certain  deities  are  regarded  as  protectors  of  new-born  babes  and  of  the  lying-in-ap¬ 
artments.  They  are  Shasthi,  Ganeja,  Kartikeya,  &c. — T. 

§  Brahmanas  are  directed  to  keep  coronal  locks.  To  this  day,  all  orthodox  Brahmanas 
observe  the  injunction. — T. 


109 


86o 


CHA  RA  KA  -  SA  MHITA . 


She  should  then  cover  the  child  with  an  untorn  and  clean  piece 
of  cloth. 

After  this,  the  child  should  be  laid  down  with  head  towards 
either  the  east  or  the  north.  The  father  of  the  child  should  then 
appear,  and  saying  that  the  new-born  one  is  bowing  unto  the  deities 
and  the  Brahmanas,  he  should  cause  the  child  to  be  christened  with 
two  names. 

One  of  these  names  should  be  in  accordance  with  the  constel¬ 
lation  under  which  the  child  is  born,  the  other  name  may  be  in 
accordance  with  choice  (of  parents  and  relatives).  Amongst  these, 
the  name  depending  on  choice  should  have  one  of  the  ‘  Ghosha’ 
letters  at  the  beginning,  and  one  of  the  ‘  Antastha’  letters,  or  one 
of  those  letters  which  are  called  ‘  Ushma,’  at  the  end.* 

It  should,  again,  be  an  old  one,  not  agreeing  with  that  of  any 
ancestor  up  to  the  third  degree,  not  new-fangled  (but  conformable 
to  what  is  established  or  usual.) 


*  The  reading  that  occurs  in  many  of  the  printed  texts,  is  ‘  Ghoshavadadyantasthantam’ 
(compounded  of  Ghoshavat-adi-antastha-antam).  The  meaning  is  “having  ‘  Ghoshavat’  at 
the  beginning  and  ‘  antastha’  at  the  end.’  The  ‘Ghosha’  letters,  according  to  Chakrapani, 
are  the  fourth  letters  of  the  five  ‘Vargas’  or  groups,  i.  e.,  gh,  jh,  dh,  dh,  and  bh.  This  is 
erroneous,  for  according  to  ‘Siddhantakaumudi’  (based  on  Panini),  the  three  last  letters 
of  every  ‘Varga’  are  called  ‘Ghosha’  letters,  the  rest  of  the  letters  of  each  ‘varga’  being 
‘aghosha.’  The  ‘antastha’  letters  are  y,  r,  1,  w.  The  ‘ushma’  letters  are  s,  sh,  5,  and  h. 

Gangadhara  adopts  the  reading  given  above.  In  the  comment  upon  it,  he  excludes  the 
word  ‘antastha’  and,  therefore,  interprets  the  compound  as  meaning  ‘having  ghosha  letters 
in  both  the  beginning  and  the  end.’  The  Bengali  translators  blindly  follow  Gangadhara. 

Regarding  the  correctness  of  the  reading,  there  is  great  doubt. 

In  the  ‘Griya  Sutras’  of  Gobhila,  the  compound  occurs  in  another  form,  viz. ,  ‘Ghosha- 
vadadyantarantastham  &c.’  ( Vide  Prapathaka  2,  Khanda  8,  Sutras  9 — 18).  The  meaning 
is  ‘having  Ghosha  letters  at  the  beginning,  and  antastha  letters  in  the  middle.’  According 
to  Gobhila,  the  letters  at  the  end  should  be  either  a  long  vowel,  or  the  aspirate,  or  the 
nasal  dot. 

It  should  be  observed  that  whether  Charaka’s  reading  or  Gobhila’s  be  accepted,  few 
names  of  even  undoubtedly  ancient  origin  correspond  with  the  rule  set  forth.  Take  the 
names  of  the  seven  Rishis,  viz.,  Marichi,  Atri,  Angiras,  &c.,  or  those  of  the  compilers 
of  Smritis ,  viz.,  Manu,  &c..  They  do  not  fulfil  the  conditions  laid  down. 

Indian  Nomenology  is  a  highly  interesting  subject.  Changes  have  been  introduced 
from  time  to  time  in  the  formation  of  names.  The  names  of  Vedic  times  can  easily  be 
distinguished  from  those  of  later  times.  In  Bengal,  under  the  influence  of  one  of  the 
most  successful  novelists  of  the  generation  that  is  passing  away,  many  new-fangled  names 
have  been  introduced.  They  are  as  yet  limited  to  certain  wealthy  families. — T. 


■  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


86 1 

As  regards  the  name  determined  by  the  constellation  (of  birth), 
it  should  consist  of  two  or  of  four  letters  taken  from  the  name  of 
the  presiding  deity  of  the  constellation. 

After  the  ceremony  of  naming  is  over,  the  physician  should 
approach  the  child  for  examining  him  in  order  to  ascertain  the 
measure  of  its  period  of  life. 

In  this  connection,  these  are  the  indications  of  children  having 
long  periods  of  life. 

They  are,  (as  follow)  : 

Hairs  distinct  from  one  another,  soft,  sparse,  oily,  with  firm 
roots,  and  dark  in  colour,  are  regarded  favourable  ;  skin  tight  (or 
compact)  and  thick  ; 

A  head  that  is  without  defect,  that  is  well-formed,  slightly 
larger  than  usual  yet  not  disproportionate  to  the  body,  and  resem¬ 
bling  an  (open)  umbrella, — is  deemed  favourable  ; 

A  forehead  that  is  large,  compact,  level,  well-knit  with  the 
temporal  bones  equipt  with  three  vertical  lines  (in  the  middle),  well- 
developed,  furnished  with  horizontal  lines,  and  resembling  the 
half-moon  ;* 

Ears  that  are  thick,  that  have  their  pithas  large  and  level,  that 
are  equal  (in  size),  that  extend  downwards,  that  bend  backwards,, 
and  that  have  well-knit  putas  and  large  holes  ; 

Eye-brows  slightly  longish,  having  a  small  interval  between- 
(that  is,  not  joined  together),  equal  (in  length),  thick,  and  broad 

Eyes  that  are  equal  (in  size),  with  gaze  directly  falling  on  the 
object  to  which  it  is  turned,  (in  other  words,  not  purblind),  with 
their  white  and  dark  portions  clearly  defined,  endued  with  strength 
and  brilliancy,  and  possessed  of  well-formed  lids  and  lashes  and 
outer  corners  ; 

Nose  straight,  with  nostrils  wide  enough  for  large  pufifs  of  breath 
with  a  spine  that  is  long,  and  with  the  tip  slightly  curved  ; 


*  Gangadhara  reads  ‘arddhavyanjanasampannam’  which  he  explains  as  equivalent  to 
semicircular.  The  correct  reading  is  given  by  Chakrapani.  It  is  ‘urddhavyanjam,’  meaning 
‘possessed  of  three  vertical  lines.’  In  many  foreheads  only  two  such  lines  are  seen,  rising 
upwards  from  the  point  where  the  brows  meet.— T. 


862 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA . 


Mouth  that  is  large,  straight,  (and  well-placed  teeth) 

Tongue  that  is  endued  with  both  length  and  breadth,  that  is 
smooth,  thin,  no  way  deformed,  and  possessed  of  a  pink  (reddish) 
colour  ; 

Palate  that  is  smooth,  that  is  endued  with  development  (in 
other  words,  that  is  proportionately  concave),  that  is  possessed  of 
heat,  and  that  is  red  in  colour  ; 

Voice  that  is  loud,  strong,  not  rough,  and  resounding,  that  seems 
to  rise  from  the  depths  of  the  body,  and  that  is  deep  ; 

Lips  that  are  neither  thick,  nor  thin  ;  that  are  endued  with 
proper  breadth,  that  cover  the  mouth  properly,  and  that  are  red  in 
colour ; 

Cheek-bones  large  ; 

Neck  not  long ; 

Chest  that  is  broad  and  well-developed  ; 

Shoulder-joint  and  back-bone  that  are  well-covered  with  flesh  ; 

Breasts  that  are  separated  from  each  other  by  a  wide  space  ; 

Flanks  that  are  symmetrical  with  the  shoulders,  and  compact ; 

Arms  that  are  well-rounded,  developed,  and  long  ; 

Thighs  that  are  of  the  same  kind  ; 

Fingers  that  are  also  of  the  same  kind  ; 

Hands  and  feet  that  are  large  and  well-developed  ; 

Nails  that  are  strong,  curved,  glossy,  coppery,  elevated,  and  con¬ 
vex  like  a  tortoise  shell ; 

Navel  that  has  lines  circling  from  left  to  right,  and  edges  ele¬ 
vated  with  the  centre  sunk  ; 

Waist  that  is  thrice  the  distance  between  the  navel  and  the 
chest,  that  is  even,  and  that  is  not  endued  with  flesh  ; 

Buttocks  that  are  well-rounded,  compact,  fleshy,  neither  very 
elevated,  nor  very  depressed  ; 

Thighs  that  are  gradually  tapering  and  well-developed  ; 

Calves  that  are  neither  fleshy  nor  void  of  flesh,  that  end  in 
ankles  like  those  of  the  deer,  that  have  nerves  and  bones  and  joints 
well-covered  ; 


*  It  should  be  noticed  that  in-  examining  a  child  immediately  after  the  ceremony  of 
naming  is  over,  the  physician  cannot  possibly  see  any  teeth.  Probably,  the  well-placed 
teeth  are  mentioned  as  a  sign  to  be  looked  for  when  the  child  has  got  them.  T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


863 


Heels  that  are  neither  very  fleshy  nor  void  of  flesh  ; 

Feet  that  are  of  the  kind  already  indicated,  and  that  are  con¬ 
vex  like  a  tortoise  shell ; 

Wind,  urine,  stools,  and  anus,  as  also  sleep,  waking  hours, 
motions,  smiles,  cries,  and  sucking  (of  the  mother’s  breast),  that  are 
all  conformable  to  nature  ; 

All  else,  unmentioned  here,  that  are  not  unnatural ; 

These  are  favourable  symptoms. 

The  reverse  of  these  are  unfavourable. 

The  indications  of  longevity  are  thus  set  forth.*102 

After  this  we  shall  lay  down  instructions  for  the  examination 
of  nurses. 

Then  the  physician  should  say, — Fetch  a  nurse  that  should  be 
of  the  same  caste  (with  the  mother),  possessed  of  youth,  humble 
in  disposition,  having  no  disease,  without  any  defect  of  limb, 
unaddicted  to  the  vices  known  as  ‘Vyasanas,’j-  good-looking,  not 
disposed  to  speak  ill  of  others,  born  in  the  same  country,  not  mean 
(in  disposition),  not  mean  in  actions,  well-born,  fond  of  children,  pos¬ 
sessing  healthy  and  living  children  of  her  own,  mother  of  male 
children,  having  a  copious  measure  of  milk,  never  heedless,  undis¬ 
posed  to  lie  down  on  and  sleep  in  improper  place  and  time,  never 
sleeping  in  unclean  places,  not  associating  with  men  and  women  of 
classes  below  her  own,  dexterous  in  serving,  pure  (in  mind  and 
body),  averse  to  everything  impure,  and  endued  with  wealth  of 
breasts' and  milk  (well-developed  breasts  and  copious  milk).i°3 


*  I  am  not  sure  that  I  have  rendered  this  long  passage  correctly.  The  Commentators- 
(both  Chakrapani  and  Gangadhara)  have  not  explained  many  of  the  doubtful  words.  Some 
portions  of  the  body  seem  to  have  been  repeated.  ‘Sakthi’  and  ‘Uru’  are  generally  under¬ 
stood  to  imply  the  same  part,  viz.,  the  thigh.  Yet  the  former  occurs  after  ‘arms,’  and  the 
latter  much  below,  after  ‘buttocks.’  Tne  measure  of  the  ‘Kati’  (by  which  the  waist  is 
understood)  has  been  stated  in  a  very  round-about  way.  Compare  the  whole  of  this 
passage  with  the  measurements  given  in  ‘Vimana-sthana,’  ante. — T. 

t  Certain  vices  are  known  by  the  name  of  ‘Vyasanas.’  They  are  generally  classed 
under  two  heads,  viz. ,  Kamaja,  i.  e.,  born  of  desire,  and  ‘Kopaja’,  i.  e.,  born  of  anger. 
The  first  includes  ten  ;  these  are  hunting,  gambling,  sleep  during  day,  speaking  ill  of 
others,  addiction  to  women,  inebriety,  addiction  to  dancing,  singing,  and  instrumental 
music,  and  purposeless  sauntering.  The  second  includes  eight ;  these  are  back-biting, 
rashness,  animosity,  jealousy,  malice,  imputing  evil  motives,  wordy  disputes,  and  affray.  T. 


864 


CHAR  AKA  -  SAM  HIT  A. 


In  this  connection  it  should  be  stated  that  the  following  indica¬ 
tions  are  regarded  as  constituting  wealth  of  breasts  : 

They  should  be  neither  too  high  nor  too  long  ;  neither  too  lean, 
neither  too  plump  : 

They  should  have  proportionate  teats,  and  be  easy  of  suck. 

Even  this  is  what  is  called  wealth  of  breasts.  i°4 

As  regards  wealth  of  milk,  the  following  are  the  indications  : 
colour,  smell,  taste,  and  touch  conformable  to  nature  ;  and  dissolv¬ 
ing  completely  in  water  when  poured  afresh  into  a  vessel  of  water. 

Such  milk,  in  consequence  of  being  natural,  conduces  to  nour¬ 
ishment  and  health. 

Even  this  constitutes  wealth  of  milk. 

When  otherwise,  it  should  be  known  as  diseased.  I05 

The  following  are  the  varieties  of  milk  : 

It  may  be  of  darkish  or  red  colour  ;  astringent  in  taste  ;  not 
slimy;  of  no  marked  scent ;  dry  ;  thin;  frothy;  light;  agreeable; 
inducing  leanness  ;  and  productive  of  diseases  brought  about  by 
(vitiated)  wind. 

Milk  of  this  kind  should  be  known  as  affected  by  wind.i°6 

It  may  be  dark,  or  blue,  or  yellow,  or  coppery  in  colour  ;  bitter, 
or  pungent,  or  sour,  in  taste  ; 

Endued  with  the  smell  of  a  corpse  or  of  blood  ;  having  too  much 
heat ; 

Productive  of  diseases  brought  about  by  (vitiated)  bile. 

Milk  of  this  kind  should  be  known  as  affected  by  bile.I07 

It  may  be  very  white,  endued  with  exceeding  sweetness,  or  with 
a  slightly  saline  taste,  possessed  of  the  smell  of  Ghee  or  oil  or  fat 
or  marrow,  slimy,  fibrous,  heavier  than  water  and,  therefore,  sinking 
in  it,  and  productive  of  diseases  brought  about  by  (vitiated)  phlegm. 

Milk  of  this  kind  should  be  known  as  affected  by  phlegm.  r°8 

Carefully  examining  the  nature  of  these  three  varietes  of  defects 
appertaining  to  milk,  emetics  and  purgatives  and  enemata  of  both 
the  oily  and  the  dry  kinds  should  be  administered,  agreeably  to  the 
nature  and  the  defect  seen,  for  correction.  i°9 

The  instructions  about  the  food  and  the  drink  of  a  nurse  whose 
milk  has  become  vitiated  are  these  : 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


865 


Her  food  and  drink  should  consist  largely  of  these,  viz.,  barley, 
wheat,  (^ali-rice  (a),  Shashti-rice  (b),  Mudga  (c),  Harenuka  (d), 
KulatthafeJ  Sura  ( f),  Sauviraka  (g),  Maireya  (k),  Medaka  ( i), 
Lacuna(y),  and  Karanja(£).n° 

Thoroughly  examining  the  particular  defect  in  the  milk,  the 
remedies  should  be  selected  from  the  above  for  administration.111 

The  infusion  of  the  following  are  regarded  as  beneficial  for  drink  : 
Patha(/),  Mahaushadha(;«),  Suradaru(«),  Musta(o),  Murva(/),  Gudu- 
chi(y),  V atsakaphala(r),  Kiratatikta(r);  Katurohini(7),  and  Sariva(«). 

For  the  same  object  the  administration  is  desirable  of  other 
drugs  that  are  bitter,  astringent,  pungent,  and  sweet. 

Thus  has  the  subject  been  expounded  of  the  correction  of  milk. 
Examining  the  particular  defect  of  milk,  the  correctives  should  be 
applied  in  proper  measure  and  proper  time.112 
The  following  promote  the  secretion  of  milk,  viz., — I 

All  wines  with  the  exception  of  Sidhu  ; 

Potherbs  and  rice  and  meat  obtained  from  inhabited  places, 
marshy  places,  and  water  ; 


a.  Rice  obtained  from  paddy  of  the  ordinary  red  variety. 

b.  Rice  obtained  from  paddy  that  is  reaped  on  the  expiration  of  the  sixtieth  day  from 
that  of  sowing. 

c.  Phaseohts  Mungo,  Linn. 

d.  Otherwise  called  Renuka.  Piper  aurantiacum ,  Wall. 

e.  Dolichos  unijlorus,  Lamk  ;  syn.  Dolichos  bijlorus,  Roxb. 

f.  A  variety  of  wine. 

g.  A  variety  of  wine. 

h.  A  variety  of  wine. 

i.  A  variety  of  wine. 

j.  Allium  Sativum,  Linn.  Garlic. 

k.  Pogamia  glabra,  Vent ;  syn.  Galedupa  Indica,  Lamk. 

l.  Cissampelos  hernandifolia,  Linn.  syn.  Slephania  herandifolia,  Walp. 

m.  A  name  applied  to  dry  ginger. 

n.  Cedrus  deodara,-  Loni  ;  syn.  Pinus  deodara,  Roxb. 

0.  Cyperus  rotundas,  Linn. 

p.  Sanseviera  Zeylanica,  Willd ;  syn.  Sanseviera  Roxburghiana,  Schult. 

q.  Tinospora  cordifolia,  Miers  ;  syn.  Menispermum  cordifolium,  Willd. 

r.  Otherwise  called  Indrayava,  The  seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica,  R.  Br. 

s.  Agatliotes  Cherayta. 

t.  Picrorrhiza  kurroa,  Royle. 

u.  Asclepias  preudqsarsa,  Roxb ;  syn.  Hemidesmus  Indicus,  R.  Br.  Sariva  also 
means  Syamalata,  i.  e.,  Ecliites  frutescens,  Roxb. 


866 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Food  that  is  liquid  and  that  abounds  with  sweet  and  sour 
ingredients  ; 

Herbs  having  milky  juices  ; 

The  drinking  of  milk  ; 

Cessation  from  labour,  (or  rest)  ;  and 
the  drinking  of  the  infusions  of  Virana(«)  Shastika(<5),  (^alika(c), 
Ikshuvalika(rf),  Darbha(e),  Kuca(/),  Kaca(^-),  Gundra(/z),  Itka- 
tamula(f). 

Thus  have  these  drugs  been  mentioned  which  promote  the 
secretion  of  milk. i  *3 

When  the  nurse  (by  being  subjected  to  the  above  treatment) 
happens  to  have  milk  agreeable  to  the  taste,  copious  in  measure, 
and  pure  (from  every  kind  of  defect),  she  should  then  bathe,  use 
fragrant  unguents,  and  dress  herself  in  white  robes,  and  wear  these 
drugs,  viz.,  Aindri(y'),  Brahmi(^),  £ataviryya(/),  Sahasraviryya(«z), 
Mogha(«),  Avyatha(o),  £iva (/),  Arishta(y),  Vatyapushpi(r),  Vish- 
waksena(j),  and  Kanta(^). 

Having  worn  these  she  should  then,  sitting  with  face  towards 
east,  give  suck  from  her  right  breast,  to  the  child.1  H 

a.  Andropogon  muricatum,  Retz. 

b.  Rice  from  paddy  that  ripens  in  sixty  days. 

c.  Rice  from  paddy  of  the  ordinary  red  variety. 

d.  A  variety  of  reed.  Saccharum  spontaneum. 

e.  Saccharum  cyluidricum,  Lamk  ;  syn.  Imperata  cylindrica ,  Beauv. 

f.  Poa  cynosuroides. 

g.  A  variety  of  saccharum. 

h.  Panicum  uliginosum,  Roxb. 

i.  A  variety  of  saccharum  ;  generally  used  in  hedges  in  Assam. 

j.  Called  in  Bengali  ‘Rakhal-sasa.’ 

k.  Used  for  Bhargi  (in  Bengali,  Bamanhati).  Clerordendron  siphonanthus,  R.  Br.  ; 
syn.  Siphonanthus  Indica,  Lamk. 

l.  Panicum  Dactylon,  Linn.,  syn.  Cynodon  Dactylon ,  Pers.  (The  white  variety  is 
implied. ) 

m.  The  above  of  the  blue  variety. 

n.  Otherwise  called  Patala.  Stereospermum  suave-olens  D.  C. ;  syn.  Bignonia- 
suaveoleus,  Roxb. 

o.  Another  name  of  Haritaki  or  Chebulic  myrobalans. 

p.  Another  name  of  Amlaki :  Phyllanthus  Emblica,  Linn. 

q.  Another  name  of  Nimba.  Melia  Azadirachta,  Linn. 

r.  Otherwise  called  Bala.  Sida  cordifolia,  Linn. 

s.  Another  name  of  Priyangu.  Aglaia  Roxburghiana,  W.  A. 

t.  Another  name  of  Renuka.  Piper  aurantiacum.  Wall. 


CHARAKA -SAMHITA. 


867 


We  shall,  after  this,  expound  the  ordinances  relating  to  the 
apartments  in  which  the  child  should  he  housed  (after  coming  out 
of  the  lying  in  room).ZI5 

One  conversant  with  the  science  of  building  should  (be  set  to) 
construct  a  house  of  the  following  kind  for  the  child  : 

It  should  be  large  or  spacious,  delightful,  well-lighted,  unexpos¬ 
ed  to  the  wind,  with  one  portion  well-ventilated,  strong,  free  from 
animals  that  live  by  preying  on  others,*  animals  that  have  fangs, f 
mice,  and  insects,  and  with  places  conveniently  situated  for  water 
mortar,  urination,  passing  of  stools,  and  cooking. 

It  should  be  well-suited  to  the  requirements  of  the  season. 

It  should  have  every  equipment  in  respect  of  beds  and  seats, 
and  coverlets  suited  to  the  season. 

It  should  have  everything  calculated  for  the  proper  protection 
of  the  child,  and  rites  should  be  performed  that  are  ordained 
for  making  offerings  to  the  deities,  for  mangala-homa ,  and  for 
expiation. 

It  should  also  be  filled  with  men  endued  with  bodily  and  mental 
purity,  possessed  of  years,  physicians,  and  persons  devoted  to  the 
good  of  the  child  and  its  parents. 

Even  these  are  the  ordinances  relating  to  the  apartments  in 
which  the  child  is  to  be  housed.116 

The  beds,  coverlets,  and  sheets  for  the  use  of  the  child  should 
be  soft,  light,  and  clean,  and  of  agreeable  smell. 

Beds,  coverlets,  and  sheets,  when  befouled  with  sweat  and  dirt 
and  insects  and  urine  and  stools,  should  be  taken  out.zz7 

If  other  (that  is,  fresh)  beds,  &c.,  be  not  obtainable,  then  those 
befouled  should  be  adequately  washed  and  fumigated  and  cleaned 
and  dried,  and  given  to  the  child  for  use.  ”8 

The  following  should  be  used  for  fumigating  clothes  and  beds 
and  coverlets  and  sheets,  viz.,  barley,  mustard  seeds,  linseeds, 

*  The  word  ‘jwapada’  ordinarily  implies  beasts  of  prey,  such  as  tigers,  lions,  &c.  Here 
it  is  used  to  imply  smaller  animals,  such  as  snakes,  &c.,  which  live  by  preying  upon 
other  creatures. — T. 

t  The  word  does  not  mean  boars  and  the  like  here,  but  such  animals  as  have  fangs, 
like  snakes,  &c. — T 

IIO 


CHA  RAX  A-  SA  MHITA. 


assafcedita,  GuggulaV),  Vacha(3),  Choraka(c)  VayasthauT1,  Golomiy), 
Jatila(/),  Palankasha( g )  Acokaf/2),  RohiniT)  and  sloughs  of  snakes. 

These  should  be  (reduced  ■  to  powder  and)  mixed  with  Ghee. 
(The  smoke  of  these  should  be  applied  to  the  washed  clothes).  I:9 

Gems  should  also  be  worn  by  the  child. 

Also  little  portions  should  be  cut  off  from  the  ends  of  the  right 
horns  of  living  rhinoceruses,  Rurus,  Gavayas,  and  bovine  bulls.* 

Mantras  also  (written  on  scraps  of  paper  or  bark  of  Bhurjja) 
should  be  worn.-]' 

Such  herbs  also  as  Aindri,  Brahmi,  &c.,|  as  also  Jivaka(y)  and 
Rishabhaka(/?),  and  other  objects  which  Brahmanas  (conversant  with 
the  Atharva  Veda)  may  declare  as  beneficial,  should  be  worn.  120 

The  child  should  also  be  given  such  toys  as  are  well-coloured, 
productive  of  sound,  delightful,  light,  not  having  pointed  ends,  in¬ 
capable  of  being  swallowed,  not  destructive  of  life,  and  incapable  of 
exciting  fear.121 

It  is  not  proper  to  frighten  the  child. 

Hence,  when  the  child  is  crying,  or  not  eating,  or  not  doing 
anything  that  is  proper  for  it  to  do,  one  should  never,  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  frightening  it,  mention  Rakshasas  and  Picachas  and 
Putana,  &c.§122 

a.  Balsamodendron  Muktil. 

b.  Acorus  calamus ,  Linn. 

c.  A  ndropogon  acicularis,  Retz. 

d.  Another  name  of  Haritaki.  Chebulic  myrobolan. 

e.  White  variety  of  Panicum  Dactylon ,  Linn. 

f.  Otherwise  called  Jatamansi.  Nardostachys  Jatamansi,  I>.  C. 

g.  A  variety  of  Guggulu.  Vide  note  a  above. 

h.  Saraca  Indica,  Linn. 

i.  Picrorrhim  kurroa ,  Royle. 

*  Ruru  is  a  kind  of  deer.  Gavaya,  though  classed  by  Hindu  writers  under  the  genus  of 
deer,  is,  in  reality,  a  kind  of  cow.  It  is  very  furious,  and  seeks  to  tear  men  and  other 
creatures  with  its  large  horns. — T. 

t  These  scraps  of  paper  or  bark  are  put  into  or  enclosed  in  small  drums  of  gold,  or 
silver,  or  copper,  or  iron,  and  worn  on  the  upper  arm,  or  by  a  string  round  the  waist  or 
hanging  from  the  neck.' — T. 

t  Vide  notes  ante. 

j.  Not  procurable.  The  substitute  is  Guduchi,  i.  e.,  Tinospora  cordifolia. — T. 

k.  Not  procurable.  The  substitute  is  Vansalochana  or  bamboo  manna. — T. 

§  Putana  was  a  female  Rakshasi  who  was  employed  by  King  Kangsa  for  giving  poisoned 
milk  to  Krishna  born  in  Brindabana.  Not  knowing  who  Krishna  was,  she  killed  many 
children,  till  at  last  when  she  gave  suck  to  Krishna,  the  latter  sucked  out  her  life-blood 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


8  69 


If  any  disease  comes  to  the  child,  then  carefully  examining  it  by 
the  fivefold  consideration  of  Nature,  inducing  causes,  premonitory 
indications,  developed  symptoms,  and  treatment,  and  attending  also 
to  the  especial  circumstances  connected  with  patient,  drugs,  place, 
and  time,  the  physician  should  set  himself  to  the  treatment,  using 
remedies  consisting  of  those  that  are  sweet,  mild,  light,  agreeable 
to  the  scent,  and  cool,  since  these  are  well-suited  to  children. 

It  is  by  this  meins  that  chiidren  recover  very  soon. 

When  the  child  is  ill,  measures  should  be  taken  (promptly)  for 
curing  that  illness.  I23 

As  regards  that  child  which  is  brought  up  in  practices  that  are 
opposed  to  place,  time,  and  constitution,  the  physician  should  cause 
those  practices  to  be  gradually  altered  and  replaced  by  those  that 
are  really  suitable. 

Abandoning  all  injurious  practices,  it  attains  to  wealth  of 
strength,  complexion,  body  and  life.*I24 

It  is  in  this  way  that  the  child  should  be  brought  up  till  the 
attainment  of  youth  and  the  acquisition  of  ability,  for  earning  reli¬ 
gious  merit  and  wealth. f 


and  killed  her  immediately.  The  word  is  applied  to  a  class  of  demons  who  are  supposed 
to  be  peculiarly  hostile  to  children. 

*  It  is  curious  to  see  how  every  Bengali  edition  obstinately  adheres  to  a  vicious  read¬ 
ing  of  aphorisms  123  and  124.  The  fact  is,  the  words  ‘  Dega-kalatmagunaviparyyayena  var- 
tamanah’  do  not  form  a  part  of  123  ;  they  belong  to  124.  What  is  stated  in  123  and  124 
is  this  :  when  the  child  is  ill,  that  should  be  done  which  would  cure  the  illness.  There 
are  some  children  who  happen  to  be  brought  up  in  practices  that  are  opposed  to  the  attri¬ 
butes  of  the  ‘deca’  (the  country  of  their  birth),  the  ‘kala’  (the  season  that  is  going  on),  and 
‘atma’  (the  body  or  constitution).  What  should  be  done  in  their  case  ?  Those  practices, 
which  are  unhealthful,  should  be  gradually  altered,  and  replaced  by  healthful  ones.  By 
abandoning  those  baneful  practices,  the  child  will  regain  wealth  of  strength,  com¬ 
plexion,  &c. — T. 

t  ‘  Dharmarthakau9alagamanat’  does  not  mean  acquisition  of  ‘  dharma’,  ‘  artha’,  and 
«  kaujala’  as  some  Bengali  translators  have  taken  it  to  imply,  but  the  meaning  is  acquisition 
of  ‘  kaujala’  or  dexterity  or  ability  for  earning  ‘  dharma’  and  ‘  artha.’  What  is  said  here  is 
that  the  boy  should  be  brought  up  in  the  way  directed  till  he  attains  to  that  development  of 
all  the  faculties  which  forms  the  principal  feature  of  the  period  called  youth  or  majority. 
It  is  when  this  period  is  reached  that  one  acquires  the  ability  of  earning  both  religious 
merit  and  wealth.  Ordinarily,  the  attainment  of  majority  is  spoken  of  in  the  Hindu  scrip¬ 
tures  as  ‘  Kutumvabharavahanakshamatwam’,  i.  e.,  attainment  of  the  capacity  to  bear  the 
burthens  of  the  family  including  dependant  relatives.  The  test  of  ‘  yauvana’  or  youth,  or 
majority,  is  the  acquisition  of  this  capacity. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


8/o 


Thus  has  been  expounded  the  subject  of  those  rites  and  prac¬ 
tices  which  are  productive  of  success  unto  those  who  are  desirous 
of  offspring. 

By  observing  these  acts  according  to  the  ordinances  laid  down, 
a  person  endued  with  honesty  succeeds  in  obtaining  the  worship, 
in  the  measure  he  desires,  of  the  world. *I25 

( Here  are  two  verses  containing  a  Sifnunary ). 

By  duly  observing,  according  to  the  ordinances  (laid  down),  those 
acts  fraught  with  grave  import  which  have  been  declared  (in  the 
foregoing  aphorisms)  and  which  bestow  success  upon  persons  de¬ 
sirous  of  offspring,  the  man  of  knowledge  and  honesty  attains  the 
worship,  in  the  measure  he  wishes,  of  the  world.f 1 

This  Division  is  called  ‘  £arira’  (that  which  relates  to  the  Body) 
because  it  treats  of  the  whole  body  in  respect  of  all  its  aspects  and 
in  respect  of  its  human  and  superhuman  wealth. j2 

Thus  ends  the  Eighth  Lesson,  called  Jatisutriya,  of  the  Division 
called  £arira,  of  Agnivega’s  treatise  as  revised  by  Charaka. 

Thus  ends  the  Fourth  Division  in  the  compilation  drawn  up  by 
that  Professor  (of  the  Science  of  Life),  known  as  the  ascetic 
Charaka. 


*  The  last  word  of  this  aphorism,  viz.,  ‘anasuyaka,’  literally  means  one  divested  of 
‘  asuya’  or  malice.  Hence,  an  honest  man.  It  may  also  be  taken  as  implying  ‘  one  having 
faith  in  what  has  been  said  before. — T. 

t  The  worship  or  respect  of  the  world  is,  in  this  instance,  due  to  the  superior  virtues 
of  the  child  which  a  person  is  sure  to  have  by  a  due  observance  of  the  acts  laid  down. 
There  is  an  oft-quoted  adage  which  runs  as  follows  : 

Putre  yajasi  toye  cha  naranam  punyalakshanam. 

It  means,  the  indications  of  a  man’s  merits  occur  in  son,  fame,  and  water  ;  that  is,  if 
one’s  son  becomes  adorned  with  every  virtue,  or  if  one  happens  to  acquire  great  fame 
by  good  deeds,  or  if  the  water  becomes  good  of  the  tank  one  causes  to  excavate,  one  is 
regarded  as  possessed  of  great  merits.  Happiness  for  countless  years  becomes  his  in  heaven 
or  the  life  hereafter.  It  is  this  that  is  referred  to  here — T 

t  Wealth  of  Body  has  been  treated  of  in  this  Lesson  from  both  the  human  and  the 
superhuman  point  of  view.  The  first  includes  all  that  portion  of  this  Lesson  which  is  con¬ 
cerned  with  what  constitutes  the  superiority  of  one  Body  over  another  as  regards  flesh, 
bone,  &c.  To  the  other  point  of  view  belongs  all  that  is  said  about  the  extraordinary 
excellences  of  some  bodies  or,  rather,  of  men  endued  with  bodies. — T. 


NDRIYASTHAN  AM 


THE  DIVISION  ON  INDRIYAS.* 

We  shall,  after  this,  expound  the  Lesson  on  Indriyas  as  con¬ 
nected  with  Complexion  and  Voice. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.i 
Verily,  in  this  connection, 

Complexion,  Voice, 

Smell,  Taste,  Touch, 

Eyes,  Ears,  Nose,  Tongue,  Skin, 

Mind,  Likes  (and  dislikes), 

Purity,  Conduct,  Practices, 

Memory, 

Nature,  or  normal  condition, 

Deviation  from  Nature,  or  abnormal  condition, 

Features  or  countenance, 

Intellect  (or  the  power  of  apprehension), 

Strength,  Cheerlessness,  Cheerfulness,  Dryness,  Oiliness, 

Sleep  (including  sloth  and  inactivity), 

Activity  (including  disposition  for  work), 

Heaviness  (of  the  whole  body  or  of  particular  limbs), 


*  The  word  ‘  Indriya’  in  this  Division  is  used  in  its  literal  sense.  It  is  derived  from 
‘Indra’,  meaning  ‘Prana’  or  the  Life-breaths  ;  hence  ‘Indriya’  means  what  appertains  to 
the  Life-breaths,  or  what  constitutes  the  indications  of  the  Life-breaths.  In  this  Division 
of  the  work,  the  Rishi  expounds  the  premonitory  indications  of  dissolution  long  before 
dissolution  actually  comes.  Those  indications  are  all  connected  with  changes  of  condition 
in  respect  of  complexion,  voice,  &c.  It  will  be  seen  that  amongst  the  various  incidents 
which  the  physician  is  directed  to  observe  in  order  to  ascertain  the  measure  of  one’s  life, 
mention  is  not  made  of  the  Pulse.  (Jujruta  also  is  silent,  like  Charaka,  on  the  pulse. 
It  is  true,  later  physicians  came  to  regard  the  pulse  as  a  determining  factor  of  great  impor¬ 
tance,  hut  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  works  on  the  pulse  are  all  very  modern.  European 
physicians  also  have  come  to  regard  the  pulse  as  not  of  much  importance.  The  truth  is, 
those  Hindu  physicianss  who  set  great  importance  on  the  pulse  are  untrue  to  Charaka  and 
Qugruta.  It  is  a  mere  pretence  and  nothing  more  for  a  Kaviraja  to  examine  the  pulse 
repeatedly  and  assure  the  friends  of  the  patient  that  his  declarations  about  the  latter’s 
condition  are  all  based  upon  his  observation  of  the  pulse. 

It  would  seem  that  about  the  time  of  Charaka,  the  pulse  was  not  regarded  as  an  indi¬ 
cator  of  health  or  disease,  for  nothing  is  said  about  the  pulse  in  this  Division. — T. 


872 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Lightness  (of  the  whole  body,  or  of  particular  limbs), 

Qualities  of  the  body  (such  as  softness  or  hardness,  heat  or 
cold,  &c.), 

Diet  (including  drinks,  and  the  likes  of  the  patient  for  particular 
kinds  of  food  and  drink), 

Sports  (including  all  indifferent  acts  and  practices  in  which 
the  patient  .ndulges  or  likes  to  indulge)  ; 

Development  of  diet  (implying  that  into  which  the  food  and  the 
drink  of  the  patient  is  developed,  that  is,  whether  they  are  develop¬ 
ed  into  the  juice  which  is  matured  into  blood  and  flesh  or  whether 
the  result  is  abundance  of  kitta  or  dross) ; 

Means  (or  remedies  to  be  applied  for  alleviation  of  disease) ; 

Alleviation  or  cure  (of  disease), 

The  disease  (that  affects  the  patient), 

The  premonitory  symptoms  ; 

The  sensations  (of  the  patient  in  respect  of  pleasure  and  pain)  ; 

The  supervening  complaints  ; 

The  aspect  of  the  body  in  respect  of  light  and  shade  ; 

The  shadow  (of  the  body  on  any  reflecting  surface  or  water,  &c.) ; 

Dreams  or  visions  (of  the  patient)  ; 

Topics  connected  with  the  messenger  commissioned  to  fetch  the 
physician  ; 

The  omens  observed  by  the  physician  on  his  way  to  the  patient’s 
house ; 

Changes  in  the  normal  condition  of  the  relatives  of  the  patient ; 

Medicines  (in  view  of  the  disease) ; 

The  effects  produced  by  the  medicines  administered  ; 

Considerations  about  the  applicability  of  particular  medicines 
to  the  patient  in  view  of  his  constitution  and  the  disease  that  has 
affected  it ; 

These  should  be  examined  and  attended  to  by  the  physician 
desirous  of  ascertaining  what  the  remnant  is  of  the  patient’s  period 
of  life.  The  examination  should  be  by  the  help  of  direct  perception, 
inference,  and  the  instructions  of  the  wise.2 

Verily,  amongst  these  objects  of  examination,  some  do  not 
appertain  to  the  person  (the  measure  of  whose  life  is  to  be  ascertain¬ 
ed)  and  some  appertain  to  that  person. 


CHA  RAKA  -SAMHITA. 


873 


Amongst  these,  those  that  do  not  appertain  to  the  person 
himself,  should  be  examined  by  the  aid  of  the  instructions  of  the 
Wise  as  also  by  reason  (or  inference). 

As  regards,  again,  those  that  appertain  to  the  person  himself, 
these  should  be  ascertained  by  a  careful  observation  of  what  is 
normal  and  what  abnormal.*3 

The  normal  condition  (or  Nature,  or  Constitution)  of  a  person  is 
considered  under  six  aspects,  viz., 

1.  That  which  depends  upon  the  class  to  which  he  belongs  ; 

2.  That  which  depends  upon  the  family  or  lineage  to  which  he 
belongs  ; 

3.  That  which  follows  from  his  habitat  (or  country)  ; 

4.  That  which  follows  from  the  age  (such  as  Krita,  Treta, 
Dwapara,  and  Kali)  in  which  he  lives,  or  the  season  of  the 
year  (such  as  spring,  &c.)  ; 

5.  That  which  follows  from  the  years  the  person  counts  (such 
as  infancy,  boyhood,  youth,  manhood,  &c.)  ; 

6.  That  which  is  dependant  upon  the  person’s  Soul. 

The  constitutions  of  men,  as  dependant  upon  these,  cause  the  differ¬ 
entiating  characteristics  between  man  and  man.f4 


*  Amongst  those  objects  that  do  not  appertain  to  the  person  himself  the  measure  of 
whose  life  is  to  be  ascertained,  are  such  as  relate  to  the  messenger  despatched  for  fetching 
the  physician,  the  omens  observed  by  the  physician  on  his  way  to  the  house  of  the  person 
to  be  examined,  changes  in  the  normal  condition  of  the  relatives  of  such  person,  &c.  The 
changes  adverted  to  are  often  regarded  as  indicators  of  grave  results.  Amongst  others, 
the  changes  observed  in  the  wife  are  regarded  as  very  significant.  The  breaking  of  parti¬ 
cular  ornaments,  excessive  cheerlessness,  &c.,  are  taken  as  indications  of  widowhood  and, 
therefore,  of  the  death,  within  a  brief  space  of  time,  of  her  husband. — T. 

+  ‘  Jati-prasakta’ — i.  e.,  as  adhering  to  or  dependant  upon  the  ‘Jati’  of  a  person; 
‘  Jati’ means  the  class,  such  as  Brahmana,  or  ICshatriya,  or  Vaigya,  or’Sudra,  to  which  a 
person  belongs. 

‘  Kula-prasakta’  implies  that  which  arises  from  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  the  ‘Kula’ 
or  lineage  of  a  person. 

‘  Deganupatini’  means  that  which  follows  the  habitat  of  the  person  :  that  is,  the  country 
in  which  he  resides.  The  constitution  of  one  who  is  born  and  who  lives  in  a  cold  climate 
is  different  from  that  of  one  born  and  living  in  a  hot  climate. 

Some  texts  read  ‘  daganupatini’,  meaning  ‘depending  upon  the  ‘daga’  or  condition  in 
respect  of  prosperity  or  adversity,  health  or  disease,  &c.,  of  the  person.  This  can  scarcely 
be  the  correct  reading,  for  ‘dega’  and  ‘lcala’  always  come  together  in  such  connections. 
Besides,  ‘dega’  determines  the  constitution  more  effectively  than  ‘Daga. 


874 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Deyiation  from  normality  (z.  e.,  from  Natui'e  or  natural  consti¬ 
tution)  is  of  three  kinds,  viz., 

1.  That  which  appertains  to  indications  ; 

2.  That  which  appertains  to  what  is  indicated  ;  and 

3.  That  which  is  dependant  on  Accidents  (or  Omens). 

Amongst  these,  the  first  is  that  which  has  for  its  cause  indica¬ 
tions  actually  arising  in  the  body.  It  should  be  stated  that  there 
are  some  indications  which  are  inherent  to  the  body,  and  others 
which  appear  or  occur  at  particular  occasions.  These,  when  they 
arise,  produce  abnormal  conditions  of  particular  kinds. *5 

The  second  is  that  which  has  for  its  determinants  all  those 
symptoms  which  have  been  laid  down  in  the  lessons  bearing  upon 
Nidana.f6 

The  third  is  that  which  follows  the  exposition  of  accidents  or 
omens. 

It  is  that  which  physicians  regard  as  determinants  of  the  rem¬ 
nant  of  one’s  period  of  life  notwithstanding  the  fact  of  their  not 
having  indications  appearing  in  the  body. 

Then,  again,  inasmuch  as  these  indicate  the  decrease  of  the 
period  of  life,  they  are  also  regarded  as  the  likes  of  the  symptoms 
of  approaching  death. 


‘  Kalanupatini’  implies  what  follows  ‘Kala.’  The  Commentators  take  ‘Kala’  as  refer- 
ing  to  the  great  divisions  of  time,  viz.,  the  epochs  or  large  periods,  such  as,  Krita,  Treta, 
Dwapara,  and  Kali.  It  has  been  observed,  in  a  previous  Division  of  this  work,  that  con¬ 
stitutions  differ  in  the  different  ages.  Men  lived  400  years  in  the  Krita,  300  in  the  Treta, 
and  200  in  the  Dwapara,  ages  ;  while  the  limit,  in  this  the  Kali  age,  is  too  years.  Kala 
also  means  the  seasons,  such  as,  spring,  summer,  &c.  Constitutions  are  affected  by  the 
seasons. 

‘  Pratyatmaniyata’  is  that  which  is  governed  by  the  ‘atman’  or  self.  Each  individual 
Self,  in  consequence  of  the  acts  that  determine  its  birth,  becomes  encased  in  a  body  having 
a  particular  constitution. 

*  The  text  does  not  seem  to  be  correct  or,  at  least,  complete.  What  the  Rishi  wishes 
to.  say  is  that  there  are  some  indications  which  inhere  to  the  body,  that  is,  belong  to  it 
as  the  head,  the  nose,  the  eyes,  belong  to  it.  There  are  others  which  arise  or  appear  at 
particular  occasions.  When  the  question  is  the  ascertainment  of  the  remnant  of  one’s 
period  of  life,  indications  of  both  these  kinds  help  the  physician  in  his  conclusion. — T. 

t  These  are,  of  course,  the  symptoms  of  disease.  ‘Lakshya-nimitta  vikriti,’  meaning 
‘that  abnormality  which  has  reference  to  what  is  indicated,’  is  concerned  with  diseases 
which,  it  is  well  known,  are  ascertained  by  observation  of  the  symptoms  laid  down  in  the 
Division  called  ‘Nidana.’ 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  ,  875 

The  wise  declare  these  as  capable  of  assisting  at  the  ascertain¬ 
ment  of  the  period,  that  is  undisclosed  by  the  first  and  the  second 
period  of  abnormality,  of  life.  7 

In  treating  of  the  subject  of  abnormality  (vikriti),  we  shall  ex¬ 
pound  the  indications,  relating  to  the  body,  of  persons  whose 
deaths  are  near. 

In  this  connection  the  first  topic  is  that  which  relates  to  com¬ 
plexion  (or  Varna).  8 

As  regards  this,  the  following  are  the  complexions  of  the  body 
which  are  normal,  viz.,  dark,  intermediate  between  dark  and  fair, 
and  fair.  9 

All  else  also  that  are  seen  to  be  conformable  to  (the  complexions 
of)  the  ancestral  lines  of  persons,  should  be  regarded  as  their  nor¬ 
mal  complexions  ;  and  those  complexions  as  well,  however  much 
they  may  differ  from  usual  ones  that  are  regarded  so  by  experts  in 
complexion.*  10 

Dark-blue,  coppery,  and  yellow  mixed  with  white,  are  regarded 
as  abnormal  complexions.  Those  complexions  also  which  arise 
immediately  before  the  appearance  of  the  abnormal  complexions, 
are  taken  as  abnormal.  11 

Thus  have  complexions,  both  normal  and  abnormal,  been 
expounded. 

Here  it  should  be  stated  that  if  the  normal  complexion  be  seen 
in  half  the  body  and  the  abnormal  in  the  other  half  of  the  body, 
that  is,  if  both  the  normal  and  the  abnormal  complexions  appear 
together,  separated  from  one  another  by  well-defined  lines,  one  on 
the  left  side  and  the  other  on  the  right  side,  or  one  on  the  front 
and  the  other  on  the  back,  or  one  on  the  lower  part  and  another 
on  the  upper  part,  or  one  internal  and  the  other  external,  this 
should  be  known  as  an  indication  of  the  near  approach  of  death. 12 

Similarly,  a  difference  of  colours  within  the  mouth  is  regarded 
as  an  indication  of  death  being  near.  x3 


*  I  am  not  sure  that  I  have  correctly  understood  this  passage.  Gangadhara’s  comment 
is  unintelligible.  He  seems  to  think  that  all  other  colours  which  agree  with  the  actual 
colours  of  existent  objects  are  implied  by  this  passage.  This  would  be  absurd,  for  no 
colour  then  would  be  abnormal.  ‘Anuka’  means,  in  this  connection,  race  or  ancestry. 
‘Anyatha  vapi  nirdishtamanan’  may  be  taken  to  mean ‘other  colours  differing  from  the 
normal  but  regarded  as  normal.’ — T. 

Ill 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


876 

The  appearance  of  grief  and  joy,  of  dryness  and  oiliness,  is  ex¬ 
pounded  after  the  manner  of  the  difference  of  colours.*  14 

So  also  the  appearance  of  any  one  of  these,  viz.,  Piplava(a), 
Vyanga(^),  Tflakalaka(r),  and  Pidaka(rf),  on  the  face  of  a  patient, 
is  regarded  as  a  baneful  symptom.  15 

The  appearance  of  any  of  those  colours  which  have  been  laid 
-down  as  abnormal,  on  the  nails,  the  eyes,  or  the  face,  in  the  urine 
in  the  stools,  on  the  hands,  the  feet,  or  the  lips,  while  the  patient 
suffers  from  loss  of  strength,  complexion,  and  (power  of)  the  senses 
is  regarded  as  a  symptom  of  the  decrease  of  his  period  of  life. 

Any  other  colour,  that  is  abnormal,  that  was  not  seen  before, 
'that  appears  suddenly,  and  that  is  due  to  no  apparent  cause,  in 
a  patient  that  is  becoming  weak  day  by  day,  is  a  symptom  indica¬ 
ting  the  near  approach  of  death. 

Thus  has  been  explained  the  topic  of  complexions.  16 

The  topic  of  voice. 

These  voices  are  called  normal  (or  natural),  viz.,  those  which 
resemble  the  voices  of  swans,  cranes,  ‘dundubhi.’j-  the  rattle  of  car- 
wheels,  sparrows,  crow,  pigeon,  and  ‘jharjharas’.J 

All  -other  voices  which  are  seen  to  be  conformable  to  (the  voices 
of)  the  ancestral  lines  of  persons  should  be  regarded  as  their  normal 
voices  ;  and  those  voices  as  well,  however  much  they  may  differ 
from  normal  ones,  that  are  regarded  so  by  experts  in  voice.1? 

The  following  voices,  when  observed  in  patients,  are  regarded 
as  abnormal,  viz.,  that  which  resembles  the  voice  of  the  parrot, 
that  which  is  very  low,  that  which  is  totally  choked  in  the  utter- 

*  ‘Glani’  and  ‘harsha,  rendered  ‘grief  and  joy’,  may  be  taken  as  standing  for  the  effects 
also  of  grief  and  joy.  The  sense  is  that  if  there  are  pains  in  half  the  body  and  the  total 
absence  of  pain  in  the  other  half,  it  is  to  be  taken,  like  differences  of  colour,  as  an  indica¬ 
tion  of  the  approach  of  death. 
a.  Freckles. 

t.  Brown  spots  on  the  face. 
c.  Pigmentary  nsevi  or  moles. 

■a.  Pimples. 

t  ‘Dundubhi’  commonly  means  a  drum.  The  word  is  also  applied  to  a  kind  of  bird 
Perhaps,  it  is  the  former  that  is  intended  here.— T 

$  A  kind  of  musical  instrument.  It  is  a  sort  of  drum.  A  section,  cut  off  from  a 
hollow  earthen  globe,  overlaid  tightly  with  a  goatskin  or  sheepskin.  It  is  beat  by  a  num¬ 
ber  of  pliant  sticks  made  of  the  rattan,  having  a  single  handle,  resembling  a  cat-o-nine.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


8 17 


ance,  that  which  is  indistinct,  that  which  is  half-uttered,  that  which 
is  weak,  that  which  is  uttered  with  pain,  and  that  which  is  the 
result  of  repeated  efforts. 

Those  voices  also  are  regarded  abnormal  which  arise  immedi¬ 
ately  before  the  appearance  of  the  voices  laid  down  as  abnormal. 

Thus  has  the  subject  been  expounded  of  voices  that  are  normal 
or  natural  and  those  that  are  abnormal  or  unnatural,  i8 

The  sudden  appearance  of  voices  modified  from  the  normal  into 
the  abnormal,  or  the  combination  into  one  of  many  voices,  or  the 
division  into  many  of  one  voice,  is  regarded  as  an  unfavourable 
symptom.* 

Thus  has  the  subject  been  expounded,  of  voices.. 

Thus  have  the  subjects  been  expounded  of  both  complexions 
and  voices  for  ascertaining  the  near  approach  of  death.  »9  * 

Here  occur  some  verses. 

He  is  not  (that  isr  his  death  is  near)  on  whose  body  an  abnor¬ 
mal  colour  arises,  whether  on  only  its  half  or  on  the  whole,  when 
there  is  no  cause  for  the  appearance  of  such  colour.  1 

If  half  the  face  becomes  blue,  or  dark,,  or  coppery,  or  red,  and 
another  colour  appears  on  the  other  half  of  the  face,  it  is  regarded 
as  an  indication  of  the  nearness  of  death.  2 

Oiliness  well  discernible  on  half  the  face,  and  exceeding  dryness 
on  the  other  half,  or  pains  experienced  in  one  half  of  the  face  and. 
joy  on  the  other  half,  is  regarded  as  a  symptom  of  death.  3 

Pigmentary  nsevi  or  moles,  freckles,  brown  spots,  and  well- 
marked  lines,  appear  on  the  face  of  a  patient  that  will  give  up  his 
life-breaths  very  soon.  4 

White  marks  like  flowers  appearing  on  the  nails  and  the  teeth,, 
or  a  clay-like  substance  attaching  to  the  teeth,  or  a  white  powder, 
like  lime,  appearing  on  the  teeth,  are  symptoms  of  the  near  ap¬ 
proach  of  death.  5. 


*  ‘Prakritivaikarika’  means  ‘modified  from  the  normal  into  the  abnormal.’  Some  of 
the  Bengali  translators  take  it  to  imply  both  normal  and  abnormal,  which  is  wrong> 
‘Abhinirvitti’  is  appearance,  and  ‘asu’  is  sudden.. 

‘The  combination  of  many  voices  into  one’  implies  an  analysis  that-  is  extremely  difficult 
if  not  wholly  impracticable. 

‘The  division  into  many  of  one  voice’  practically  implies  the  appearance  of  many  voices 
in  succession  to  one  another. — T. 


8/8 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA . 


Abnormal  colour  on  the  lips,  the  (soles  of  the)  feet,  and  the' 
(palms  of  the)  hands,  in  the  eyes,  in  the  urine  and  the  stools,  and 
on  the  nails,  of  a  person  already  reduced  in  strength,  is  an  indica¬ 
tion  of  the  near  approach  of  death.  6 

He  whose  lips  have  become  blue  like  a  ripe  jamva(«),.  should  be 
known  as  a  person  whose  period  of  life  has  run  short  and  death 
is  near,  by  one  that  is  wise.  1 

He  is  not  (i.  e.,  does  not  live  long)  whose  voice,  whether  one  or 
consisting  of  many  in  succession,  has  suddenly  become  abnormal,, 
when  he  is  gradually  sinking.  8 

Whatever  else  of  what  is  abnormal  in  voice  and  colour  appears 
in  a  person  destitute  of  strength  and  flesh,  is  indicative  of  the  near¬ 
ness  of  death.  9 

Thus  have  the  topics  been  expounded  of  voice  and  colour,  on 
ascertainment  of  the  symptoms  of  persons  whose  death  is  near. 
The  physician  who  is  not  well  conversant  with  those  symptoms 
falls  into  errors  in  estimating  t  he  unexhausted  measure  of  the 
period  of  life. 10 

Thus  ends  the  first  Lesson,  called  Varna-swariya,  in  the  Divi¬ 
sion  called  Indriya,  of  the  treatise  of  Agniveca  as  revised  by 
Charaka. 


LESSON  II. 

PUSHPlTAM, 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  called  ‘  Pushpitamindriyam.’ 
Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.* 

As  a  flower  is  seen  here  to  be  the  premonitory  indication  of  a 
fruit  to  be,  so  a  symptom  called  ‘Arishta’  is  a  premonitory  indica¬ 
tion  of  a  person  about  to  die.i 

There  may,  indeed,  be  a  flower  that  is  not  followed  by  a  fruit. 


a.  Fruit  of  the  Eugenia  jambolana,  Lamk. 

*  ‘  Pushpa’  is  flower.  Why  this  Lesson  is  called  ‘Pushpitam’  or  » Pushpitamindriyam’ 
is  explained  below.  ‘  Arishtas’  or  indications  of  the  near  approach  of  death  are  likened 
to  flowers,  death  being  the  fruit.  The  approach  of  fruit  is  indicated  by  the  appearance  of 
flowers.  Sometimes  flowers  do  not  develop  into  fruits  ;  so  indications  regarded  as 
‘Arishtas’  are  not  followed  by  death.  They  may  not  be  real  ‘Arishtas’  and  hence  the 
non-appearance  of  death.  The  object  of  this  Lesson  is  to  lay  down  further  instructions 
about  ‘Arishtas’  truly  so  called. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  879 

So  also  there  may  be  a  fruit  that  has  not  been  preceded  by  a 
flower.  2 

For  all  that,  there  cannot  be  a  disappearance  of  an  ‘Arishta’ 
that  has  manifested  itself,  without  death  occurring  (as  a  conse¬ 
quence).  There  cannot,  again,  be  a  death  that  has  not  been  pre¬ 
ceded  by  an  ‘Arishta.  3 

An  ignorant  physician  regards  a  symptom  as  an  ‘Arishta’  which 
without  being  a  real  ‘Arishta’  only  puts  forth,  the  appearance  of  an 
Arishta.’  Similarly,  such  a  person  fails  to  detect  an  ‘Arishta’  in  a 
symptom  that  is  really  so.  Both  these  are  due  to  a  deficiency  of 
the  understanding.  4 

Listen,  for  the  increase  of  knowledge  we  shall,  by  reference  to 
the  indications  that  precede  death,  lay  down  instructions  about 
diverse  kinds  of  persons  in  whom  flowers  have  appeared.*  S 

One  from  whose  body  are  constantly  emanated  diverse  scents 
resembling  the  scents  of  diverse  flowers,  like  a  forest  of  diverse 
trees  and  creepers  that  has  flowered,  is  regarded  by  the  wise  as  a 
person  that  has  blossomed  with  all  the  indications  of  death. 

Such  a  person,  it  is  certain,  casts  off  his  body  within  a  year’s 
time.  6-7 

Similarly,  if  a  person’s  body  puts  forth  only  individual  scents, 
agreeable  or  disagreeable,  resembling  the  scents  of  individual 
flowers,  he  also  is  regarded  as  one  that  has  blossomed  with  all  the 
indications  of  death,  f  8 

The  physician  should  regard  that  man  also  as  having  blossomed 
with  the  indications  of  death  in  whose  body  he  smells  many  dis¬ 
agreeable  scents  combined  into  one.  9 

If  agreeable  and  disagreeable  odors  emanate,  contra  wise  and 
causelessly,  from  a  person’s  body  that  is  smeared  or  unsmeared, 
such  person  is  regarded  as  having  blossomed  (with  symptoms  of 
death  )4  10 


*  ‘  Pushpitan  naran,  literally,  ‘men  that  have  flowered  implying  persons  in  whom 
‘Arishtas’  or  indications  of  death  have  already  appeared. — T. 

+  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  there  may  be  a  person  whose  body  produces  many  scents 
like  a  forest  of  many  trees  and  creepers  in  the  flowery  season.  There  may  also  be  a 
person  in  whose  body  only  one  scent  is  perceptible  at  a  time,  and  that  scent  like  that  of 
a  particular  flower.  The  former  class  of  persons  is  indicated  in  verse  7  ;  the  latter,  in 
verse  8.-T. 

t  What  is  meant  is  this  :  a  person 


rs  his  body  with  a  fragrant  odor,  but 


88o 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


As  an  example  of  this  :  Chandana(«),  Kushtha(<$),  Tagara(t), 
Aguru(tf),  honey,  floral  garlands,  urine,  stools,  corpses  (of  animals), 
human  corpses,  or  all  other  odors  of  diverse  essences  and  diverse 
origin,  should  upon  such  condition,  be  regarded  as  having  become 

abnormal.*!  1-12 

For  explaining  what  has  not  been  expressly  said,  we  shall  de¬ 
clare  (generally)  this  principle  appertaining  to  smells,  a  knowledge 
of  which  will  enable  the  physician  to  tell  the  time  of  death.13 

That  man  will  not  live  out  the  year  in  whose  body  a  scent, 
agreeable  or  disagreeable,  appears  without  any  apparent  cause  and 
continuously.!  !4 

This  much  upon  the  Science  of  Smells. 

We  shall  now  duly  expound  the  Science  of  Taste  in  the  bodies 
of  persons  afflicted  with  disease. 

That  juice  which  is  born  of  the  bodies  of  men  who  are  in  a 
normal  state,  assumes  an  abnormality  of  two  sorts  when  men  reach 
their  last  stage.! 6 

The  juice  in  some  becomes  exceedingly  tasteless ;  while  in 
others  it  becomes  exceedingly  sweet.  1 7 


unfragrant  odor  arises  therefrom.  Such  a  person  is  regarded  as  having  blossomed  with 
symptoms  of  death.  So  if  one  smears  oneself  with  an  unfragrant  odor  and  if  a  fragrant 
odor  arises  therefrom,  one  is,  under  such  circumstances,  regarded  as  having  blossomed. 
It  should  be  remembered  that  the  emanation  of  a  contrary  odor  should  be  due  to  no 
apparent  cause. — T. 

a.  Santalum  album,  Linn. 

b.  Saussurea  auriculata  ;  syn.  Aplotaxis  auriculata. 

c.  Tabernamontana  caronaria,  Linn. 

d.  Aquilaria  Agallocha,  Roxb. 

*  The  sense  is  as  follows  :  Chandana  and  the  rest  are  agreeable  odors.  Urine  and 
the  rest  are  disagreeable  odors.  If  a  person  smears  himself  with  the  agreeable  odors  with 
the  result  that  disagreeable  odors  issue  from  his  body,  or  if  he  smears  himself  with  dis¬ 
agreeable  odors  with  the  result  that  agreeable  odors  arise  from  his  body,  the  conclusion 
should  be  that  he  has  blossomed  with  the  symptoms  of  death.  The  very  odors,  agreeable 
or  disagreeable,  should  be  regarded  as  having  become  abnormal  through  contact  with 
such  a  person. 

‘Mritani,’  Chakrapani  explains,  refers  to  corpses  of  animals,  while  ‘  Kunapani’  refers 
to  human  corpses. — T. 

t  ‘  Viyoni’ is ‘without  any  apparent  cause.’  ‘  Vidura’  is  continuous.  When  the  smell 
is  such  that  it  does  not  disappear  after  a  bath  or  in  consequence  of  anything  that  one  may 
do,  it  is  then  that  death  is  regarded  to  be  certain  before  a  year  expires.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


88r 


It  is  by  the  following  consideration  that  the  juice  should  be 
regarded  as  having  become  abnormal. 

In  what  manner  can  men  become  acquainted  with  the  taste  of 
the  juice  in  men  ? 

Flies,  leeches,  gad-flies,  and  gnats,  keep  away  from  the  tasteless 
body  of  a  person  whose  death  is  near.18-19 

Flies  come  from  all  directions  to  the  body,  which  has  a  very 
sweet  taste,  of  a  person  whose  time  is  up,  even  if  the  body  be 
well-washed  and  smeared  with  fragrant  unguents.  20 

Here  occurs  a  verse  containing  a  Summary. 

By  these  indications  which  I  have  set  forth  of  juice  and  smell, 
the  physician  should  tell  the  fruit,  which  is  death,  of  the  person, 
who  has  blossomed.*  1 

Thus  ends  the  Second  Lesson,  called  Pushpitamindriyam,  in  the 
Division  called  Indriya,  of  the  treasise  of  Agniveca  as  revised  by 
Charaka. 


LESSON  III. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  called  ‘  Parimarshaniyam- 
lndriyam.’ 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.f  1 

The  indications  have  been  duly  set  forth  of  persons  whose  death 
Is  near,  in  respect  of  colour,  voice,  smell,  and  taste.  Listen  now 
to  the  indications  in  respect  of  touch.  2 

The  physician  desirous  of  ascertaining  the  remnant  of  a  patient’s 
period  of  life  principally  by  touch,  should  himself  touch  the 


*  The  correct  reading,  in  the  second  line,  is  ‘etaih’  and  not  ‘etat’  as  occurs  in  Ganga- 
dhara’s  text.  ‘  Yani  &c.,  (tais  or)  etais  &c.’  is  grammar.  ‘Etat’  would  give  no  sense. — T. 

f  *  Parimarshana’  is  touch.  Having  expounded  those  indications  of  colour,  voice, 
smell,  and  taste  which  help  the  physician  in  ascertaining  the  near  approach  of  death,  the 
Rishi  proceeds  to  expound  those  indications  which  appertain  to  the  sense  of  touch.  The 
meaning  of  the  word  used  for  naming  this  Lesson  will  appear  clearly  from  the  succeeding 


332 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


patient’s  body  with  his  own  healthy  hand,  or  cause  it  to  be  touched 
by  another.*  3 

Verily,  the  following  particulars  should  be  ascertained  by  the 
physician  by  touching  the  body  of  the  patient. 

These  are, — 

The  cessation  of  motion  of  those  parts  of  the  body  which  are 
(normally)  in  a  state  of  constant  motion. 

Coldness  of  those  parts  which  are  (normally)  always  warm. 

Hardness  of  those  parts  which  are  soft. 

Roughness  of  those  parts  which  are  smooth. 

The  absence  of  parts  that  are  (normally)  existent.-j- 

Dislocations,  fractures,  emfastenings  of  joints  ; 

Absence  or  loss  of  flesh  and  blood  ; 

Hardness  of  the  flesh  ; 

Appearance  of  perspiration  or  its  total  stoppage  or  suppression  : 
Whatever  else  also  of  abnormality  arising  without  any  apparent 
cause. 

Even  this  is  an  abridgment  of  the  symptoms  of  the  conditions 
perceptible  by  touch.!  4 

We  shall  now  expound  them  in  detail. 

If  upon  an  examination,  severally,  of  the  limbs  of  the  patient 
by  touch,  it  is  found  that  his  feet,  calves,  thighs,  lips,  abdomen, 


*  1  By  another,’  i.  e.,  if  the  patient  happens  to  be  a  lady.  So  exclusive  are  Hindus, 
.•and  Mussulmans  too,  in  the  matter  of  everything  concerning  their  ladies  that  the  physician 
unless  he  happens  to  be  a  relative  or,  indeed,  an  exceptionally  trusted  person,  is  not 
allowed  to  touch  the  bodies  of  female  patients.  The  only  part  that  can  be  touched  is  the 
wrist  for  feeling  the  pulse.  The  abdomen  is  seldom  allowed  to  be  touched  ;  still  more 
seldom,  the  chest.  In  certain  families,  if  the  eyes  of  a  female  patient  have  to  be  examined, 
she  is  covered  up  with  a  piece  of  thick  cloth,  or  made  to  sit  behind  a  screen.  Two  small 
holes  are  kept  in  the  cloth  or  the  screen  through  which  the  eyes  only  are  seen.  Difficulties 
ean,  therefore,  be  easily  imagined  which  physicians  have  to  encounter  in  India  in  treat¬ 
ing  the  diseases  of  women.  The  movement  inaugurated  by  the  Countess  of  Dufferin  for 
training  lady-physicians  for  the  treatment  of  lady  patients  in  India  is  a  step  in  the  right 
direction. — T. 

t  This  implies  the  absence  of  testicles,  which  injome  diseases,  cannot  be  felt  by  the 
rtouch,  for  they  actually  go  upwards, 

J  The  correct  reading  of  the  last  line  is  ‘lakshanananam  samgraha  sprigyanam 
bhavanam.’  Gangadhara  has  ‘drigyanam’  for  ‘sprigyanam,’  which  is  evidently  incorrect. 
Some  texts  wrongly  omit  ‘sangraha.’  The  use  of  ‘vyasatat’  in  the  succeeding  sentence 
proves  the  correctness  of  the  reading  ‘sangraha,’ — T, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


883 


flanks,  backbone,  hands,  neck,  palate,  hips,  and  forehead  are  cover¬ 
ed  with  sweat,  cold,  motionless,  hard  and  destitute  of  flesh  and 
blood,  he  should  then  be  regarded  as  one  whose  life  has  already 
expired  or  is  about  to  expire.  5 

If  upon  an  examination,  severally  by  touch,  of  the  patient’s 
limbs,  it  is  found  that  his  heels,  knees,  groins,  anus,  testicles,  pennis, 
navel,  shoulders,  breasts,  wrists  cheeks,  ribs,  nose,  ears,  eyes,  eye¬ 
brows,  temples  and  such  other  parts,  have  fallen  away  from  their 
positions,  he  should  then  be  regarded  as  one  whose  life  has  already 
expired  or  is  about  to  expire.  6 

The  physician  should  also  keep  his  eye  upon  these,  vis.,  the 
inspiration  and  expiration  of  the  patient,  his  carotid  arteries,* 
eye-lashes,  eyes,  hair,  bristles  on  the  body,  abdomen,  nails  and 
fingers. 

If  the  inspiration  and  expiration  be  either  very  long  or  very 
short,  the  patient  should  be  regarded  as  already  dead. 

If  upon  touching  his  carotid  arteries  it  is  found  that  they  do  not 
tremble  (or  move),  he  should  be  regarded  as  one  who  is  dead. 

If  his  teeth  appear  to  be  filthy,  excessively  white,  and  overlaid 
with  a  sort  of  white  dust,  he  should  be  regarded  as  dead. 

If  his  eye-lashes  be  found  to  have  become  matted,  he  should  be 
regarded  as  dead. 

If  his  eyes  be  found  to  have  lost  their  normal  aspect  and  be¬ 
come  abnormal,  bulged  out,  or  sunken,  or  excessively  crooked  or 
curved,  or  exceedingly  expanded,  or  productive  of  copious  secre¬ 
tions,  or  always  unwinking,  or  excessively  winking,  or  rolling,  or 
of  vision  entirely  misdirected,  or  of  weakened  or  failing  vision,  or 
colour-blind  so  that  they  see  everything  as  white  or  dark,f  or  red 
as  burning  coals,  or  overlaid  with  any  of  these  abnormal  colours, 
vis.,  dark,  yellow,  blue,  dark-blue,  coppery,  green,  and  white,  he 
should  be  regarded  as  dead.  7 


*  ‘  Manya’  is  generally  used  to  signify  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Here,  as  correctly 
explained  by  Chakrapani,  it  is  used  to  mean  the  carotid  artery,  Lower  down  it  is  used  in 
the  dual  number,  meaning,  of  course,  the  two  carotid  arteries. 

t  Here  two  kinds  of  colour-blindness  are  mentioned,  viz.,  *  Nakulandha’  and  ‘  Kapa- 
tandha.’  The  first  literally  means  ‘blind  like  the  mongoose’  the  second  is  ‘blind  as  the 
pigeon.’  The  first  is  supposed  to  see  everything  as  white  j  the  second,  everything  as 
dark.— T. 


112 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


S&4 

The  hair  on  the  head  and  body  of  the  patient  should  be  pulled. 

If  the  hair  on  the  head  and  body,  when  pulled,  comes  out  with¬ 
out  giving  any  pain  to  the  patient,  he  should  be  regarded  as  one 
who  is  dead. 8 

If  upon  examining  the  abdomen  the  veins  be  found  to  be  visible 
and  if  those  veins  be  dark-blue,  or  coppery,  or  blue,  or  yellow,  or 
white,  he  should  be  regarded  as  dead.  9 

If  his  nails  be  dried  up  and  bloodless,  and  if  their  colour  be 
like  that  of  a  ripe  jamva(«),  he  should  be  regarded  as  dead.  10 

The  fingers  of  the  patient  should  be  pulled. 

If  upon  pulling  the  fingers  they  do  not  produce  the  usual  sound, 
the  patient  should  be  regarded  as  dead.  11 

( Here  occurs  a  verse  containing  a  Summary ). 

The  physician  who,  upon  examination  by  touch,  succeeds  in 
ascertaining  in  the  patient  all  those  diverse  conditions  appertaining 
to*touch,  never  falls  into  error  in  the  matter  of  (calculating)  the 
period  of  life.* 

Thus  ends  the  Third  Lesson,  called  Parimarshaniyamindriyam, 
in  the  Division  called  Indriya,  of  the  treatise  of  Agnive$a  as  revis¬ 
ed  by  Charaka, 


LESSON  IV. 

INDRIYANIKAM. 

(ASSEMBLAGE  OF  SENSES.) 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  called  Indriyanikam)  or  the 
(assemblage  of  senses). 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.*  i 

Learn  from  us  as  to  how  a  physician  conversant  with  distinc¬ 
tions,  desiring  to  ascertain  the  measure  of  life’s  period,  should  exa¬ 
mine  the  several  senses  of  a  human  being.  2 

Vision  and  the  other  senses  are,  with  a  view  to  understand  them 
rightly,  examinable  by  Inference  (and  not  direct  perception)  ;  for, 

a.  Fruit  of  the  Eugenia  jambolana,  Lamk. 

*  The  word  ‘anikam’  implies  an  assemblage  or  collection.  Hence,  '  Indriyanikam’ 
‘assemblage  of  senses’,  that  is,  ‘the  various  senses  taken  together.’ _ T. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


S85 


verily,  the  true  knowledge  of  the  senses  is  not  derived  from  the 
senses,*  3- 

When  a  person’s  sense-derived  knowledge  is  seen  to  disagree, 
without  any  apparent  reason,  with  that  of  one  in  health,  it  should 
be  regarded  as  a  symptom  of  death.f  4 

The  symptoms,  productive  of  evil,  in  respect  of  the  senses, 
have  thus  been  said  (in  brief). 

Listen  now,  again,  to  the  same  more  elaborately.  5 
These  contrarieties  of  visual  appearances,  viz.,  beholding  empty 
space  (or  ether)  as  a  solid  substance,  and  the  earth  as  ether,  are 
symptoms  of  approaching  death.J  6 

The  physician  should  regard  the  life  of  that  person  as  run  out 
who  sees  the  air  which  is  perceptible  by  touch  alone,  or  who  sees 
-not  the  blazing  fire.§  7 

That  man  (soon)  casts  off  his  life-breat-hs  who  beholds  a  net 
spread  out  in  a  piece  of  crystal  water  in  which  no  net  has  really 
been  spread,  or  who  sees;  a  stable  (or  fixed)  object  as  moving.11 8 


*  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  The  senses  of  the  patient,  i.  e.,  his  powers  of  vision, 
hearing,  &c.,  are  examinable  by  Inference  only  and  not  by  direct  perception  of  the 
physician.  If  it  is  the  vision  of  the  patient  that  is  to  be  examined,  the  physician  cannot 
possibly  do  so  by  means  of  his  own  eyes.  What  he  can  do  is  to  apply  the  powers  of 
reasoning  or  take  the  help  of  Inference  for  ascertaining  whether  the  vision  is  impaired  or 
not.  Colour-blindness,  for  example,  cannot  be  ascertained  except  by  exposing  different 
colours,  before  the  patient  and  marking  the  result  by  Inference.  So  whether  a  patient’s 
sense  of  smell  is  right  or  not,  the  physician  cannot  ascertain  by  direct  perception  but  by 
Reasoning  or  Inference.  The  word  ‘atindriyam’  in  the  second  line  of  the  verse  implies 
‘underived  from  direct  perception.’  The  word  has  another  signification  when  applied  to 
knowledge  which  Yogins  have  of  thingsbeyond  the  ken  of  the  senses.  The  latter  signi¬ 
fication,  however,  is  not  entirely  unconnected  with  the  former. — T. 

f  A  healthy  person  sees  a  thing  to  be  red.  One  afflicted  by  disease  sees  it  white.  This 
is  a  sign  of  death  being  near. — T. 

t  Literally,  ‘by  seeing  these  contrarieties  a  person  (soon)  meets  with  death.’ — T. 

§  ‘  Amvaragochara’  implies  ‘  perceptible  by  touch.’  Literally,  it  means  ‘occurring  in 
or  occupying  space  or  ether.’ 

A  misprint  occurs  in  Gangadhara’s  text,  viz.,  the  omission  of  a  ref  a  (or  r )  after  ‘Agni’ 
in  consequence  of  which  the  latest  Bengali  translator  of  Charaka  makes  utter  nonsense  of 
the  second  line.  The  fact  is,  every  one  of  the  five  principal  elements  is  referred  to  suc¬ 
cessively,  in  this  order,  viz. ,  ether,  earth,  air,  fire,  and  water. — T. 

IT  Gangadhara  makes  a  ridiculous  blunder  in  explaining  the  second  line  of  this  verse. 
He  takes  ‘sthite’  and  ‘gachchhati’  as  adjectives  qualifying  ‘jale’  in  the  first  line  like  ‘suvi- 
male.’  According  to  him  the  meaning  of  the  verse  is — ‘  He  who  sees  a  net  in  a  piece' of 


886 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA, 


He  does  not  live  long  who,  in  (even)  his  waking  hours,  sees  ghosts, 
and  Rakshasas  of  diverse  kinds,  and  anything  else  that  is  strange.  9 
He  who  sees  a  blazing  fire  of  ordinary  complexion  as  blue,  or 
without  splendour,  or  dark,  or  white,  lives  for  only  seven  nights. ia 

He  who  sees  light  in  the  skies  when  there  is  no  light,  or  clouds 
when  there  are  no  clouds,  or  flashes  of  lightning  in  the  absence  of 
clouds,  meets  (soon)  with  death. 11 

He  who  sees  the  bright  sun  or  moon  as  having  the  appearance 
of  an  earthen  pot  covered  with  a  dark  cloth,  does  not  live  long. 12 

He  who,  in  health  or  sickness,  sees  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  or  the 
moon,  on  days  other  than  those  of  the  new-moon  and  the  full 
moon,  dies  at  the  time  of  seeing  it.  J3 

He  who  sees  the  sun  at  night,  or  the  moon  when  there  is  no 
moon,  or  smoke  when  there  is  no  fire,  or  who  sees  a  fire  at  night 
to  be  without  splendour,  meets  with  death  very  soon.  H 

Men  who  are  about  to  cast  off  their  life-breaths  behold  these 
adverse  phenomena  :  effulgent  objects  as  divested  of  effulgence,  or 
objects  without  effulgence  as  effulgent  ones.  *5 

Men,  when  the  period  of  their  life  has  run  short,  behold  well- 
formed  objects  as  deformed,  discoloured,  and  incorrect  in  respect  of 
number.  16 

He  who  sees  what  is  invisible,  and  sees  not  what  is  visible,  both 
of  them,  doubtless,  see  the  abode  of  Yama  very  soon.i7 

He  who  hears  (a  sound)  when  there  is  no  sound,  and  does  not 
perceive  sounds  (when  there  are  sounds),  the  physician  possessed 
of  learning  should  know  both  of  them  as  already  dead.  18  • 

That  patient  who,  upon  shutting  his  ears  with  his  fingers,  does 
not  hear  the  sound  of  burning  fire,  should  be  regarded  as  already 
dead  and  abandoned  by  an  intelligent  physician.*  19 

He  who  smells  the  agreeableness  or  disagreeableness  of  odors 
contrawise,  or  who  has  no  smell  of  odors  at  all,  should  be  known 
as  one  whose  life  has  run  short.f  2° 


clear  water,  which  is  either  unmoving  or  moving,  and  in  which  no  net  has  really  been 
spread  &c.,  &c.’— T. 

*  ‘Abandoned,’  i.  e.,  his  treatment  should  not  be  taken  up.  A  healthy  man,  upon 
shutting  his  ears  with  his  fingers,  hears  the  sound  of  burning  fire.— T. 

t  The  sense,  of  course,  of  the  first  line  is,  he  who  perceives  agreeable  odors  to  be  dis¬ 
agreeable,  or  disagreeable  odors  to  be  agreeable. — T, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


887 


He  who,  in  the  absence  of  the  disease  ‘Mukhapaka,’  fails  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  the  different  tastes  or  to  perceive  tastes  at  all,  should  be 
regarded  by  skilful  physicians  as  ripe  for  death.*  21 

One  whose  death  is  near,  having  touched  things  that  are  hot,  or 
cold,  or  rough,  or  smooth,  or  mild,  or  keen,  perceives  them  to  be 
otherwise  (than  what  they  really  are).f  22 

He  who,  without  rigid  penances  or  yoga  duly  practised,  per¬ 
ceives  what  is  beyond  the  ken  of  the  senses,  soon  meets  with 
death-!  23 

He  who  fails  to  perceive  by  his  senses  other  than  the  eye  the 
objects  of  those  senses,  or  who  perceives  them  contrawise,  should 
be  known  as  one  whose  period  of  life  has  run  out.§  24 


*  In  the  disease  called  *  Mukhapaka,’  the  mouth  becomes  filled  with  sores. — T. 
t  This  verse  may  be  translated  otherwise  as  follows  :  ‘one  whose  death  is  near,  receives 
impressions  of  touch  contrawise,  that  is,  perceives  a  thing  that  is  hot  to  be  cool,  or  a  thing 
that  is  rough  to  be  smooth,  or  a  thing  that  is  mild  to  be  keen.’  I  prefer  the  wider  meaning. 

t  It  should  be  asked  that  by  practising  rigid  penances  or  Yoga,  one  attains  to  super¬ 
human  powers.  A  Yogin,  for  example,  beholds  the  whole  earth  as  a  fruit  on  the  palm 
of  his  hand.  He  has  knowledge,  again,  of  the  past,  the  present  and  the  future.  If,  how¬ 
ever,  a  person  without  yoga  puissance  perceives  things  beyond  the  ken  of  the  senses,  that  is 
abnormal  and  indicates  the  near  approach  of  death. — T. 

§  The  Bengali  translators,  following  Gangadhara,  make  utter  nonsense  of  this  verse. 
If  Gangadhara’s  reading,  which  has  been  adopted  above,  be  correct,  what  the  Rishi  says 
is  this  :  without  speaking  of  the  eye,  but  speaking  of  only  the  other  four  senses,  he  who 
fails  to  perceive  by  those  four  senses  their  respective  objects,  or  perceives  them  contrawise, 
soon  meets  with  death.  In  reality,  a  dying  man  loses  the  other  four  senses  first.  His 
eyes  do  not  (generally)  lose  ther  power  till  the  very  last. 

According  to  Gangadhara  this  verse  means — he  dies  soon  who  perceives  by  his  eye  the 
objects  of  the  other  senses.’  This  is  simply  ridiculous.  Can  any  one,  in  illness,  perceive 
smell  or  sound  or  taste  or  touch  by  the  eye  ?  Chakrapani,  however,  adopts  an  entirely 
different  reading,  viz., 

Indriyanamrite  drishterindriyarthanadoshajan 
Narah  paQyati  yah  kagchidindriyairna  sa  jivati. 

Following  Chakrapani,  the  version  should  be, — “  He  who,  without  possession  of  the 
power  of  the  senses,  perceives  such  objects  of  the  senses  as  are  not  made  manifest  through, 
any  vitiation  of  theirs,  meets  with  death.” 

An  example'is  necessary  to  make  the  meaning  clear.  One  afflicted  by  jaundice  sees 
things  to  be  yellow  that  are  not,  in  reality,  yellow.  This  yellowness  of  every  object  is  due> 
to  a  vitiation  of  the  eye.  If,  however,  one  whose  eyes  are  not  afflicted  by  jaundice,  sees 
white  or  red  or  green  things  to  be  yellow,  he  does  not  live.  Then,  again,  if  one  who  has 
totally  lost  the  power  of  vision,  suddenly  begins,  in  illness,  to  see  things,  that  symptom 
indicates  the  near  approach  of  death, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


If  even  healthy  men  in  consequence  of  confusion  (or  loss)  of 
understanding,  perceives  on  many  occasions  contrary  impressions 
of  the  objects  of  the  senses,  the  physician  should  assign  their  death 
to  be  near.  25 

( Here  is  a  verse  containing  a  Summary ). 

That  physician  who  is  truly  conversant  with  the  Science  of  the 
senses  (as  expounded  above)  is  fully  acquainted  with  the  subject 
of  death  and  life. 

Thus  ends  Lesson  IV.  called  Indriyanika,  in  the  Division  called 
Indriya,  of  Agnivega’s  treatise  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  V. 

OF  PREMONITORY  SYMPTOMS. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  Premonitory  Symp¬ 
toms,  relating  to  the  senses,  of  life  and  death. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri. 


Generally,  when  such  objects  of  the  senses  as  are  not  manifested  through  any  vitiation 
of  the  senses,  become  perceivable  notwithstanding  the  feet  that  the  senses  themselves  have 
lost  their  powers,  it  is  regarded  as  an  abnormal  sign  foreboding  death.  Hence,  the  sudden 
recovery  of  a  sense,  during  illness,  after  its  loss  for  a  long  while,  is  an  abnormal  symptom 
indicating  the  near  approach  of  death. 

The  adjective  ‘adoshajan’  (qualifying  ‘indriyarthan’)  is  used  simply  for  excluding  such 
cases  of  perception  as  do  arise  in  consequence  of  a  vitiation  of  the  senses.  In  other  words, 
all  perceptions  which  would  not  be  possible  if  the  senses  were  in  their  normal  state, 
indeed,  which  become  possible  owing  to  a  vitiation  of  the  senses,  are  excluded  by  this 
adjective.  Of  course,  those  perceptions  are  abnormal,  but  then  they  do  not  indicate 
death,  being,  as  they  are,  due  to  known  and  explicable  causes.  The  fact  is,  when  there  is 
no  vitiation  of  the  senses, — when,  indeed,  the  senses  themselves  are  not, — and  yet  percep¬ 
tion  takes  place,  it  is  a  sign  of  death,  such  perception  being  exceedingly  abnormal. 

In  the  verse  immediately  preceding,  perceptions  have  been  adverted  to  of  a  kind  that 
transcend  the  powers  of  the  senses'.  Such  perceptions  are  possible  for  Yogins.  When, 
however,  they  occur  to  ordinary  men,  they  are  abnormal  and,  therefore,  indicate  the  near 
aproach  of  death. 

Chakrapani’s  reading  is  undoubtedly  better  than  that  of  Gangadhara.  It  has  been 
already  observed  how  Gangadhara,  having  adopted  an  incorrect  reading,  has  explained 
the  verse  incorrectly. — T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMH1TA. 


For  enhancing  the  knowledge  of  physicians  we  shall  now 
declare  the  general  and  especial  premonitory  symptoms  of  incu¬ 
rable  diseases  naming  the  latter  separately. 2 

Death,  with  fever  as  his  harbinger,  enters  into  that  person  into 
whom  all  the  premonitory  symptoms  spoken  of  in  connection  with 
fever  enter  in  an  excessive  degree.3 

The  death  of  that  man  also  is  certain  into  whom  the  premoni¬ 
tory  symptoms  of  any  other  disease  enter  in  the  same  measure.*  4 
We  shall  speak  of  certain  other  premonitory  symptoms  of  a 
fierce  character,  which  keep  company  with  certain  diseases,  and  by 
which  death  may  be  inferred..  5 

The  consumption  of  that  man  increases  for  bringing  about  death 
whose  strength  decreases,  whose  phlegmonous  secretions  (through  the 
mouth)  increase,  and  who  becomes  addicted  to  sexual  indulgence.!  6 
That  person  who,  in  his  dream,  goes  in  a  southward  direction, 
riding  on  a  dog,  or  a  camel,  or  an  ass,  gets  phthisis  and  casts  off 
his  life!  7 

He  who  drinks  wine,  in  his  dreams  with  the  dead,  or  who  is 
dragged  (in  his  dreams)  by  a  dog,  gets  severe  fever  and  does  not 
live  for  the  fever  does  not  forsake  him. 8 

He  who  beholds  the  welkin  in  his  vicinity  looking  like  a  sheet 
of  cloth  dyed  red  as  if  with  lac,  gets  bilious  hemorrhage  and  is 
borne  to  the  presence  of  Yama.  9 

He  who,  in  his  dreams,  sees  himself  decked  with  garlands  of 
red  flowers,  and  clad  in  red  clothes,  and  his  whole  body  dyed  red, 
and  who,  while  laughing  continually,  is  dragged  by  a  woman,  gets 
bilious  hemorrhage  and  succumbs  to  it.  i° 

He  who  has  deep-seated  pains  (in  the  abdomen),  or  flatulence, 
or  rumbling  noise  in  the  intestines,  and  weakness  in  an  excessive 
degree,  and  discolouration  in  the  nails  and  other  parts  of  the  body, 
meets  with  death  if  afflicted  by  ‘  Gulma’  (abdominal  tumour),  n 


*  1  In  the  same  measure,’  i.  e..  in  an  excessive  degree. — T. 

t  In  consumption,  the  sexual  apetite  is  seen  to  increase  inordinately.  Hence  the  use 
of  the  word  ‘nariprasakta’  in  the  sense  of  ‘addicted  to  women.’  Patients,  even  when  they 
know  that  sexual  indulgenge  is  sure  to  bring  about  death,  repeatedly  indulge  in  it  unless 
restrained  by  proper  arrangements  made  by  relatives  and  friends.— T. 

f  The  second  line  is  read  differently  in  some  texts,  though  there  is  no  difference  of 
meaning.  Instead  of  ‘yakshmanamasadya  jivitam  sa  vimunchati,’  those  texts  read — 
‘yalcshma  tamavifya  na  jivannavasrijyati.’ — T. 


890 


CHARAKA-SAMH1 TA. 


That  man  who  sees,  in  his  dreams,  hard  and  thorny  creepers 
grown  on  his  chest,  is  borne  to  Yama’s  abode  by  the  disease  called 
Gulma  that  has  afflicted  him  in  a  fierce  form. 12 

He  whose  body,  upon  being  slightly  scratched,  becomes  exceed¬ 
ingly  cracked,  producing  sores  that  do  not  heal,  is  taken  away  by 
Yama  with  the  aid  of  leprosy  (of  diverse  forms).  13 

He  who,  in  his  dreams,  sees  himself  naked,  his  body  smeared 
with  ghee,  and  engaged  in  pouring  libations  on  a  fire  that  has  been 
quenched,  and  who,  besides,  sees  lotuses  growing  upon  his  chest, 
is  borne  away  to  the  regions  of  death  by  leprosy.  J4 

If  flies  attack  a  persons’s  body  that  has  been  washed  and  smear¬ 
ed  with  unguents,  that  person  is  certain  to  catch  any  of  the  urinary 
diseases  called  ‘  Prameha’,  which  puts  him  to  death.  15 

He  who  drinks,  in  his  dreams,  various  kinds  of  oily  substances 
such  as  (milk,  ghee,  &c.)  in-  the  company  of  Chandalas,  becomes 
afflicted  by  Prameha  and  touched  by  (marked  for)  death.  16 

He  who  becoms  subject  to  moods  of  thoughtfulness,  sense  of 
fatigue  (without  toil),  anxiety,  and  stupefaction  when  there  is  no 
cause  for  it,  absence  of  pleasure  in  anything,  and  loss  of  strength, 
meets  with  death  through  insanity.*  l7 

A  physician  possessed  of  wisdom  should  regard  that  man  as  on 
the  point  of  death  through  fatal  insanity  whom  he  sees  to  have  an 
aversion  for  food,  whose  mind  is  a  perfect  void,  and  who  is  afflicted 
by  urticaria  evanida.j-  18 

Insanity  kills  that  man  who  gives  way  to  wrath,  who  yields  to 
fear  in  an  excessive  degree,  whose  face  is  very  rarely  lighted  up 
with  smiles,  who  is  frequently  subject  to  swoons,  and  whose  thirst 
is  insatiable.  r9 


*  ‘  Dhyana’  is  deep  meditation  or  reflection.  Here  it  means  moods  of  thoughtfulness. 
‘  Ayasa’  is  explained  as  sense  of  fatigue  without  toil.  ‘  Moha’  is  stupefaction  :  it  may 
also  mean  ‘delusion.’  The  adjective  ‘asthanasambhava’  implies  ‘not  born  of  a  proper 
cause.’  Thus,  one  may  grieve  for  the  death,  that  has  not  taken  place,  of  a  friend  or 
relative.  ‘  Arati’  is  the  absence  of  ‘rati’  or  pleasure.  What  is  implied  by  it  is  a  disgust 
for  everything.  Gangadhara  takes  it  as  implying  restlessness  of  mind.  This,  however,  is 
a  consequence  of  ‘arati,’  and  not  ‘arati’  itself. — T. 

t  The  last  word  of  the  second  line  is  either  ‘udardda,’  meaning  urticaria  evanida,  or 
‘udardha’  implying  scarlet  fever.  The  reading  which  Gangadhara  adopts,  as  regards  the 
first  line,  is, — ‘aharadweshanam  yasya  luptachittamudardditam.’  The  last  compound  is 
explained  by  him  in  a  way  that  is  utterly  unintelligible.— T. 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister,  Maryland,  U.  S.  A. : — You  have  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California ...  .  As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent . 

There  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  theraputic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajous,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  .-—You  are  entitled  to  "the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satelite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  ' Ohio,  U.  S,  A.  : — The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge: — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccless  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York  .-—Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis,  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila- 
■delphia: — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
■importance.  . .  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Philadelphia : — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sincerely 
hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the  happy 
ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I  expect 
will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the  greatest 
Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  of  Cashmere : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Facility,  North-Western 
University,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition  .-—I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  : — Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  19,  East 38th  Street,  New  York : — Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Traise,  Dramstadt The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  Proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A., 
Editor  Meyer  Brother f  Druggists : — I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere  174,  Boulevatse ,  Saint  Germain  -. — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  : — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  I  always 
arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop 
from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients 
according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and 
fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  thecompletion  of  the 
work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  [Bonnerjee,  Eaq.,  6,  Park  Street ,  Calcutta-. — My  dear  Pandit  ICabiratna' 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  promise  to  you  [about 
drawing  their  attention  to]  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after. — An 

Ayurvedic  physician  of  note  .  considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  Medical  literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing : — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector-. — Your  patriotic 
labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun . You  de¬ 

serve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  H.  Skrifle,  Esq.,  Magistrate  and  Collector : — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with 
interest.  It  is  marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonder¬ 
ful  to  note  the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how 
completely  they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to 
the  enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Gierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gya  It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynall,  Bangor,  North  Wales  :-r-The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Lohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  Your  English  translation 
,  of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as  ;pos- 
'  sibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning  to 
find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws. of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every  system 
of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is  a  work 
that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji,— The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


fi.  ■ 


Mi 


try 


PART  XXIX. 


,-tf  )  l  dst/^ — J 

'<nr 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


( TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH) 


PUBLISHED  BY 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  Original)  WITH  COMMENT¬ 
ARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 
journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  the  Hindu 
SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C.,  &C, 


CALCUTTA : 

200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N.  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRATNA  PRESS, 
12,  SIMLAH  STREET  BYE-LANfi. 

1902, 

( The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved. ) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters. ) 

Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — .  I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  atracted  more  attention. 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Libiarian  to  the  India  Office — . Your 

excellent  translation  .  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West  . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

.  Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York ,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenbtirgh,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College ,  New  York,  V  S.  A.— I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing.  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons  A.  Birth.,  Paris : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to„,  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris: — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany  . — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  IConigsbursh,  Germany  : — English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal: — I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life 
cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 

James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister,  Maryland,  U  S.  A.  : — You  have  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California: —  .  As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent . 

There  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  .-—You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis',  Ohio,  U.  S,  A.  : — The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge : — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccless,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York: — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis,  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia  : — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS 


OF  ' 

PART  XXIX. 

The  contents  of  this  part  are,  perhaps,  most  interesting.  It 
begins  with  the  concluding  portion  of  Lesson  V.  which  is  mainly 
taken  up  with  such  dreams  as  are  near  precursors  of  death.  In 
Lesson  VI.  occurs  certain  indications  of  the  near  approach  of 
death,  at  the  sight  of  which  a  physician  should  not  take  up  the 
treatment.  Lesson  VII.  also  treats  of  certain  features  which  prog¬ 
nosticate  the  near  approach  of  death.  The  subject  matter  of  Les¬ 
son  VIII.  is  of  the  same  kind.  In  Lesson  IX.,  X  and  XI.  also  the 
Rishi  speaks  of  symptoms  which  should  lead  a  physician  to  avoid 
a  patient  inasmuch  as  those  are  precursors  of  death.  Lesson  XII. 
treats  of  messengers  despatched  for  fetching  the  physician  and 
omens  good  and  bad  connected  with  them. 

To  Western  readers  many  portions  of  these  Lessons  may 
appear  fanciful.  But  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  facts 
stated  are  all  based  upon  observation.  The  Rishis  were  acute  ob¬ 
servers.  To  convict  them  of  superstition  and  prejudice  would  argue 
an  unscientific  mind.  Every  practitioner  of  Hindu  medicine  daily 
meets  with'cases  in  which  the  truth  of  one  or  other  of  these  obser¬ 
vations  is  abundantly  established.  The  fact  is,  these  should  not 
be  condemned  as  groundless  or  fanciful  or  a  priori  reasoning.  As 
regards  the  indications  connected  with  the  body  of  the  patient, 
there  is  nothing  that  is  opposed  to  medical  science.  If  European 
treatises  on  medicine  do  not  mention  them,  it  is  because  medical 
■men  do  not  accurately  observe  them.  If,  again,  the  truth  of  some 
■of  those  statements  becomes  manifest  to  every  practitioner,  the 
inference  is  not  unscientific  that  careful  observation  will  estab¬ 
lish  the  *  truth  of  the  other  statements  occuring  in  these  Lessons. 
At  any  rate  the  subject  is  most  interesting.  It  should  be  studied 
before  dismissed  as  baseless  superstition.  It  seems  to  be  a  fashion 
to  dismiss  dreams  as  indicating  nothing.  Yet  in  the  experience 
of  many  men,  dreams  have  been  found  to  foreshadow  the  truth  in 
at  least  some  instances.  Fashionable  wisdom  seeks  to  satisfy  itself 
by  calling  these  cases  as  strange  coincidences.  But  is  not  this 


explanation  an  instance  of  drawing  enquiry  by  deception  ?  Strange 
coincidence !  What  does  the  expression  mean  ?  A  moment’s 
thought  reveals  the  truth  that  what  is  meant  by  the  words  is  that 
dreams  do  correspond  with  subsequent  facts  ;  that  the  number  of 
instances  is  few ;  and,  lastly,  that  such  correspondence  does  not 
admit  of  any  explanation.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the 
Rishi,  in  these  lessons,  does  not  say  that  every  dream  foreshadows 
the  reality.  What  he  says  is  that  certain  dreams  of  persons  afflict¬ 
ed  with  illness  are  fulfilled.  As  already  observed,  the  subject  de¬ 
serves  to  be  investigated  and  studied  with  care  before  dismissing 
it  as  the  raving  of  ignorance  and  superstition. 

The  omens  connected  with  messengers  despatched  for  fetching 
the  physician,  or  those  connected  with  the  physician’s  doings  or 
•condition  at  the  time  or  the  sights  he  sees  while  on  his  way  to  the 
patient’s  house,  are,  no  doubt,  difficult  to  swallow.  It  should  be 
remembered,  however,  that  they  are  not  mentioned  -as  exercising 
any  influence  of  their  own  on  the  result  of  treatment,  vis.,  death  or  . 
cure.  On  the  other  hand,  they  are  sanctioned  as  accidents  or  co¬ 
existing  facts.  Even  here  the  value  of  observation  cannot  be 
ignored.  That  men  whose  minds  were  acutely  logical  should  set 
importance  on  such  accidents  and  connect  them  with  such  a  grave 
fact  as  the  life  or  the  death  of  a  patient,  may  not,  perhaps,  mean 
much,  for  the  grossest  superstitions  have  been  seen  to  ,exist  side  by 
side  with  the  advanced  notions  of  science  in  m'inds  of  undoubted 
culture.  There  is  no  exploded  theory  in  science  that  cannot  be 
revived  if  such  an  argument  be  regarded  to  have  much  force.  For 
all  that,  when  men  of  advanced  culture  put  forth  a  statement  alleg¬ 
ing  observation  to  be  its  foundation,  the  truth  or  otherwise  of  such 
statement  -may  easily  be  tested  by  observation.  The  Rishis  do  not 
pretend  to  the  possession  of  a  sixth  sense  by  help  of  which  they 
come  forward  to  interpret  certain  dreams  of  diseased  persons. 
They  appeal  only  to  those  senses  which  all  -men  possess.  As  such, 
they  should  not  be  shut  out  of  court  on  the  -strength  of  our  own 
prejudices.  They  ARE  ENTITLED  to  a  fair  hearing.-  Science  re¬ 
gards  nothing  to  be -superstition  without  a  careful  examination.  It 
is  earnestly  expected  that  statements  made  in  these  parts,  however 
wild  and  fanciful  apparently,  will  not  be  rejected  without  a  careful 
examination. 


Palamau,  Bengal^ 
The  2otk  July  1902. 


My  dear  Panditjee, 

The  XXVI 1 1th  Part  of  the  Charaka-Samhita  has  just  reached 
me,  redirected  from  Bogra,  which  place  I  left  in  September  last. 
Since  then  one  other  Part,  I  think,  I  have  received,  but  I  thank  you 
all  the  same  for  remembering  me  occasionally.  On  opening  the 
present  Part  I  was  most  agreeably  surprised  to  read,  on  its  very 
first  p'a'g<e,  ah  account  of  the  Ayurvedic  Institute  which  you  have 
started  and  I  could  not  help  exclaiming — “At  last.” 

For  many  years  past.  I  have  silently  watched  the  great  revival 
that  is  going  on  all  over  India.  Out  of  the  'depths  of  a  dinriforgot- 
ten  past,  wave  after  wave  was  being  thrown  forward  by  some 
strange  and  mysterious  force,  and  on  the  crest  of  each,  came  borne 
along  India’s  old  -religion,  her  philosophy,  her  literature,  her  science, 
and  even  some  of  her  manners  and  customs  long  since  dead.  As  one 
huge  wave  after  another  came  rolling  on,  each  grander  and  more 
majestic  than  its  predecessor,  my  heart  thrilled  in  expectancy,  but 
grew  weary  of  waiting  for  the  one,  I  have  been  straining  my  vision 
for,  viz ,,  -India’s  great  system  of  medicine  long  relegated  to  the 
regions  of  darkness  and  oblivion.  At  last  it  has  come  and  may  the 
Ayurvedic  Institute  -live  long  and  help  in  restoring  it  to  its  proper 
place  in  the  temple  of  India’s  future,  in  all  its  ancient  majesty  and 
grandeur ! 

These  effusions  from  a  man  brought  up  in  an  alien  system  of 
medicine  and  practising  the  same  in  the  service  of  an  alien  Govern¬ 
ment  qmay  -appear  strange  to  you,  but  I  am  a  firm  believer  in 
“ancient  ideals  in  modern  life.”  I  do  not  advocate  your  system  in 
detriment  to  the  one  in  which  I  have  been  brought  up,  but  I  take 
it  as  one  of  the  many  phases  of  Eternal  Truth,  as  one  of  the 
■many  segments  of  a  great  whole  yet  unknown,  and,  as  such,  I  wel¬ 
come  its  revival  and  wish  your  Institute  all  success,  With  kindest 
regards, 


Pandit  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna, 
Calcutta , 


Believe  me, 

My  dear  Kavirajjee, 

Ever  yours  most  sincerely 
Nobin  Chandra  Dutt, 
Civil  Medicdl  Officer,  Palamau. 


Kidderpur, 
Bedford  Park, 
CROYDON, 

ENGLAND. 
July  1 8th,  1902.' 


My  dear  Kaviratna  Mahashaya, 

*  *  *  As  I  told  you  when  you  first  spoke  to  me  about  yoUr 
desire  to  establish  the  institute,  I  take  great  interest  in  the  project 
and  sincerely  hope  it  will  be  a  success.  It  was  a  bad  time  for  our 
Ayurvedic  system  of  medicine  when  our  countrymen  first  took 
to  studying  allopathic  medicine.  Most  of  them  discarded  our 
system  altogether  and  it  has  not  regained  its  old  strength  yet 
although  it  is  gaining  ground  every  day.  The  mistake  our  medical 
men  made  was  in  giving  up  the  study  of  our  system.  What  they 
ought  to  have  done  was  to  study  the  Western  system  in  connection 
with  our  own  and  then  take  the  best  of  both  and  make  a  new 
system.  Even  now  the  only  effort  that  was  made  in  this  direction 
was  by  you,  through  the  medium  of  your  ‘-Chikitsa-sammilani,” 
and  your  effort  did  not  receive  the  encouragement  that  it  ought  to 
have.  I  am  anxious  that  our  system  of  medicine  should  be 
properly  studied  and  brought  into  harmony  with  modern- disco¬ 
veries,  particularly  in  the  direction  of  Surgery.  Your  Institute,  if 
it  receives  proper  support,  will  be  sure  to  do  this,  and  I  heartily 
wish  it  every  success. 

Hoping  you  are  quite  well  and  wishing  you  every  success  in  all 
your  ventures, 

I  remain, 

Yours  most  sincerely, 

(Sd.)  W.  C.  BONNERJEE. 

Pandit  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna-, 

Calcutta. 


NOTICE. 


Our  Subscribers  will,  no  doubt,  be  glad  to  learn 
that  we  have,  at  last,  established  a  Printing  Press 
<?f  our  own.  We  intend  to  bring  out  a  Part  every 
month.  Hitherto  we  equld  not  do  it  as  we  were 
obliged  to  depend  upon  others.  We  have  laid  out 
a  good  sum  on  our  Printing  Press.  Part  XXVIII,, 
Which  we  now  issue,  has  been  printed  in  our  Press. 
That  the  work  has  been  executed  in  a  superior  style 
will  at  once  be  manifest.  To  satisfy  our  Subscribers 
has  all  along  been  our  chief  aim.  Now  that  we  have 
got  a  Press  of  our  own,  subscribers  may  rely  upon 
our  word  that  the  work  will  be  completed  as  quickly 
as  possible. 


IMPORTANT. 


We  have  dispensed  with  the  services  of  Agents 
„in  the  matter  of  collecting  subscriptions.  Sub¬ 
scribers  are  requested  not  to  pay  the  arrears  of 
their  subscriptions  to  any  one  who  visits  them. 
They  should  remit  their  dues  directly  to  the  head- 
office  at  200  Cornwallis  Street,  Calcutta,  by  Postal 
Money  Orders  or  in  registered  Covers  addressed 
to  the  undersigned.  Our  last  Agents  were  Babu 
Narendra  Nath  Roy,  Babu  Kalidas  Sircar,  and  Babu 
Hem  Chandra  Dutt,  L.  M.  S.  The  first  was  ‘doing’ 
Behar,  the  Central  Provinces,  and  Bombay  City. 
The  second  was  ‘doing’  East  Bengal  and  Assam.  The 
third  was  travelling  in  Nuddea  and  the  contiguous 
Districts.  Our  relations  with  all  the  three  have  been 
suspended.  If  we  appoint  Agents  in  future,  we  shall 
publish  their  names  duly. 

P.  S.  We  shall  be  obliged  to  the  Subscribers  giving  us  intimation  if  any  one 
visits  them  as  my  Agent.  In  that  case  the  so-called  Agent  should  be  known  as 
an  imposter. 

10-6-1902.  j 


AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 


INSTITUTION 


FOR  THE 

DIFFUSION  OF  AYURVEDIC  KNOWLEDGE. 

An  Association  of  Kavirajes  has  been  established  in  Calcutta 
.under  the  name  of  “Ayurvedic  Institute.”  The  immediate 
object  is  a  diffusion  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Hindu  Medical  Scrip¬ 
tures  by  means  of  popular  lectures.  The  proceedings  of  the  first 
meeting  are  circulated  herewith.  The  ultimate  object  of  the  Insti¬ 
tute  is  the  establishment  of  an  Ayurvedic  College,  with  an  Hospital 
attached  to  it  where  patients  may  be  treated  according  to  the 
Ayurvedic  method  and  the  results  published  in  a  journal.  A  garden 
for  the  cultivation  of  the  plants,  &c.,  which  furnish  the  ingredients' 
of  Ayurvedic  medicines,  is  also  in  contemplation. 

We  respectfully  invite  expressions  of  opinion  from  the  thinking 
portion  of  the  Indian  community.  We  shall,  indeed,  be  greatly 
obliged  if  men  of  culture  kindly  communicate  their  views  to  us  on 
this  all-important  subject. 

Calcutta  1  * 

200  Cornwallis  Street ,  [AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

10-6-1902.  J 


THE  AYURVEDIC  INSTITUTE. 


We  are  very  glad  to  see  that  in  response  to  our  invitation  to 
the  thinking  portion  of  the  community  to  favour  us  with  expres¬ 
sions  of  opinion  on  the  proposed  Ayurvedic  Institute,  we  have 
received  several  letters  from  different  parts  of  India,  and  Europe 
as  well.  We  select  two  from  among  those,  one  of  them  is  from  an 
eminent  physician  who  is  certainly  qualified  by  his  knowledge  and 
experience  to  give  an  opinion  on  this  all-important  subject.  His 
letter  will  speak  for  itself  far  better  than  anything  we  can  say. 
The  other'  is  from  a  distinguished  patient  whose  name  is  a  house¬ 
hold  word  in  every  part  of  India.  His  intelligence  and  culture 
have  already  placed  him  at  the  head  of  his  profession. 

We  shall  feel  highly  obliged  if  others  among  our  countrymen 
favour  us  with  their  opinions. 

Calcutta,  j 

200  Cornwallis  Street,]  AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA. 

1 2-9- 1 902.  J 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


That  man  goes  to  the  world  hereafter  who,  in  his  dreams, 
dances  with  Rakshasas  and  sinks  in  water.  20 

He  who  sees  darkness  when  there  is  no  darkness,  and  who,  in 
his  waking  hours,  hears  many  sounds  ©F:  various  kinds,  is  carried 
off  by  epilepsy.  21 

Death,  with  epilepsy  as  his  harbinger,  bears  away  that  man 
who,  in  his  dreams,  is  borne  away,  head  downwards,  while  dancing 
in  intoxication,  by  a  person  that  is  dead.*  22 

Tetanus  seizes  and  kills,  without  doubt,  that  man  who  is  attack¬ 
ed,  while  awake,  by  any  of  these  diseases,  viz paralysis  of  the 
cheeks,  wryneck,  and  paralysis  of  the  eyelids.  23 

That  man  dies  who  having  eaten,  in  his  dreams,  cakes  of  ses¬ 
ame  seeds  and  rice,  vomits  something  like  them  upon  waking  from 
sleep.  24 

The  physician  who  is  well  acquainted  with  these  premonitory 
symptoms  becomes  conversant  also  with  the  diseases  which  they 
bring  about  and  their  result  (viz.,  death).  25 

Certain  other  dreams,  of  a  fierce  kind,  mentioned  below,  should 
be  attended  to  as  they  also  prognosticate  either  death  or  severe 
sufferings  of  diseased  persons.  26 

He  who,  in  his  dreams,  sees  bamboos,  clumps  of  plants  and 
trees,  and  creepers  growing  in  his  head,  and  birds  coming  into 
them,  or  who  sees  his  head  clean-shaved,  27 

Or  who,  in  his  dreams,  sees  himself  surrounded  by  vultures, 
owls,  dogs,  crows,  and  other  carrion  birds,  or  by  Rakshasas,  dead 
men,  Pi^achas,  women,  Chandalas  and  Asuras  of  the  class  called 
'Dravita  Andhakas’,  28 

Or  who,  in  his  dreams,  finds  himself  surrounded  by  pathless 
forests  of  bamboos,  of  canes,  of  creepers,  as  also  of  grass  and  prick¬ 
ly  plants,  and  confounded  in  their  midst,  and  falling  down  while 
endeavouring  to  come  out,  29 

Or  who,  in  his  dreams,  falls  down  on  the  bare  ground  covered 
with  dust,  or  upon  an  anthill,  or  upon  ashes,  or  upon  a  cremato¬ 
rium,  or  into  a  hole,  3° 

Or  who,  in  his  dreams,  sinks  in  a  ditch  or  pond  of  dirty  water, 
or  into  a  mire,  or  in  a  dark  well,  or  who  is  borne  away  by  a  rapid 
current,  31 

Or  who,  in  his  dreams,  drinks  oily  drinks  (such  as  ghee,  milk, 


*  ‘Avidhya’  implies  ‘head  downwards/  that  is,  seized  by  the  hair  and  dragged  away 
with  head  bent  down, — T. 


892 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


&c.),  or  rubs  his  body  (or  causes  to  be  rubbed)  with  oil,  or  under¬ 
goes  defeat  and  capture,  or  gets  gold,  or  engages  in  a  quarrel,  or 
vomits,  or  defecates,  32 

Or  who  loses  both  his  shoes  and  sandals,  or  sees  the  skin  of 
his  feet  peeling  off,  or  feels  joy,  or  gets  a  severe  rebuke  or  chiding 
from  his  deceased  ancestors,  33 

Or  who  sees,  in  his  dreams,  the  fall  or  destruction  of  (his  own) 
teeth,  or  of  the  moon  or  the  sun,  or  the  stars  and  constellations, 
or  of  (burning)  lamps,  or  of  (images  of)  Daityas,  or  of  (his  own) 
eyes,  or  the  cracking  of  a  mountain,  34 

Or  who,  in  his  dreams,  enters  a  forest  of  trees  with  red  flowers, 
or  a  place  where  sinful  acts  are  perpetrated,  or  the .  funeral  pyre, 
or  a  place  where  his  progress  is  obstructed  by  thick  darkness  like  to 
what  occurs  in  a  cave,  35 

Or  who,  in  his  dreams,  sees  himself  proceeding  towards  the 
south,  himself  decked  with  garlands  of  red  flowers,  laughing  aloud, 
and  perfectly  naked,  or  who  enters  a  terrible  forest,  riding  on  a 
vehicle  drawn  or  borne  by  apes,  soon  meets  with  death,  or  is 
plunged  into  great  distress.  36 

The  sight,  again,  in  one’s  dreams,  of  persons  clad  in  yellow 
garments,  or  of  men  who  are  of  unamiable  features,  or  of  men  who 
are  naked,  or  of  men  bearing  staves,*  or  of  men  of  dark  hue  (or 
clad  in  dark  clothes),  or  of  men  with  red  eyes,  is  never  regarded 
but  as  an  ill  omen  (by  those  who  are  conversant  with  the  effects 
of  dreams).  37 

The  sight  of  a  woman  who  is  of  dark  colour,  who  is  sinful,  who 
is  unobservant  of  the  practices  of  the  good,  who  has  long  hair  and 
nails,  and  hanging  breasts,  or  who  is  clad  in  garlands  of  red  flowers 
and  red  garments,  is  regarded  tp  be  as  fatal  as  a  fatal  night.  38 

Even  these  are  terrible  dreams  by  seeing  which  one  that  is 
afflicted  by  disease  meets  with  death. 

If  a  man  in  health  sees  such  dreams,  his  life  becomes  doubtful, 
and  rarely  does  he  escape.  39 

When  the  ducts  which  carry  impressions  of  external  objects 
to  the  mind,  are  obstructed  by  the  three  faults  exceedingly  excited, 
it  is  then,  vis.,  at  that  exceedingly  unpropitious  time,  that  one  sees 
such  terrible  dreams.  4° 

One,  when  one’s  slumbers  are  light,  sees  various  kinds  of 


*  That  is,  men  who  have  renounced  the  world  and  betaken  to  the  life  of  Bhikshus  ; 
in  other  words,  who  support  themselves  by  eleemosynary  alms.— T. 


CHARAKA  -SAM HI  TA. 


893 


dreams,  that  are  either  realised  or  not  realised,  through  one’s  mind 
which,  of  course,  is  the  lord  of  the  senses.  41 

The  learned  know  that  dreams  are  of  seven  kinds,  viz.,  Seen, 
Heard,  Felt,  Desired,  Imagined,  Prognosticating,  and  Fault- 
born.*  42 

Amongst  these,  the  first  five,  as  also  the  dreams  one  sees  during 
daytime,  and  all  dreams  that  are  exceedingly  short,  and  those  that 
are  exceedingly  long,  should  be  regarded  by  the  intelligent  physi¬ 
cian  as  not  likely  to  be  realised.  43 

The  dream  that  is  seen  during  the  first  part  of  the  night  is 
realized  partially.  He,  however,  who  having  seen  a  dream  does 
not  sleep  after  it,  (for  the  rest  of  the  night),  soon  meets  with  a 
complete  realisation  of  his  dream, f  44 

It  should  be  known  that  if  a  person  having  (first)  seen  an  evil 
dream,  (afterwards)  sees,  without  waking  up,  another  dream  that 
is  auspicious  and  of  beneficial  form,  he  meets  with  good  resultsj.  45 

Here  occurs  a  verse  containing  a  Summary. 

That  physician  who  is  conversant  with  those  premonitory 
symptoms  (of  diseases,  which  bring  about  death),  as  also  with 
these  terrible  dreams,  never  takes  up,  from  ignorance,  the  treatment 
of  diseases  that  are  incurable.  1 

Thus  ends  the  Fifth  -Lesson,  called  Purvarupiyam-Indriyam, 


*  The  seven  kinds  of  dreams  are  thus  explained  :  When  dreams  arise  from  what  has 
been  seen,  they  fall  under  the  class  called  Seen  ;  when  from  what  has  been  heard,  they  fall 
under  the  class  called  Heard  ;  when  they  spring  from  what  has  been  felt,  they  fall  under 
the  class  called  Felt ;  when  they  are  due  to  desires  actually  cherished,  they  fall  within  the 
class  called  Desired ;  when  they  are  caused  by  the  action  of  the  imagination  (such  as 
golden  cow,  which  is  a  combination  of  gold  and  cow)  they  fall  within  the  class  called 
Imagined,  When  they  indicate  what  is  to  happen,  they  are  called  Prognosticating  ;  lastly, 
when  they  are  especially  due  to  the  action  of  the  excited  faults,  they  are  called  Fault- 
born.— T. 

t  In  the  second  line,  the  pronouns  ‘yah’  and  ‘sah’  refer  to  the  person  who  dreams, 
and  not  to  the  dream  which  is  dreamt.  ‘Mahaphala,’  therefore,  is  an  adjective  of  ‘sah’ 
as  indicating  the  person.  Gangadhara  correctly  explains  the  word  as  implying  ‘mahapha- 
lapraptah  syat.’  ‘Sadyah’,  meaning  soon,  implies,  as  explained  by  the  commentators, 
a  period  of  three  days. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  under  the  circumstances  indicated,  dreams,  both  good  and 
bad,  are  realised,  and  not  the  good  only  as  the  use  of  the  word  ‘mahaphala’  may,  at  first 
sight,  seem  to  imply. — T. 

J  In  other  words,  the  evil  dream  is  not  realised. — T. 


*94 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


in  the  Division  called  I ndriy  asthanam ,  of  Agnivega’s  treatise  as 
revised  by  Charaka, 


LESSON  Vf, 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  on  '  Indriyas’  (indications-- 
of  life)  as  connected  with  the  several  sorts  of  persons. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  1 

O  great  Muni,  how  many  kinds  of  diseased  persons  are  there¬ 
in  whom  treatment  does  not  produce1  any  result  and  whom:  (there¬ 
fore)  the  physician  should  refuse  to  treat  ?  2 

Listen  now  to  what  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri’s  race,  thus  asked 
by  Agniveca  a  question  that  is  difficult  to  answer,  expounded  the 
topic  to  the  latter.*  3- 

The  physician  should  forsake  that  man  the  upper  part  of  whose 
chest  is  exceedingly  pained'  while  he  speaks,,  from  whose  stomach 
the  food  taken  issues  out,  or  in  whose  stomach,  the  food,  if  it  does 
not  come  out,  is  not  digested  ;  whose  strength  decreases,  and  thirst 
increases  ;  and  who  is  afflicted  with  a  deep-seated  pain  in  the 
region  of  the  chestf  4-5 

Remembering  the  directions  of  .Atri’s  son,  no  medicine-  should 
be  given  to  that  person  whose  hiccup  rises  from  regions,  deep  be¬ 
low,  and  who  has  copious  bloody  motions.}  & 

The  life  of  that  man  becomes  difficult  to  save  whom  either  of 
these  two  diseases,  viz.,  suppression  of  urine  and'  stools,  and  diar¬ 
rhoea,  assails  when  he  is  already  weak  and  ill'.!  7 

The  life-breaths  soon  abandon  that  man  whom  these  two  dis- 


*  This  verse  shows  that  the  speaker  here  is  not  Punarvasu  of  Atri’s  race;  It  is  some¬ 
body  else  who  recites  the  words  of  Atri  to  Agniveca.  This  is  the  first  time  when  some¬ 
body  else  steps  in  as  the  narrator.  This  person  may  be  Charaka  himself,  the  editor  and- 
reviser  of  Agnivefa’s  treatise.  It  is  curious  that  neither  Chakrapani  nor  Gangadhara, 
por  any  of  the  Bengali  translators,  notices  this  change  in  respect  of  the  agency  of 
narration. — T. 

t  The  physician  should  not  take  up  the  treatment  of  that  man  who  shows  the  several 
morbid  symptoms  indicated  in  these  two  verses.  ‘Chyavate,’  with  reference  to  the  food 
taken,  implies  motion  downwards  as  also  upwards,  in  other  words,  one  who  purges  ancf 
vomits. — T. 

f  ‘  Gambhiraja’  is,  literally,  ‘deep-born.’  Deep-born  hiccup  means  hiccup  rising 
from  the  intestines,  or  such  regions  as  lie  deep  beneath  the  throat. — T. 

11  ‘  Anaha’  here  evidently  means  suppression  of  stools  or  of  both  urine  and  stools. 
In  many  medical  works,  it  is  supposed  to  in  n- suppression  of  mine  only. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  895 

eases,  viz.\  suppression  of  urine  and  stools,  and  excessive  thirst, 
assail  while  he  is  already  weak.  8 

He,  indeed,  is  like  a  dead  man ’who  gets  an  accession  of  fever 
in  the  morning,  who  has  a  dry  and  painful  cough,  and  who  is  with¬ 
out  flesh  and  strength  *  9 

He,  indeed,  is  like  a  dead  man  who  gets  an  accession  of  fever 
in  the  afternoon,  who  has  a  phlegmonous  and  painful  cough,  and 
who  is  without  flesh  and  strength,  w 

That  man  does  not  live  whose  urine  becomes  dense,  whose 
stools  become  knotty,  whose  digestive  fire  becomes  weak,  who  has 
abdominal  dropsy,  and  who  is  afflicted  by  asthma  or  difficulty  of 
breathing.f  11 

That  man  whose  dropsy  extends  to  the  hands  and  the  feet, 
dies  of  that  very  disease  after  giving  much  pain  to  his  kins¬ 
folk!  12 

The  physician  should  not  take  up  that  man  for  treatment  who 
has  got  dropsical  swelling  on  his  feet,  whose  calves  have  lost  all 
compactness,  and  whose  thighs  have  become  exceedingly  weak.  13 
That  man  should  not  be  treated  with  medicines  whose  hands, 
feet,  anus,  and  abdomen  show  signs  of  swelling, 'who  has  become 
divested  of  complexion,  strength,  and  appetite.  H 

That  man  should  be  forsaken  (by  the  physician)  from  a  distance 
whose  chest  is  largely  filled  with  phlegm  which  is  of  a  blue,  or 
yellow,  or  red  colour,  and  which  comes  out  constantly.  J5 

The  physician  possessed  of  knowledge  should  forsake  from  a 
distance  that  man  the  hairs  on  whose  body  stand  erect,  whose 
urine  becomes  dense,  who  has  fever  with  a  dry  cough,  and  whose 
flesh  has  been  reduced.  16 

That  man  has  no  treatment  whose  faults  have  all  been  excited, 
causing  sufferings  of  diverse  kinds,  who  has  lost  flesh,  and  who  is 
divested  of  strength.  17 

Fever  with  diarrhoea,  appearing  after  the  disappearance  of  drop¬ 
sical  swellings,  or  dropsical  swellings  appearing  after  the  disappear- 


*  The  commentators  explain  this  verse  in  the  following  way  :  the  morning  is  the  time 
.for  phlegm.  Dry  cough  has  the  wind  for  its  cause.  Appearance  of  a  dry  cough,  there¬ 
fore,  in  the  morning  is  a  very  morbid  symptom  which  indicates  grave  consequences. — T. 

t  Chakrapani  explains  that  ‘grathitam’,  as  applied  to  ‘mutram’  or  urine,  means 
‘ghanibhutam’,  i.  e.,  dense. — T. 

$  The  fact  is,  this  disease  lasts  long  and  causes  much  suffering  to  kinsfolk.  It  is  cer¬ 
tain  to  end  in  death,  yet  as  death  does  not  come  soon,  kinsfolk  have  to  attend  to  him  and 
nurse  him  long,— T. 


8  g6 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


ance  of  the  former,  lead  to  death,  especially  in  the  case  of  one  who 
has  already  become  weak.  18 

The  physician  possessed  of  knowledge  should  forsake  that  man 
who  has  become  pale  and  exceedingly  emaciated,  who  is  afflicted 
by  great  thirst,  whose  eyes  have  become  motionless,  and  whose 
breath  has  become  quick.*  J9 

That  man  should  be  forsaken  who  is  afflicted  by  dislocation 
of  the  cheek-bone,  and  wryneck,  and  excessive  thirst,  whose 
strength  has  been  exceedingly  diminished,  and  whose  life-breaths 
move  about  in  the  chest  only.  20 

That  man  soon  meets  with  death  who  sees  darkness  after  physi¬ 
cal  exertion,  who  fails  to  obtain  ease,  whose  flesh,  and  strength, 
and  food  have  diminished.  21 

That  man  soon  dies  who  is  afflicted  by  diseases  which  increase 
rapidly  in  severity,  which  spring  from  opposite  causes,  and  which 
cannot  be  treated  without  having  recourse  to  operations  of  opposite 
consequences.!  22 

That  man  dies  soon  whose  strength,  knowledge,  general  health, 
Grahani ,  flesh  and  blood,  rapidly  decrease.  23 

Death  rapidly  takes  away  the  life  of  that  man  whose  diseases 
increase  rapidly  (in  severity)  and  whose  nature  (disposition)  rapidly 
alters  for  the  worse.  24 

( Here  occurs  a  verse  containing  a  Summary ). 

Even  these  kinds  of  diseased  bodies  the  physician  should  not 
take  up  (for  treatment). 

Wise  physicians  do  not  expect  (when  such  men  come  to  them) 
the  slightest  success  from  treatment.  1 

Thus  ends  the  6th  Lesson,  called  “  that  appertaining  to  how 
many  kinds  of  body  are  there.”  in  Agnivefa’s  treatise  as  revised 
by  Charaka. 


*  ‘  Damvau’,  as  explained  by  Chakrapani,  means  a  person  with  fixed  or  motionless 
eyes.  ‘  Kupita’,  meaning  angry,  as  applied  to  ‘breath’,  probably  means  quick. — T. 

+  ‘  Diseases  springing  from  opposite  causes’,  i.  e.,  complicated  diseases  some  of  which 
arise  from  cold,  some  from  heat,  some  from  dryness,  some  from  oiliness,  &c.  Treatment 
involving  operations  of  opposite  consequences,  i.  e.,  purgatives  and  astringents,  &c. — T, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


897 


LESSON  VII. 

•  We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  called  “  Pannarupimin- 
driyam.” 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri,*  1 

The  physician  should  never  desire  to  take  up  the  treatment 
of  that  man  in  whose  eyes,  upon  examination,  he  fails  to  discern 
the  images,  caused  by  reflection,  of  objects  before  them. I  2 

That  man  is  almost  dead  whose  shadow  in  the  light  of  the 
moon,  the  sun,  or  the  candle,  in  water,  or  in  a  mirror,  seems  de¬ 
formed  in  respect  of  (particular)  tints.j  3 

Reflections  that  are  torn,  or  broken,  or  disturbed,  that  are  less 
or  more,  that  are  faded  or  thin,  or  divided  into  two,  that  are  head¬ 
less  or  otherwise  deformed, — these  and  others  that  are  defective 
should  all  be  known  to  be  of  those  whose  end  is  near,  if  (of  course) 
these  are  not  due  to  intelligible  causes.1T  4-5 

That  man  is  already  dead  who  sees  his  shadow,  in  a  dream,  to 
differ  in  respect  of  samsthana  (features),  or  pramana  (measure),  or 
complexion,  or  brilliance.  §  6 

By  samsthana  should  be  understood  features  (or  aspect).  It  is 
of  two  kinds,  viz.,  well-formed  and  ill-formed. 

As  regards  pramana  (measures)  of  men,  it  is  of  three  kinds,  viz., 
small,  large  and  middling.  7 

By  Pratichcch&ya  (reflection)  of  a  person  is  meant  that  shadow 
in  a  piece  of  water,  or  a  mirror,  or  in  the  light  of  the  sun  and  the 


*  ‘  Panna-rupi’  implies  something  whose  form  or  aspect  has  disappeared.  The  sense 
of  the  word,  as  applied  to  ‘  Indriyas’  or  the  senses,  will  appear  clearly  further  down. — T. 

t  ‘Kumarika’  means  the  image,  reflected  on  the  pupil,  of  any  object  before  the  eye. 
Pratichcchayamayim’  means  ‘consisting  of  what  is  only  a  reflection.’ 

‘  Panna-rupam’  is  an  abreviation  of  ‘apanna-rupam’,  implying'ill-formed  or  confused 
in  respect  of  shape.  Here  it  is  the  total  absence  of  the  image  that  is  referred  to.  The 
inability  of  the  eye,  or,  rather,  the  pupil  of  the  eye,  to  reflect  the  image  of  an  object  before 
it,  is  regarded  as  a  sign  of  approaching  death. — T. 

J  It  is  believed  extensively  in  India  that  a  man  who  is  on  the  point  of  death  sees  his 
shadow  in  a  mirror,  &c.,  deformed  of  a  limb,  such  as  headless,  or  armless,  &c.  See  the 
following  verses. — T. 

IT  ‘Intangible  causes’  such  as  the  action  of  the  wind,  or  some  defect  in  the  medium, 
or  the  absence  of  vivid  light. — T. 

§  Some  texts  read  ‘sasthepi’  for  ‘sapnepi.’  If  the  former  reading  be  preferred,  the 
sense  will  be  this  :  not  only  the  sick  and  afflicted  die  soon  when  their  shadows  become 
, abnormal,  but  the  healthy  also  are  to  be  regarded  ascertain  to  die  soon  if  their  shadows 
also  appear  to  be  abnormal.— T. 


898 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


rest,  which  corresponds  with  his  measure  and  features,  and  which 
auswers  to  his  complexion  and  brilliance.*  8 

The  sheen,  which  is  of  five  varieties,  of  ether  and  the  rest,  has 
varied  characteristics.! 

Amongst  these,  the  reflection  which  appertains  to  ether  is  stainless, 
blue,  oily,  and  effulgent.  9 

That  sheen  which  is  dry,  dark  and  red  in  colour,  and  divested 
of  effulgence,  is  regarded  as  appertaining  to  air. 

That  which  is  of  the  hue  of  pure  blood,  is  regarded  as  apper¬ 
taining  to  fire.  It  is,  besides,  of  blazing  effulgence  and  agreeable 
to  sight.  IO 

The  sheen  which  is  as  stainless  as  that  of  a  pure  stone  of  lapis 
lazuli ,  and  which  is  oily,  is  regarded  as  appertaining  to  water. 

That  which  is  steady,  oily,  thick,  and  glossy,  and  which  is 
either  dark  or  white,  or  both,  in  hue,  is  regarded  as  appertaining  to 
earth.  11 

Of  these  five  separate  varieties  of  sheen,  that  which  is  regarded 
as  appertaining  to  the  air  is  censurable.  The  four  others  are 
fraught  with  happiness.  The  sheen  appertaining  to  the  air  soon 
ends  in  the  destruction  of  the  individual,  or  bringing  upon  him 
great  misery.  12 

All  kinds  of  colour  have  Light  in  their  composition. 

Colour  is  of  seven- kinds  :  these  are  I.  Red,  2.  Yellow,  3.  White, 
4.  Brown,  5.  Green,  6.  Pale,  and  7.  Dark  (black)!  13 


*  One’s  reflection  in  a  mirror  certainly  corresponds  with  one’s  measure  or  proportions, 
features,  complexion,  and  brilliance.  In  sunlight  or  moonlight  or  candle-light,  however, 
one’s  shadow  may  be  larger  or  smaller  than  one’s  body,  according  to  the  position  in 
which  one  may  be  placed.  Only  reflections  in  the  looking  glass  are  meant  here. — T. 
f  In  the  previous  verse,  the  Rishi  has  explained  the  meaning  of  the  word  ‘cchaya.’ 

Ordinarily,  it  implies  a  shadow,  or  the  reflection  of  an  object  in  a  mirror  or  other  polish¬ 
ed  surface.  Thus  the  shadow  of  a  person  standing  sunlight  or  moonlight  or  candle-light 
is  a  ‘cchaya.’  The  image  reflected  in  water  and  in  a  mirror  is  also  a  ‘cchaya.’  This 
‘cchaya’,  the  Rishi  says,  is  called  ‘Pratichcchaya,’  The  word  ‘cchaya’,  however,  has  a 
different  meaning.  In  medical  scriptures,  it  is  sometimes  used  to  signify  the  sheen  or 
or  light  which  a  person’s  body  seems  to  possess.  This  sheen  is  fancifully  classed  under 
five  heads,  and  is  supposed  to  appertain  to  the  five  principal  elements  of  which  the  body 
is  composed.  The  characteristics  of  each  class  of  sheen  are  explained  in  this  and  the 
following  verses.  A  certain  kind  of  sheen  or  light  is  supposed  to  appertain  to  Ether,  not 
because  the  body  wliich  possesses  it  has  Ether  for  its  predominating  element,  but  because 

in  consequence  of  its  especial  characteristics  it  is  fancifully  regarded  as  etherial. _ T. 

t  In  verse  13,  the  Rishi,  it  seems,  speaks  of  colour.  The  colour  or  complexion  of 
the  body  is  certainly  distinct  from  the  sheen  or  light  which  colour  or  complexion  displays. 
In  the  enumeration,  it  will  be  seen,  both  the  primary  and  the  secondary  colours  occur. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


899 


Amongst  these,  those  that  are  effulgent,  cool,  and  stainless,  are 
regarded  as  auspicious.  Those,  on  the  other  hand,  that  are  dry, 
filthy,  and  cheerless,  are  regarded  as  inauspicious.*  H 

That  which  is  called  Shadow  overwhelms  the  complexion,  while 
that  which  is  called  Lustre  brightens  the  complexion.  Then,  again, 
Shadow  is  noticeable  only  when  a  person  is  near  ;  while  Lustre  is 
noticeable  from  even  a  distance.  I5 

There  is  no  man  that  is  without  Shadow,  as,  indeed,  there  is  no 
one  that  is  without  Lustre.  It  is  not,  however,  every  kind  of 
Shadow,  or  every  kind  of  Lustre,  that  indicates  the  good  or  the 
bad  that  is  in  store  for  a  particular  person.  Only  particular  kinds 
of  Shadow  and  particular  kinds  of  Lustre  do  so.  Times  also  come 
when  Shadow  becomes  dependent  upon  Lustre. 

The  physician  should  abandon  that  man  whose  eyes  betray  the 
symptoms  of  jaundice,  whose  face  is  full,  whose  cheeks  are  fleshy, 
who  is  always  afraid,  and  whose  body  is  hot. 

That  man  does  not  live  for  even  a  week  who  loses  consciousness 
as  often  as  he  is  raised  to  a  sitting  posture  from  his  bed,  and  who 
expresses  a  disgust  for  everything.-]"  18 

That  man  who  suffers  under  a  combination  of  diseases  some  of 
which  are  of  an  upward  and  some  of  a  downward  tendency,  and 
whose  Grahani  is  about  to  be  afflicted,  lives  for  half  a  month.  :9 
That  man  who,  attacked  by  disease,  has  been  emaciated,  who 
eats  little  but  whose  evacuations  in  the  form  of  stools  and  urine 
are  copious,  should  be  avoided  by  the  physician.  20 

That  diseased  man  who,  reduced  in  strength,  eats  more  food 
than  before,  but  whose  evacuations  in  the  form  of  stools  and  urine 
are  scanty,  should  be  regarded  as  already  dead.  21 

That  man  who  while  eating  such  food  as  is  possessed  of  nour¬ 
ishing  virtues  but  whose  strength  and  complexion  continually  de¬ 
crease,  lives  for  a  short  while.  22 


It  is  evident  that  the  Rishis  had  little  knowledge  of  an  analysis  of  colours.  There  is 
really  an  infinity  of  colours  in  the  world.  It  is  evident  that .  the  seven  mentioned  here 
were  taken  as  primary  colours. — T. 

*  It  is  very  difficult  to  give  correct  readings  of  the  adjectives  used  in  this  and  the 
other  verses. — T. 

t  ‘  Vikathwana’  is  explained  by  Chakrapani  as  implying  one  who  expresses  disgust 
for  everything.  Gangadhara  explains  it  as  referring  to  the  physician  in  the  sense  that  the 
physician  can  with  boastful  certitude,  &c.,  Gangadhara  is  certainly  wrong,  as  his  interpre¬ 
tation  violates  grammar, 

114 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


-900 


That  man  whose  throat  emits  a  cooing  sound,  whose  breath 
has  become  hard,  whose  stools  have  become  liquid,  whose  strength 
has  been  reduced,  who  is  always  thirsty,  and  whose  mouth  is  dry, 
does  not  live.  23  , 

That  man  whose  breath  has  become  short,  and  who  staggers 
or  reels  in  moving,  Punarvasu  of  Atri’s  race  regards  him  as  already 
dead.* * * §  24 

He  whose  breath  has  gone  upward,  and  who  is  overwhelmed 
by  phlegm,  and  whose  complexion,  strength,  and  food  have  de¬ 
creased,  does  not  live.f  25 

That  man  whose  eyes  have  become  upturned,  or  whose  eyes 
tremble  constantly,  whose  strength  has  been  reduced,  who  is  afflict¬ 
ed  by  thirst,  and  whose  mouth  has  become  dry,  does  not  live.j  26 
That  man  whose  cheeks  have  become  swollen,  whose  fever  and 
coughing  are  intense,  who  has  got  deep-seated  pains  in  the  abdo¬ 
men,  and  who  has  a  disgust  for  food,  is  not  a  subject  upon  which 
treatment  can  succeed.  27 

That  man  whose  mouth  and  tongue  have  been  displaced,  whose 
eye-brows  have  fallen  down,  and  whose  tongue  has  been  covered 
with  prickles,  should  be  regarded  as  already  dead.§  28 

That  man  whose  penis  has  gone  inwards  so  as  to  almost  disap¬ 
pear,  and  whose  testicles  hang  downwards  in  a  measure  much 
beyond  what  is  usual,  or  one  in  whom  is  seen  the  reverse  of  this 
in  consequence  of  any  abnormality,  is  regarded  as  betraying  the 
indications  of  the  near  approach  of  death.1T  29 


*  ‘Whose  breath  has  gone  upward.’ — The  breath  is  supposed  by  Hindu  physicians 
to  traverse  through  the  whole  body.  When  a  man  dies,  the  breath  is  seen  to  gradually 
come  upward  ;  that  is,  it  is  withdrawn  from  the  lower  extremities  to  the  navel ;  then  to 
the  chest ;  then  to  the  throat ;  then  it  is  stopped.  In  certain  diseased  constitutions,  the 
breath  moves  through  only  the  upper  half  of  the  body. — T. 

t  It  is  curious  to  see  how  all  the  Bengali  translators  have  mistaken  the  meaning  of  the 
words  ‘vyabiddham  spandyate’.  It  simply  implies  ‘staggering  or  reeling  motion  in  walk¬ 
ing’  and  has  no  reference  to  the  trembling  of  the  body. — T. 

t  Both  Chakrapani  and  Gangadhara  read  the  second  half  of  the  first  line  in  the  same 
way,  viz.,  ‘yasya  vrarate  kampane’,  meaning  ‘whose  eyes  continually  tremble.’  Some 
texts  read  ‘yasya  manye  chanatakampane’,  implying  ‘whose  cheeks  continually  tremble.’ 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Chakrapani’s  reading  is  correct. — T. 

§  Some  texts  read  ‘vyavrittamurdhajihvakshah,’  implying  ‘one  whose  head,  tongue, 
and  eyes  have  fallen  off.’  This  can  hardly  be  correct.  ‘Vyavrittamukhajihvasya’  seams 
to  be  the  true  reading. — T. 

IT  ‘In  consequence  of  any  abnormality.’  This  implies  that  the  conditions  noted  should 
not  be  normal,  but  should  be  due  to  disease. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


90  r 

That  man  whose  flesh  has  been  excessively  reduced,  whose 
bones  are  seen  to  be  covered  by  the  skin  alone,  who  has  become 
weak,  and  who  does  not  take  any  food,  lives  for  a  month  at  the 
most.*  3° 

( Here  occurs  a  verse.) 

That  skilful  person  who  possesses  a  knowledge  of  all  the  indi¬ 
cations  called  Arishtas  (which  prognosticate  the  near  approach  of 
death)  succeeds  in  acquiring  the  appellation  of  “  one  conversant 
with  the  Science  of  Life.” 

Thus  ends  Lesson  VII.,  called  Pannarupiyam,  in  the  Division 
called  Indriya,  of  the  treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  VIII. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  called  1  Avakgirasiyam’  in 
the  Division  called  Indriya. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.f  * 

The  physician  should  not  entertain  even  the  wish  to  undertake 
the  treatment  of  that  man  the  shadow  of  whose  person  (in  water, 
in  a  mirror,  or  in  the  li^ht  of  the  sun  or  the  moon  or  a  candle  or 
lamp)  appears  to  be  inverted,  or  crooked,  or  entirely  headless.}  2 

That  person  whose  eyelashes  become  matted  together,  and 
whose  vision  is  weakened  (on  that  account),  should  never  be  treat¬ 
ed  with  medicines  by  a  physician  possessed  of  wisdom.  3 

That  person  suffering  under  dropsical  swellings,  whose  eyelids, 
becoming  swollen,  do  not  come  together  (when  he  shuts  them),  or 
whose  eyelids  cling  together  (in  consequence  of  sticky  secretions), 
should  be  looked  upon  as  a  dead  man.  4 


*  ‘Tagasthinyeva  drigyate’  is  the  reading  that  occurs  in  many  editions.  There  can  be 
very  little  doubt  that  it  is  wrong.  The  correct  reading  is  ‘tagasthishycva  drifyate.’  The 
sense,  of  course,  is  this  :  one  whose  flesh  has  dried  up,  and  who  is  only  bone  and 
skin,  &c. — T. 

t  This  Lesson  is  called  ‘Avakprasiya’,  implying  that  which  relates  to  shadows  which 
are  either  inverted  or  headless,  &c.  The  fact  is,  the  first  verse  only  refers  to  such 
shadows.  The  entire  Lesson,  however,  is  called  after  the  subject  of  the  first  verse. — T. 

t  ‘Avakgiras’  is  head  downwards  and  feet  upwards ;  i.  e.,  inverted.  ‘Vakra’  is 
crooked  or  curved.  A  crooked  shadow  probably  means  a  shadow  that  is  not  straight 
whether  such  shadows  are  ever  seen  may  well  be  doubted. — T. 


902 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


The  physician  should  predict  the  near  approach  of  death  of 
that  person  in  whose  eyebrows  or  on  whose  head  lines  and  circles, 
not  seen  before  and  not  made  (by  means  of  the  brush  or  the  comb), 
appear.* * * §  S 

If  it  is  an  ailing  person  in  whom  such  signs  are  seen,  he  lives 
for  only  three  days.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  healthy  man  in 
whom  these  are  noticed,  he  lives,  at  the  most,  for  six  days.  6 

That  man  who  does  not  feel  any  pain  when  the  hairs  of  his  head 
are  extracted  with  force,  lives  for  only  six  days,  be  he  in  health  or 
otherwise.  7 

The  physician  possessed  of  wisdom  should  not  take  up  the 
treatment  of  that  person,  since  his  death  is  near,  whose  hair, 
though  unrubbed  with  oil,  presents  the  appearance  of  having  been 
rubbed  with  oil.  8 

That  ailing  man  the  bridge  of  whose  nose  becomes  thick,  and 
appears  to  be  swollen  even  when  he  is  not  suffering  from  dropsy, 
should  be  avoided  by  the  physician  possessed  of  knowledge.  9 

That  man  whose  tongue  falls  out  or  becomes  contracted  exceed¬ 
ingly,  or  whose  nose  becomes  dried  up,  does  not  live.  IO 

That  person  whose  face,  ears,  and  lips,  become,  through  disease, 
white,  or  dark,  or  exceedingly  red,  or  blue,  never  succeeds  in 
getting  rid  of  that  disease.f  ii 

He  whose  teeth,  while  he  is  afflicted  by  a  disease,  assume  a 
bony  whiteness  of  hue,  or  look  like  flowers,  or  become  coated 
with  filth,  never  succeeds  in  regaining  health  by  shaking  off  that 
disease.!  12 

The  tongue  that  is  paralysed,  bereft  of  sensibility,  heavy,  cover¬ 
ed  all  over  with  prickles,  dark-coloured,  dry,  or  swollen,  and  that 
hangs  out,  is  regarded  as  the  tongue  of  a  dead  man.§  13 


*  ‘Simanta’  is  a  line  made  by  parting  the  hair  with  a  brush  or  a  comb. 

‘Vartmaka’  is  a  circular  line.  What  is  said  here  is  that  if  such  lines  and  circles  are 
seen  in  one’s  eyebrows  or  on  one’s  head,  and  if  these  be  not  the  result  of  brushing  and 
combing,  one’s  death  should  be  regarded  as  near. — V. 

t  Gangadhara  adopts  a  different  reading.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  wrong. 
Chakrapani  supports  the  reading  I  have  adopted.— T. 

t  It  is  difficult  to  understand  what  is  meant  by  the  adjective  ‘pushpitah’  as  applied 
to  the  teeth.  Chakrapani  does  not  explain  it.  Gangadhara  takes  it  as  implying  that 
whiteness  of  hue  which  the  skin  assumes  when  one  is  afflicted  by  vitiligo.  Probably, 
variegated  in  hue  is  the  sense. — T. 

§  ‘Visarpini’  implies  ‘hanging  out,’  as  explained  by  Gangadhara.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


903 


That  man  who  having  breathed  long  for  some  time  is  forced  to 
take  short  breath  and  swoons  away  (or  sees  darkness  around  him) 
should  be  avoided  by  the  wise  physician  as  one  the  period  of  whose 
life  has  run  out.  M 

When  the  period  of  one’s  life  runs  out,  one’s  hands,  and  feet, 
and  cheek-bones,  and  palate  become  exceedingly  cold,  or  very 
hard,  or  very  soft.  JS 

That  patient  who  frequently  presses  his  knees  together,  or 
drawing  up  his  legs  stretches  them  again,  and  who  frequently  turns 
his  face,  does  not  live.*  16 

That  man  never  recovers  from  disease  who  cuts  off  his  nails 
with  his  teeth,  or  who  tears  off  his  hair  with  his  nails,  or  who 
scratches  on  the  earth  with  a  piece  of  wood.  z7 

That  man  who  grinds  his  teeth  in  his  waking  hours,  and  weeps 
or  laughs  without  adequate  reason,  and  who  does  not  feel  any 
pain  (or  exertion)  at  all  this,  does  not  succeed  in  shaking  off  his 
disease.  18 

That  man  who,  while  ill,  laughs  and  weeps  frequently,  who 
strikes  his  bed  with  his  feet,  and  who  frequently  touches  the  holes 
in  the  upper  part  of  his  body  (such  as  the  holes  of  the  ears  and 
the  nose),  does  not  live.  1 9 

The  physician  should  predict  the  death  of  that  person  who 
derives  nothing  but  pain  from  those  things  which  formerly  used  to 
give  him  pleasure.  20 

Of  a  patient  who  is  about  to  die,  the  neck  fails  to  support  the 
head,  and  the  backbone  the  weight  of  the  upper  part  of  the  body, 
and  the  jaws  the  food  inserted  into  the  mouth.f  21 

In  a  man  who  is  about  to  die  the  following  symptoms  appear  r 
sudden  accession  of  the  heat  and  pain  of  fever  ;  thirst ;  swoons 
loss  of  strength  ;  and  slackness  (dislocation)  of  joints.  22 

That  man  who  is  afflicted  with  fever  brought  about  by  vitiated 
phlegm  and  characterised  by  a  sensation  of  slight  cold,  and  upon 


*  Gangadhara  reads  ‘vaktram’  in  the  second  line  as  ‘vakram.’  This  is  incorrect. 
Chakrapani  reads  ‘vaktram. — T. 

t  Gangadhara  reads  ‘sahanu’  for  ‘na  hanu.’  In  the  first  line  also,  he  reads  girogribam’’ 
and  ‘prishtham  va  bharamatmanah.’  These  are  curious  readings.  The  interpretation  also 
which  he  gives  is  curiously  wrong.  Many  of  the  vernacular  translators  follow  him  more 
or  less.  The  only  correction  which  the  verse  requires  is  ‘griba’  for  ‘gribam.’  It  is  a 
simple  verse,  and  the  sense  is  very  plain, — T. 


904 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


whose  face  there  is  copious  perspiration  in  the  early  morning 
succeeds  very  seldom  in  shaking  off  his  disease.* * * §  23 

When  one’s  period  of  life  has  run  out,  the  following  symp¬ 
toms  are  observable  :  food  (placed  in  the  mouth)  does  not  reach 
the  throat ;  the  tongue  is  withdrawn  into  the  throat ;  and  the 
person’s  strength  disappears,  j-24 

That  man  is  on  the  point  of  death  who  frequently  tosses  his 
head  and  who  frequently  contracts  his  arms  and  stretches  them, 
upon  whose  forehead  copious  perspiration  appears,  and  the  joints 
of  whose  body  become  slack. £  25 

Here  occurs  a  verse. 

The  physician  of  intelligence  should  frequently  examine  the 
patient  with  attention  for  these  indications.  Some  of  them,  mani¬ 
festing  themselves  for  a  short  while,  disappear.  Not  one  of  these, 
however,  which  have  been  mentioned  here,  is  unproductive  of 
consequences.  26 

Thus  ends  the  Eighth  Lesson,  named  Avakgirasiya,  in  the 
Division  called  Indriya,  of  the  treatise  of  Agniveca  as  revised  by 
Charaka. 


LESSON  IX. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  called  ‘  Yasya  £yava-nimit- 
tiyam’  of  the  Division  called  Indriya. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.§  1 


*  ‘Gosarga’  is  early  dawn  ;  the  hour  when  kine  are  let  off  from  the  pen  or  fold  to 
graze  in  the  fields.  Evening  is  called  ‘Godhuli,’  i.  e.,  the  hour  when  the  air  becomes 
saturated  with  the  dust  raised  by  the  hoofs  of  kine  returning  to  the  fold  from  the  pasture. 

‘Lepa’  fever  is  that  which  is  brought  about  by  vitiated  phlegm  and  in  which  the 
patient  feels  cold  as  long  as  the  fever  lasts.  It  is  characterised  by  the  heaviness  of  the 
limbs  and  copious  perspiration  also. — T. 

t  The  patient  becomes  unable  to  move  his  tongue  and  jaws  for  bearing  the  food 
placed  in  his  mouth  to  the  entrance  of  the  throat  preparatory  to  the  deglutition.  The 
tongue  becomes  contracted  and  almost  enters  the  throat.  These  are  signs  of  the  near 
approach  of  death. — T. 

t  Krichcchrat’  is  correctly  explained  by  Chakrapani  as  implying  ‘qighram,’  i.  e., 
frequently.  Some  of  the  Bengali  translators  take  it  as  implying  ‘painfully.’  The  correct 
reading  is  ‘anchayitwa’  and  not  ‘munchayitwa,’  although  Chakrapani  is  for  the  latter. — T. 

§  This  Lesson  is  called  ‘Yasya  gyava-nimittiyam,’  or,  as  some  texts  have  it,  ‘yasya- 
gyaviyam,’  after  the  first  word  of  the  first  (or  following)  verse.  Short  poems  or  sonnets. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


905 


The  physician  possessed  of  knowledge  should  regard  the  dis¬ 
ease  of  that  patient  to  be  fatal  whose  eyes  have  become  brown,  or 
green,  and  have  fallen  down  (from  their  usual  place).*  2 

The  physician  of  wisdom  should  avoid  that  man  as  one  the 
period  of  whose  life  has  run  out,  who,  when  afflicted  by  various 
diseases,  becomes  unconscious  and  whose  mouth  has  become  dry.  3 
That  man  whose  nerves  have  become  green,  and  the  pores  of 
whose  body  have  become  closed  (so  that  no  perspiration  appears 
on  his  skin),  dies  of  vitiated  bile  if  he  feels  a  hankering  after  food 
and  drink  possessing  an  acid  taste.  4 

Phthisis  kills  that  man  the  ends  or  extremities  of  whose  body 
seem  to  thrive  and  assume  a  healthy  complexion  but  the  other 
parts  of  whose  body  become  dry  and  wasted,  and  whose  strength 
also  decreases.-]-  S 

Of  one  who  is  afflicted  by  consumption,  the  following  are 
regarded  as  fatal  signs,  viz.,  heat  in  the  shoulders,  hiccup,  vomiting 
of  blood,  epistasis,  and  pains  in  the  sides.J  6 

The  man  who  is  afflicted  by  distempers  brought  about  by  excited 
wind,  he  who  is  afflicted  by  epilepsy,  he  who  is  afflicted  by  leprosy, 
he  who  is  afflicted  by  dropsy,  he  who  is  afflicted  by  abdominal 
dropsy,  he  who  is  afflicted  by  abdominal  tumour,  he  who  is  afflicted 
by  diabetes,  and  he  who  is  afflicted  by  phthisis, — all  these  should 
not  be  taken  up  for  treatment  if  they  have  lost  strength  and  flesh. 
If  afflicted  by  other  diseases  as  well,  the  physician  should  avoid 
them  (upon  loss  of  strength  and  flesh).  §  6-7 

If  a  person  whose  epistasis  has  been  removed  by  purgatives 


or  songs  are  very  generally  named  in  this  way.  The  Eighth  Lesson  has  been  named  in 
the  same  way. — T. 

*  ‘Qyava’  is  brown  ;  ‘harita’  is  green.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  two  words 
are  to  be  taken  disjunctively.  ‘Vidhwasta,’  meaning  fallen  down,  applies  to  both 
cases. — T. 

t  ‘Anta’  implies  end  or  extremity.  ‘Qariranta’  mean  hands  and  feet,  face  with 
nose  and  ears,  &c. — T. 

t  Some  texts  read  ‘darQanam’  for  ‘ccharddanam.’  The  latter  is  evidently  the  correct 
reading. 

‘Heat  in  the  shoulders’  implies  that  the  other  parts  of  the  body  are  cooler. 

All  deep-seated  pains  go  by  the  name  of  Quia.— T. 

§  Some  texts  read  ‘rakti’  for  ‘sophi.’  ‘Rakti’  implies  one  who  is  afflicted  by  bilious 
hemorrhage.  ‘Sophi’  implies  one  that  is  suffering  from  dropsy  or  dropsical  swellings 
in  general.  ‘Udari’  is  one  afflicted  by  abdominal  dropsy  in  particular.  In  the  last  line. 


906 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


becomes  afflicted  by  thirst,  and  if  one,. after  being  purged,  becomes 
subject  to  flatulence,  they  should  both  be  regarded  as  already 
dead.  8' 

That  person  does  not  live  who  is  incapable  of  drinking  water 
or  milk,  or  any  other  liquid,  when  his  mouth,  throat,  and  chest  are 
dry.*  9 

The  physician  should  predict  the  dissolution  of  that  man  in 
whom  he  notices  a  weakening  of  the  voice,  loss  of  strength  and 
complexion,  and  an  aggravation  of  the  disease  without  any  (appa¬ 
rent)  cause.  10 

The  physician  endued  with  intelligence  should  forsake  that 
man  whose  breath  moves  in  only  the  upper  regions  of  his  body, 
whose  body  has  lost  all  heat,  who  has  got  deep-seated  pains  in  his 
groins,  and  who  does  not  obtain  ease  by  any  means,  n 

The  physician  should  avoid  from  a  distance  that  man  who 
often  exclaims  in  a  broken  voice  that  his  death  is  near,  and  who 
hears  sounds  that  do  not  existf  12 

Atri’s  son  regards  the  life  of  that  man  whose  disease  disappears 
at  a  time  when  he  is  very  weak,  to  be  very  doubtful. 

If  his  kinsmen  with  bows  and  prostrations  implore  the  physi¬ 
cian  to  take  up  his  treatment,  the  latter  should,  without  adminis¬ 
tering  any  correctives,  direct  that  he  should  be  treated  with,  the 
(nourishing)  juice  of  meat.  , 

If  in  course  of  even  a  month  no  improvement  takes  place,  he 
should  be  directed  to  have  the  juice  of  diverse  other  kinds  of  meat. 
(No  medicine,  however,  should  be  given).  His  life  is  exceedingly 
difficult  to  save.  I3-IS 

The  wise  are  of  opinion  that  the  period  of  life  has  run  short 
of  that  man  whose  spittle,  faeces,  and  vital  seed  sink  in  water:  id 

He  in  whose  spittle  diverse  colours  are  seen  occurring  sepa¬ 
rately,  and  whose  spittle  sinks  in  water,  does  not  live  long.*  1 1 


some  texts  read  ‘madeshu’  or  ‘anyeshu.’  The  sense  then  would  be — ‘in  other  diseases 
of  even  a  mild  form,  &c.’  It  should  be  remembered,  however,  that  loss  of  strength  and 
flesh  in  other  diseases  of  a  mild  form  is  not  generally  regarded  as  a  fatal  indication. 
Hence,  ‘anyeshu’  seems  to  be  the  correct  reading. — T. 

*  Some  texts  read  this  verse  differently.  The  sense,  however,  remains  unaffected. — T. 

t  ‘Exclaims  in  a  broken  voice  that  his  death  is  near,’  that  is,  who  often  says,  in  an 
unnatural  and  hollow  voice  that  he  will  die  or  not  live.  ‘Sounds  that  do  not  exist,’  that 
is,  ‘imaginary  sounds.’ — T. 

J  ‘Sidati  is  explained  by  Chakrapani  as  equivalent  to  ‘majjati’  or  sinks.  Gangadhara 
lakes  it  as  meaning  ‘dissolves.’  This  is  evidently  wrong. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


90  7 


That  man  whose  bile,  following  the  heat  of  the  body,  goes  up  to 
the  temples  and  increases  there  in  intensity,  is  said  to  be  afflicted 
by  the  disease  called  ‘Sankhaka’  which  kills  him  in  three  nights.  lS 
That  man  from  whose  mouth,  blood,  mixed  with  froth,  comes 
out  frequently,  and  whose  abdomen  is  afflicted  with  deep-seated 
pains,  should  be  avoided  by  the  physician.  z9 

That  patient  in  whom  these  symptoms  are  noticed,  vis.,  loss  of 
strength  and  flesh,  excessive  aggravation  of  the  disease  under 
which  he  is  suffering,  and  disgust  for  food,  does  not  live  for  more 
than  three  days,*  20 

( Here  are  two  verses.) 

When  death  is  near  of  human  beings,  even  these  symptoms 
manifest  themselves.  Indeed,  other  symptoms  also,  resembling 
these,  may  be  seen,  21 

Verily,  all  these  symptoms  become  observable,  although  all 
of  them  do  not  appear  in  all  men  who  are  about  to  die.  Hence, 
an  observant  physician  should  study  all  these  symptoms  properly.22 
Thus  ends  the  ninth  Lesson,  called  ‘  Y asya-gyaviyam,’  in  the 
Division  called  ‘Indriya,’  of  the  treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised  by 
Charaka. 


LESSON  X. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  called  ‘Sadyomaraniyam.’ 
Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.f  1 

I  shall  now,  O  Agnivega,  speak  of  the  symptoms  of  those  per¬ 
sons  who  cast  off  their  life-breaths  immediately.  Verily,  when 
afflicted  by  these  symptoms,  death  becomes  inevitable.  2 

That  man  in  whose  chest  is  located  a  violent  form  of  globular 


*  Gangadhara  reads  ‘trill  pakshan’  for  ‘trin-ahSn.’  The  latter  seems  to  be  the  correct 
reading.  Here  ‘arishtas,’  that  is,  such  symptoms  as  indicate  the  near  approach  of  death, 
are  being  expounded.  When  death  is  indicated  after  three  fortnights,  such  indication  is 
not  a  violent  ‘arishta.’ — T. 

t  In  this  Lesson  the  Rishi  will  expound  those  symptoms  which  indicate  the  immediate 
.proximity  of  death.  By  ‘sadyah’  or  immediate,  some  understand  three  days,  and  some 
seven  days.  It  does  not,  as  used  here,  imply  instantaneousness. — T, 


908 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Vatashthila,  and  who  is  exceedingly  afflicted  by  thirst,  casts  off 
his  life-breaths  soon.* * * §  3 

When  the  wind  moves  in  the  body  in  such  a  way  as  to  slacken 
the  compactness  of  the  calves  (of  the  legs)  and  bend  the  nose 
(on  the  right  or  the  left  side),  it  deprives  the  man  very  soon  of 
his  life.  4 

That  man  whose  eyebrows  fall  down  from  their  usual  place, 
and  who  feels  a  burning  sensation  within  his  body,  is  sOon  carried  off 
if  he  happens  to  be  afflicted  by  any  disease  which  causes  hiccup.  5 

Of  one  whose  blood  and  flesh  have  decreased,  the  wind',  moving 
upwards  and  bending  the  tendons  of  the  neck,  soon  takes  away 
the  life-breaths.f  6 

If  the  wind  suddenly  enters  the  rectum  and  the  navel  and  then 
afflicts  the  groins  of  a  patient  who  has  become  emaciated  (through 
loss  of  blood  and  flesh),  it  succeeds  in  taking  away  his  life-breaths 
soon.j  7 

If  the  wind  slackening  the  ends  of  the  ribs  seizes  the  chest  of 
a  patient  whose  body  has  been  paralyzed  and  whose  eyes  have 
expanded,  it  takes  away  his  life-breaths  soon.§  8 

If  the  wind,  becoming  powerful,  seizes  both  the  chest  and  the 
rectum  simultaneously  of  especially  a  person  who  has  become 
weak,  it  succeeds  in  taking  away  his  life-breaths  soon.  9 

If  the  wind,  becoming  powerful,  seizes  both  the  groins  and  the 
rectum  simultaneously  of  a  person  and  makes  the  breath  asthmatic, 
it  succeeds  in  carrying  him  off  soon.  IO 


*  The  word  ‘Vatashthila’  is  compounded  of  ‘vata,’  meaning  wind,  and  ‘ashthila’, 
meaning  a  globular  or  round  pebble  or  stone.  Hence  ‘Vatashthila’  means  a  globular 
swelling  below  the  navel,  produced  by  vitiated  wind.  In  this  disease,  an  entire  stoppage 
occurs  of  wind,  urine,  and  stools.  Though  generated  below  the  navel,  that  is,  in  the 
abdomen,  it  sometimes  travels  upwards. — T. 

t  The  correct  reading  is  ‘samayamya’  (in  the  second  line)  and  not  (as  occurs  in 
Gangadhara’s  edition)  ‘same  yasya.’  The  fact  is,  by  reading  ‘same  yasya’  the  verse 
■becomes  ungrammatical.  The  sense  is,  if  a  patient  loses  blood  and  flesh,  and  if  the  wind 
moves  in  an  upward  direction  in  his  body,  and  if,  while  so  moving,  it  bends  the  tendons 
■of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  death  comes  soon. — T. 

t  ‘Antarena’  is  explained  by  Chakrapani  as  equivalent  to  ‘madhyam.’  Gangadhara 
wrongly  takes  it  as  implying  ‘vina’  or  without.  Indeed,  by  taking  the  word  as  implying 
‘without,’  the  verse  would  be  unmeaning,  for  the  sense  then  would  be, — ‘if  the  wind, 
without  entering  the  rectum  and  the  navel,  suddenly  seizes  the  groins  of  a  weak 
patient,  &c.’ — T. 

§  ‘Vitatya’  is  slackening  or  separating,  or  disjoining.  Sometimes,  by  the  action  of 
the  wind,  the  ends  or  extremities  of  the  ribs  seem  to  be  slackened.  ‘Stimitasya’  implies 
‘of  one  whose  body  has  been  paralysed  or  become  heavy  and  stupefied.’ — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


909 


If  the  wind,  obstructing  the  navel,  the  upper  part  of  the  pubic 
region,  urine,  and  stools,  causes  excruciating  pain,  it  succeeds  in. 
carrying  off  the  person  soon.*  11 

That  man  whose  groins  seem  to  be  pierced  in  all  directions  itr 
consequence  of  pains  generated  by  obstructed  wind,  whose  stools 
become  liquid,  and  who  feels  a  keen  thirst  for  drink,  casts  off  his 
life  very  soon.  12 

One  whose  body  seems  to  be  overwhelmed  by  (vitiated)  wind, 
whose  stools  become  liquid,  and  who  feels  a  keen  thirst  for  drink,, 
casts  off  his  life  very  soon.  :3 

That  person  whose  body  shows  dropsical  swellings  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  dropsy  brought  about  by  vitiated  wind,  whose  stools 
become  liquid,  and  who  feels  a  keen  thirst  for  drink,  casts  off  his 
life  very  soon.  J4 

He  who  feels  cutting  pains  in  his  ‘amagaya,’  who  feels  a  keen 
thirst  for  drink,  and  who  is  afflicted  with  excruciating  pains  in  the 
rectum,  casts  off  his  life  soon.f  rS 

If  the  wind,  staying  in  the  ‘Pakkagaya,’  deprives  a  person  of 
consciousness  and  generates  a  gurgling  sound  in  the  throat,  it  car¬ 
ries  him  off  very  soon.  16 

Of  a  person  whose  death  is  very  near,  the  following  are  the 
symptoms  that  manifest  themselves  :  the  teeth  appear  to  be  laved 
with  mud  :  the  mouth  seems  to  be  laved  with  lime  powder  ;  the 
body  perspires  copiously.^  *7 

A  patient  quickly  casts  off  his  life-breaths  if  he  is  afflicted  by 
these  symptoms,  viz.,  thirst,  difficulty  of  breath,  head-ache  (and 
other  complaints  in  the  head),  swoons,  weakness,  and  cooing  of 
the  throat,  and  liquid  motions.  18 


*  The  correct  reading,  as  indicated  by  Chakrapani,  is  ‘vastigirsham’,  meaning  the 
head  or  upper  part  of  the  ‘  vasti’  or  pubic  region.  The  Bengali  translators,  following 
the  incorrect  reading  of  Gangadhara,  take  ‘vasti’  and  ‘girah’  (changed  into  ‘giro’)  separate¬ 
ly,  waning  ‘vasti’  and  the  head.  The  action  of  the  wind  in  the  lower  regions  of  the 
■body  is  being  spoken  of.  Hence,  the  absurdity  of  reading  ‘girah’  independently,  imply¬ 
ing  the  head. — T. 

+  That  part  of  the  stomach  into  which  the  food  is  received  after  deglutition  is  called 
‘amagaya.’  The  other  part,  in  which  digestion  is  carried  on,  is  called  ‘pakkagaya.’— T. 

j  ‘Sipra’  is  the  name  of  a  river.  Hence,  as  Chakrapani  explains,  ‘Siprayante’  means 
‘resembles  the  Sipra’,  i.  e.,  perspires  copiously.  The  word  is  sometimes  used  to  signify 
horripilation.  Chakrapani  gves  some  other  meainngs.  It  seems,  however,  that  copious 
perspiration  is  what  is  intended.  T. 


9io 


CHA  RAICA  -  SAM  HIT  A. 


(Here  occurs  a  verse.) 

That  physician  who  is  conversant  with  these  indications  be¬ 
comes  acquainted  with  the  (period  of)  fife  and  the  (approach  of) 
death  of  human  beings.  r9 

Thus  ends  Lesson  X,  called  ‘Sadyo-maraniyam,’  in  the  Division 
called  Tndriya,’  of  the  treatise  of  Agnive^a,  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  XL 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  called  ‘Anu-jyotiyam  in  the 
Division  called  ‘  Indriya.’ 

Thus  said  the  illustrious;  son  of  Atri.*  1 

That  man  whose  digestive  fire  is  weakened,  who  is  incapable 
of  concentrating  his  mind  on  one  object  (for  any  length  of  time), 
the  splendour  of  whose  body  has  became  dimmed,  who  is  always 
cheerless  of  mind,  and  who-  fails  to  derive  pleasure  from  anything, 
departs  from  this  world  for  the  next  within  a.  year.-j-  2 

When  the  offerings  (of  food)  duly  presented  by  a  person;  are  not 
eaten  by  those  animals  which,  subsist,  upon  such,  offerings,  such 
■person,  repairing  to  the  next  world  within,  a  year,  himself  subsists 
upon  the  rice-balls  (presented  by  his  nearest  of  kin).j  3 


*  This  Lesson  is-  named,  as  the  previous  ones,  after  the  first  two  words,  of  the  first 

t  ‘Anujyoti’ is  explained  by  Chakrapani  as ‘of  weakened  fire  or  energy  as  regards  tire 
entire  body.’  In  view,  however,  of  the  subsequent  adjectives,  he  takes  it  as  implying 
'“of  weakened  digestive  fire.’— T. 

t  ‘Vali’  means  offerings  of  food  presented  to-  the  deities,  deceased  ancestors,  and 
animals  and  birds  like  dogs,  crows,.  &c.,  which  subsist  upon  the  gifts,  of  householders,  or 
the  remnants  of  their  dishes.  The  Hindu  religion  is  exceedingly  considerate  towards  the 
lower  animals.  Householders,  ifthey  cook  any  food,,  are  directed:  to  present  a  portion 
to  animals  and  birds.  Such  food  is  placed  on  a  particular  spot  in  the  front  of  the  house. 
These  gifts  are  especially  called  ‘vali.’  The  presentation  of  ‘vali’  to  animals  and  birds 
is  dignified.by  the  name  of  the  ‘vigwadeva-sacrifice.’  ‘Valibhuj’  or  ‘valibhrit’  means  an 
animal  or  a  bird  that  subsists  upon  the  offerings  of  food  made  by  householders.  When 
the  autumnal  harvest  is  gathered,  the  custom  prevails  in  many  European  countries  among 
'agriculturists  of  tying  a  thick  sheaf  or  two  to  a  long  pole  and  setting  it  up  at  a  place 
adjacent  to  the  barn  where  grain  is  stored,  the  object  being  to  offer  food  to  the  birds  of 
the  air  during  the  winter.  The  European  nations  may  have  carried  this  consideration 
for  the  lower  animals  from  their  Aryan  home  in  Central  Asia; 


CH A  RAK A-S  A  M HI  T A, 


r9 n 


He  who  does  not  see  (the  star)  Arundhati  which  occurs  in  the 
"vicinity  of  the  constellation  called  Saptarshi  (the  seven  Rishis  or 
Ursa  major),  sees  thick  darkness  within  a  year  from  that  date.*  4 
That  man  who  acquires,  abnormally  and  without  any  reason, 
beauty  of  features  and  development  of  form,  as  also  wealth,  of 
loses  them  abnormally  and  without  reason,  meets  with  death  before 
the  year  is  outf  5 

Of  a  person  who  is  to  die  within  six  months,  these  six  disap¬ 
pear  without  (adequate)  reason  :  viz.,  devotion,  good  conduct, 
memory,  liberality,  intelligence,  and  strength-!  6 

That  person  upon  whose  forehead  is  seen  a  beautiful  network 
of  veins  (not  seen  there  before)  dies  within  six  months.  7 

That  man  whose  forehead  is  covered  by  a  number  of  lunar 
crescents,  should  be  regarded  as  one  the  period  of  whose  life  is  to 
end  in  six  months,^ 


It  is  needless  to  say  that  I  have  followed  Chakrapani  in  the  interpretation  of  this 
verse.  Chakrapani.  has  followed  the  l’auranic  belief. 

Some  of  the  Bengali  translators  have  taken  the  word,  ‘vali’  in  the  sense  of  the  remnant 
that  is  thrown  away  of  a  dish.  They  think  that  dogs  and  birds  instinctively  keep  away 
from  the  offals  of  persons  afflicted  by  certain  diseases. 

They  maintain  that  the  remnant,,  thrown,  away,  of  the  dish  of  a  consumptive  person 
is  not  touched  by  dogs  and  crows.  This,  however,  does  not  accord-  with  the  facts.  It  is 
true  that  animals  and  birds  do  keep  away  from  the  blood  vomited  by  a  patient  afflicted 
by  phthisis,  but  it  is  not  true  that  they  keep  away  from  the  remnants  of  the  dishes  of  such 
persons.  Besides,  unless  violence  be  done  to  the  word  ‘vali’,  it  can  never  be  taken  for  the 
remnant  of  a  dish.  Hence,  Chakrapani’s  interpretation  is,  no  doubt,  correct. — T. 

*  ‘Arundhati,’  as  seen  by  us,  is  a  little  red.  star,  numbered  with  those  which  constitute 
the  constellation  called  Ursa  major,,  or  Saptarshi  (the  seven  Rishis).  The  principal  stars,, 
numbering  seven,,  are  named  after  the  seven  Rishis,  Marichi,  Atri,  Angiras,  Pulastya, 
Pulaha,  Kratu,  and  Vagishtha.  The  tradition  that  he  who  fails  to  see  Arundhati  dies 
within  ft  year  is.  very  general  in  India.  ‘Mahattamas’  or  the  great  darkness  is,  of  course,. 
Death. — T. 

t  ‘Vikritya,’  i.  e.r  abnormally..  ‘Qobha’  is  beauty  of  features  ;  ‘upachayam’  is  develop¬ 
ment  of  form.  ‘Vikritya’  applies  to  ‘gobha’  and  ‘upachayam.’  ‘Vinimittyam’,  literally, 
■without  reason,  is  explained:  by  the  commentators  as  implying  ‘in  the  absence  of  rekhas 
or  lines  on  the  palm  indicating  the  accession  of  wealth.’ 

The  fact  is,  a  sudden,  accession  of  wealth,  or  of  beauty  and  development  of  body,  or  a 
sudden  loss  of  the  same,  in  the  absence,  of  adequate  cause,  is  regarded  a  prognostication 
■of  death.. — T. 

+  •Ahetukam’  is  ‘without  reason,’  that  is,  in  the  absence  of  adequate  reason.  It  is 
seen  that  one  who  is  noted  for  devotion  to  the  gods  suddenly  ceases  to  discover  devotion. 
:One’s  conduct,  memory,  liberality,  &c.,  suddenly  disappear.  If  these  disappear  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  adequate  reason,  such  disappearance  is  not  regarded  as  a  prognostication  of 


912 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


That  man  does  not  live  for  a  month  whose  body  trembles,  and 
who  swoons  away,  and  walks,  and  speaks  like  a  person  under 
intoxication.*  9 

That  person  whose  vital  seed,  urine  and  stools  sink  in  water, 
and  who  cherishes  hatred  for  his  kinsfolk,  sinks  in  the  sea  of  death 
within  a  month.  10 

That  person  who,  while  afflicted  by  some  wasting  disease,  has 
his  arms  and  legs  and  face  emaciated  without  the  other  parts  of 
his  body  showing  signs  of  emaciation,  does  not  live  for  a  month.fn 

That  man  upon  whose  forehead,  or  upon  the  upper  part  of 
whose  pubic  region,  rows,  blue  in  colour,  of  lunar  crescents  appear, 
dies  very  soon.Ji2 

That  man  on  whose  body  variola  appear,  of  the  size  of  round 
morals,  and  disappears  quickly,  does  not  live  long.  ^3 

The  physician  should  regard  that  man  as  ripe  (for  death)  who 
has  got  a  violent  pain  in  his  neck,  a  swollen  tongue,  and  inflamma¬ 
tion  (with  suppuration)  of  the  bubonic  glands,  the  mouth,  and  the 
thrpat.il  H 

Of  one  who  is  bound  in  the  chains  of  the  Destroyer,  these  three 
set  in,  vis.,  great  delusions,  excessive  delirium,  and  excessive  pain 
in  the  bone-joints.  I}  rS 


.death.  It  is  only  when  the  disappearance  is  not  due  to  adequate  reason  that  it  is  regarded 
as  a  sure  prognostication  of  death. — T, 

*  ‘Mattwa’  is  a  person  under  intoxication.  If  a  man,  without  being  intoxicated, 
trembles  and  swoons  and  moves  unsteadily  and  stutters  like  one  that  is  intoxicated,  his 
death  is  regarded  to  be  near. — T. 

t  ‘Qushyatah’  is  ‘of  one  who  is  being  wasted  or  emaciated’,  of  course,  under  the  effects 
of  some  of  the  diseases  that  are  known  to  bring  emaciation,  such  as  consumption  or 
phthisis.  If  the  arms  and  legs  and  face  of  such  a  man  become  emaciated  while  the  rest 
of  his  body  is  not  so,  he  dies  within  a  month. — T. 

t  The  first  line  is  incorrectly  read  in  many  editions.  The  correct  reading  is  ‘vasti- 
girshe’,  meaning  ‘upper  part  of  the  pubic  region.’ 

‘Valendukutila’  implies  ‘curved  as  the  young  moon.’  Of  course,  lunar  crescents  are 
meant. — T. 

§  Variola  or  Small  pox  of  this  species  is  regarded  as  fatal.  If  the  pimples  appear 
and  ripen  after  sometime  and  then  disappear,  the  disease  does  not  prove  fatal.  When 
the  pimples  disappear  soon  after  manifesting  themselves,  it  is  then  that  the  disease  ends 
in  death.' — T. 

IT  The  bubonic  plague  which  is  just  now  devastating  Bombay  and  the  other  parts  of 
India  seems  to  he  identifiable  with  this  disease  mentioned  or  indicated  in  this  verse.  At 
least,  some  of  the  symptoms  seem  to  be  identical. — T. 

ft  The  correct  reading  of  the  second  half  of  the  first  line  is  ‘parvabhedagcha 
darunah.’— T., 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  913 

That  man  is  driven  by  Time  (on  his  way  to  the  regions  of 
Yama)  who,  in  fits  of  senselessness,  tears  his  hair,  and  who,  although 
very  weak,  takes  copious  food  like  one  in  health.* * * §  16 

The  man  who  is  driven  by  Time  (on  his  way  to  the  regions  of 
Yama)  becomes  stupefied  and  placing  his  hands  and  fingers  before 
his  eyes,  searches  for  them  ;  or,  unconscious  of  time,  remains  in 
wonderment,  with  eyes  unwinking  and  upturned  ;  of  searches  his 
bed,  or  seat,  or  his  own  body,  or  wooden  furniture  (in  the  room) 
or  the  walls,  for  something  that  is  not  there.f  17-i8 

One  who,  becoming  stupefied,  laughs  at  something  that  does 
not  provoke  laughter,  or  who  licks  his  lips,  and  whose  feet  and 
hands  and  breath  have  become  cold,  does  not  live.  J9 

He  whose  mind  is  about  to  be  eclipsed  by  the  Great  Darkness, 
calls  for  kinsmen  and  others  that  are  even  near  to  him  and  al¬ 
though  his  eyes  are  upon  them,  does  not,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  see 
them.!  20 

The  physician  possessed  of  intelligence  should  not  administer 
medicines  to  a  patient  in  whose  organism  he  sees  an  absence  of  cor* 
relation,  or  an  excess  of  correlation,  In  respect  of  ether  and  the 
rest,  simultaneously^  21 


*  Chakrapani  reads  ‘parigrihnati’  for  ‘pratigrihnati’,  and  explains  it  as  governing 
‘aharam’  in  the  objective  case. 

In  the  second  line  for  ‘avalah’  some  texts  read  ‘vachanam.’  If  this  reading  be  accept¬ 
ed,  the  meaning  will  be  ‘who  talks  and  takes  food  like  a  healthy  man.’  Gangadhara-, 
upon  what  authority  it  does  not  appear,  reads  ‘parangrihnati  &c.’  meaning  ‘who  seizes 
others  with  violence  or  great  force.’ — T. 

t  In  the  first  line  of  17,  some  texts  read  ‘anguliyakam.’  Chakrapani  notices  the 
reading  ‘angulikarau.’ 

‘Kalandha’  is,  literally,  ‘blind  to  orjunconscious  of  time’,  that  is,  without  knowing 
whether  it  is  night  or  day,  or,  if  day,  whether  Jt  is  morning,  noon,  or  night. 

In  the  first  line  of  18,  some  texts  read  ‘vasanat’  for  ‘asanat.’  The  former  means 
dress  or  garments  ;  the  latter,  a  seat. 

‘Kashtat’  comes  abruptly.  Probably,  the'wooden  furniture  in  the  sick  room  is  meant. 

‘Kinchit  asat’  means  ‘something’that  is  not  there’  or  ‘something  non-existing.’  When 
these  signs  of  a  stupefied  or’vacant  mind  are  seen,  it  should  be  held  that  death  is  near. — T. 

t  It  is  frequently  seen  that  men  who  'are  about  to  die  lose  their  power  of  vision. 
Kinsmen  and  others  standing  in  close  adjacence  to  the  sick  bed,  become  invisible  to  the 
dying  ones.  The  latter'call  after  themjbyjname,  thinking  they  are  absent. — T. 

§  In  Sutrasthana  it  has  been  explained  that  there  are  four  kinds  of  ‘Yoga’  or  correla¬ 
tion  between  the  senses  and  the  external  objects.  The  senses  are  five,  viz.,  the  eyes, 
ears,  nose,  tongue,  and  touch.  The  external  objects  are  five,  viz.,  earth,  water,  fire,  air. 


914 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA, 


Through  the  excessive  excitement  of  faults,  and  loss  of  strength 
of  mind,  the  Self  very  soon  abdicates  its  abode  called  the  body.  22 
Towards  the  end  of  one’s  period  of  life,  strength  of  complexion, 
of  voice,  and  of  digestive  fire,  as  also  strength  of  speech,  of  the 
senses,  and  of  the  mind,  decreases,  and  continuous  sleep  or  entire 
sleeplessness  comes  over  the  man.  23 

Those  men  who  have  an  aversion  to  physicians,  drugs,  drinks, 
food,  superiors,  and  friends,  should  be  known  as  already  brought 
under  the  control  of  Yama*  24 

Disease,  when  it  afflicts  such  men,  increases  in  intensity.  Medi¬ 
cines,  if  administered,  produce  no  effect.  Their  food  should  not 
be  eaten.  Their  drink  should  not  be  touched.-}-  25 

If  all  the  four,  each  endued  with  efficacious  qualities,  be  united 
together,  they  would  be  utterly  powerless  in  the  presence  of  one 
the  period  of  whose  life  has  run  short.  There  can  be  no  exhibi¬ 
tion  of  properties  when  the  substance  is  not  present  to  which  they 
inhere.:}  26 


and  ether  (or  space).  The  earth  is  supposed  to  have  the  property  of  smell ;  water,  of 
taste  ;  fire,  of  form  ;  air,  of  touch  ;  and  ether,  of  sound.  The  four  kinds  of  Yoga  or  cor¬ 
relation  are  Samayoga  (harmony  of  correlation),  Ayoga  (absence  of  correlation),  Atiyoga 
(excess  of  correlation)’  and  Mithya-yoga  (false  correlation).  Take  the  case  of  ear  and 
and  ether.  Between  the  ear  and  sound  (which  is  the  property  of  ether)  there  is  Samayoga 
when  nothing  but  agreeable  sounds  enter  it.  When  the  ear  is  perfectly  un  exercised,  that 
is,  no  sound  is  allowed  to  enter  it  or  is  heard,  the  case  is  one  of  Ayoga.  The  ear  may, 
again,  continually  hear  sounds.  This  is  Atiyoga.  Harsh  and  dissonant  sounds,  again, 
may  enter  it  and  destroy  the  very  power  of  hearing.  This  is  Mithya-yoga,  It  is  practi¬ 
cally  included  in  Atiyoga.  Chakrapani  explains  that  ‘ether  and  the  rest’,  as  used  in  this 
verse,  imply  the  relation  between  their  properties  and  the  respective  senses  by  which 
they  are  seized. 

What  the  Rishi,  therefore,  says  here  is  this  ;  when  a  physician  observes  either  Ayoga 
or  Atiyoga  in  several  of  the  senses  at  the  same  time,  he  should  abstain  from  treating  the 
patient.  Simultaneous  indications  of  Ayoga  would  be  the  incapacity  of  the  ear  to  hear, 
of  the  eye  to  see,  of  the  nose  to  smell ;  &c.  Similarly,  simultaneous  indications  of  Atiyoga 
would  be  excessive  noises  in  the  ear,  various  imaginary  sights  seen  by  the  eye,  and  imagi¬ 
nary  scents  smelt  by  the  nose,  &c.,  &c. — T. 

*  ‘Samavartin’  is  Yama.  It  literally  means  one  whose  behaviour  is  equal  towards  all. 
Yama  being  the  great  leveller  of  distinctions  is  fitly  called  ‘samavartin.’ — T. 

f  The  food  and  drink  of  these  men  should  not  be  eaten  and  touched.  The  sense  is, 
they  are  very  sinful.  Hence,  the  food  or  drink  they  offer  is  polluted  and  should  not  be 
accepted. — T. 

X  In  Sutrasthana,  there  are  two  Lessons,  one  called  ‘Vrihatchatuspada’  and  the  other 
‘Khudrachatuspada’,  that  is,  ‘  aggregate  of  four  in  full’  and  ‘aggregate  of  four  in  brief.’ 
For  successful  treatment  these  four  should  have  desirable  attributes,  viz.,  physician,  drugs 
nurses,  and  patient.  The  physician  should  be  competent ;  the  drugs  should  be  efficacious ; 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


9i5 


The  physician  should  examine  the  period  of  life  of  one  that  is 
hale  as  also  of  one  that  is  ill. 

The  sum  total  of  the  fruits  of  Science  of  Life  is  the  period  of 
life. 

He  that  is  invested  with  body  follows  this  period  of  Life.*  27 
( Here  occurs  a  verse.) 

When  the  three  faults  (viz.,  wind,  bile  and  phlegm),  trans¬ 
gressing  the  path  of  treatment,  pervade  the  whole  body  and 
cause  especial  indications  to  appear,  these  latter  are  called  by  the 
name  of  ‘Arishta.’f  28 

Thus  ends  the  eleventh  Lesson,  called  ‘Anujyotiyam’,  in  the 
Division  called  Indriya,  of  the  treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised  by 
Charaka. 


LESSON  XII. 

We  shall,  after  this,  expound  the  Lesson  called  ‘Gomaya- 
churniyam’  in  the  Division  called  ‘  Indriyam.’ 


the  nurses  should  be  intelligent  and  obedient  to  the  orders  they  receive  ;  and  the  patient 
should  be  obedient  and  trustful.  If  otherwise,  success  can  hardly  be  achieved.  What  is 
said  by  the  Rishi  in  this  verse  is  that  even  if  all  these  four,  each  possessed  of  efficacious 
attributes,  exist  together,  yet  if  the  patient’s  period  of  life  or  vitality  has  run  short,  treat¬ 
ment  cannot  be  successful.  The  physician  may  be  competent ;  the  drugs  may  be  good  ; 
the  nurses  may  be  skilful  and  attentive  ;  and  the  patient  himself  thoroughly  disposed  to 
abide  by  the  injunctions  of  the  physician  ;  yet  if  there  be  no  vitality  in  the  patient,  in 
other  words,  if  his  period  of  life  has  run  short,  he  cannot  be  cured  or  saved  from  death. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  Charaka,  following  AgniveQa,  does  not  believe  in  each 
man  having  an  allotted  period  of  life,  called  ‘ayus.’  The  science  of  treatment  would  be 
unmeaning  if  any  such  thing  as  ‘ayus’  in  this  sense,  be  admitted.  ‘Ayus’,  therefore,  as 
used  in  this  verse,  means  vitality. — T. 

*  In  the  previous  Divisions  of  this  treatise,  the  Rishi  has  laid  down  many  consider- 
tions  by  which  the  period  of  life  may  be  ascertained  of  a  healthy  man.  The  physician 
who  aspires  to  skill  in  the  cure  of  disease  should  attend  to  those  considerations.  The 
Science  of  Life  has  one  object,  viz.,  the  ascertainment  of  the  period  of  life,  and  teaching 
the  means  of  lengthening  it.  When,  therefore,  it  is  said  that  the  sum  total  of  the  fruits  of 
the  Science  of  Life  is  the  period  of  life,  what  is  meant  is  that  the  ascertainment  of  the 
period  of  life  and  its  lengthening  are  the  objects  which  the  Science  of  Life  has  in  view. 

‘Dehin’  is  ‘he  who  is  invested  with  body  or  material  case’,  that  is,  the  Self.  The  Self, 
when  invested  with  body,  is,  of  course,  dependent  upon  ‘Ayus’  or  period  of  life.  Hence, 
the  latter  has  certain  other  names,  viz.,  ‘dhari’,  ‘anubandha’,  &c.  Vide  Lesson  I., 
Sutrasthana. — T. 

t  ‘Transgressing  the  path  of  treatment’  implies  that  the  faults  become  so  excited  that 


916 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.*  i 

He  on  whose  head  dandriff  appears  resembling  dried  cow-dung 
powder,  and  which  goes  off  when  the  head  is  rubbed  with  oil,  does 
not  live  more  than  a  month.  2 

He  who,  while  afflicted  with  disease,  rubs  his  feet,  or  in  moving 
about  feels  that  his  shoulder-joints  have  become  dislocated,  does 
not  live  long  in  this  world.  3 

If  the  chest  of  a  person,  who  has  bathed  and  laved  his  body 
with  sandal-paste  and  other  unguents,  becomes  exceedingly  dry 
when  the  other  parts  of  the  body  are  still  wet,  that  person  lives  for 
•only  a  fortnight.  4 

The  life  of  that  patient  is  difficult  to  be  saved  for  whom  the 
physician,  in  spite  of  all  his  efforts,  fails  to  manufacture  (the  in¬ 
tended)  medicines.  5 

That  man  is  beyond  the  pale  of  treatment  in  whom  a  medicine 
whose  success  has  been  repeatedly  tried  produces  no  change  for 
the  better  even  when  well-applied.  6 

That  man  who  derives  no  benefit  from  even  such  food  as  has 
been  properly  cooked  for  him  by  the  physician  himself,  is  difficult 
to  save.  1 

In  the  Lesson  on  messengers  we  shall  lay  down  certain  symp¬ 
toms  which  prognosticate  the  near  approach  of  death.  Appre¬ 
hending  these,  the  physician  possessed  of  wisdom  should  certainly 
avoid  the  patient.f  8 

If  the  physician,  when  his  own  hair  is  unkempt,  or  when  he  is 
naked,  or  when  he  is  weeping,  or  when  he  is  impure,  sees  the  mes¬ 
senger  come  to  fetch  him,  he  should  at  once  conclude  that  the 
patient  on  whose  behalf  the  messenger  has  been  sent,  will  die.|  9 


they  can  no  longer  be  controlled  by  treatment ;  or  their  excitement  manifests  itself  not¬ 
withstanding  the  check  which  treatment  seeks  to  put  upon  them. 

‘Kevalam’  means  ‘samagram’  or  entire. — T. 

*  This  Lesson,  like  the  previous  ones,  is  called  after  the  first  words  of  the  first  verse 
following.  ‘Gomaya’  is  cow-dung ;  ‘chuma’  is  powder.  Hence  ‘Gomoyachurniyam’ 
implies  that  which  relates  to  cowdung  powder. — T. 

t  ‘Dutadhikara”  i.  e.,  in  the  Lesson  on  messengers  sent  for  fetching  the  physician  to 
the  patient’s  bed-side. — T. 

t  Some  Bengali  translators  understand  the  verse  to  imply  that  the  words  ‘muktakega 
&c.’,  apply  to  the  messenger  and  not  to  the  physician,  so  that  the  sense  is  this  :  if  the 
messenger  arrives  with  unkempt  or  loosened  hair,  or  in  a  state  of  nakedness,  &c.,  the 
physician  should  regard  the  patient’s  death  to  be'  near.  This  interpretation  seems  to  be 
more  natural.  If  the  messenger’s  hair  is  disordered,  if  he  is  undressed,  if  he  is  weeping, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA, 


017 


The  physician  should  never  attend  to  those  patients  whose 
messengers  come  to  him  when  he  is  sleeping  or  when  he  is  cutting 
or  piercing  anything.  1° 

Those  messengers  who  come  to  the  physician  when  the  latter 
is  engaged  in  pouring  libations  on  the  sacred  fire,  or  while  he  is 
offering  the  rice-ball  to  his  deceased  ancestors,  are  to  be  regarded 
as  desirous  of  killing  their  master  and  do  actually  kill  them,  n 

Those  patients  are  to  be  regarded  as  about  to  die  whose  mes¬ 
sengers  come  to  the  physician  when  the  latter  is  speaking  or  think¬ 
ing  of  something  that  is  evil.  12 

Those  patients  should  be  regarded  as  on  the  point  of  death 
whose  messengers  come  to  the  physician  when  the  latter  is  engag¬ 
ed  with  a  dead  person,  or  a  burnt  or  broken  thing,  or  when  he  is 
talking  of  some  such  evil.* 

If  the  physician  beholds  the  messenger  come  to  him  when  he 
is  seated  at  a  place  that  is  endued  with  attributes  similar  to  those 
of  the  disease  under  which  the  patient  is  suffering,  or  if  he  sees 
the  messenger  come  at  a  time  that  agrees  in  its  attributes  with 
those  of  the  disease  which  is  to  be  treated,  he  should  not  take  up 
the  treatment.!  l4 


or  if  he  is  impure,  not  having  had  time,  that  is,  to  dress  his  hair  and  person,  or  go  through 
the  usual  rites  of  purification,  before  setting  out  for  the  physician’s  house,  the  physician 
should  judge  death  to  be  near. — T. 

*  ‘Engaged  with  a  dead  person’,  i.  e.,  in  cremating  a  body  or  in  making  arrangements 
for  its  cremation. 

‘A  burnt  thing,’  i.  e.,  when  the  physician  is  engaged  in  helping  to  extinguish  a  fire. 
‘Vinashta’  is,  literally,  ‘lost ;’  hence,  injured  or  damaged  or  broken  objects.  A  physician 
may  be  engaged  in  repairing  it  when  the  messenger  comes  to  fetch  him. — T. 

t  Suppose  the  physician  is  seated  on  a  spot  that  is  exposed  to  severe  sunheat.  A 
messenger  comes  to  him  and  reports  that  the  patient  for  whom  he  has  come  is  suffering 
under  a  disease  characterised  by  excited  bile.  The  physician  should  not  take  up  the  treat¬ 
ment  of  the  patient.  Or,  suppose  the  messenger  arrives  after  dusk,  and  reports  that  the 
patient  is  suffering  from  a  disease  characterised  by  phlegm.  The  physician  should  not  then 
take  up  the  treatment.  The  fact  is,  certain  places  possess  attributes  agreeing  with  those 
of  wind,  or  bile,  or  phlegm.  So  also  certain  hours  of  the  day  are  similarly  circumstanced. 
Thus  the  morning  is  the  time  for  phlegm,  the  noon  for  bile,  and  the  afternoon  for  wind. 
A  spot  exposed  to  heat,  agrees  in  respect  of  attributes,  with  bile  ;  a  spot  exposed  to 
breezes  agrees  with  the  wind  ;  a  spot  contiguous  to  water  or  damp  owing  to  such  conti¬ 
guity,  agrees  with  phlegm. 

Susruta  says  that  by  ‘kala’  or  time,  especial  reference  is  made  to  certain  planetary  con¬ 
junctions  and  constellations. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


gi8 


Those  patients  should  be  regarded  as  on  the  point  of  death 
who  send  messengers  that  are  cheerless  or  terrified,  or  that  arrive 
at  a  running  speed,  or  that  are  hasty,  or  ill-dressed,  or  that  are  of 
the  female  sex  and  unchaste  in  character,  or  that  are  three  in  num¬ 
ber,  or  that  are  of  deformed  limbs,  or  that  are  eunuchs.*  rS 

The  physician  should  not  go  to  the  patient  if  he  see  the  mes¬ 
senger  to  be  one  who  is  defective  in  respect  of  a  particular  limb,  or 
one  who  has  adopted  the  symbols  of  religious  mendicancy,  or  one 
who  is  diseased;  or  who  is  a  doer  of  fierce  deeds.f  16 

The  physician  should  conclude  that  the  patient  would  succumb 
to  the  disease  if  the  messenger  arrived  on  his  account  has  used  a 
mule  or  camel,  or  a.  car  for  his  journey.  r7 

Those  messengers  betray  the  last  stage  of  the  patients,  who, 
before  seeing  the  physician,  have  touched  any  of  these  articles,  viz,, 
straw,  ,  kernless  paddy,  flesh,  bones,  hair  of  the  head,  bristles,  nails, 
teeth,  broom,  pestle,  winnow,  shoes  torn  and  thrown  away,  grass, 
wood,  husks  of  paddy,  charcoals,  clods  of  earth,,  and  stones. |  i8_i9 
If  the  physician  sees  inauspicious  signs  when  the  messenger 
is  reporting  to  him  the  condition  of  the  patient,  he  should  not  fol¬ 
low  him.  20 

Thus  one  that  is  plunged  into  distress,  one  that  is  dead,  the 
ornaments  of  a  dead  person,  some  object  that  is  broken,  or  burnt, 
or  lost,  or  conversation  relating  to  these,  some  pungent  taste,  some 
keen  scent,  or  an  exceedingly  foetid  odour  of  a  dead  body,  or  some 
fierce  touch  (as  of  a  fierce  gale  dr  storm)  or  the  touch  of  some  wick¬ 
ed  animal,  or  anything  else  of  an  inauspicious  nature  that  may 
occur  :  hearing  the  report  made  by  messengers  either  immediately 
before  the  occurrence  of  these  or  after  their  occurrence,  the  physi- 


*  The  number  three  is  regarded  unlucky  by  the  Hindus.  Three  persons  should  not 
set  out  on  ajourney  together.  Three  things  should  not  be  given.  Three  messengers 
despatched  for  fetching  the  physician  is  highly  inauspicious. — T. 

t  ‘A  doer  of  fierce  deeds’  is  one  who  is  a  robber  or  murderer  by  profession. — T. 
t  The  two  verses  are  to  be  construed  together.  In  the  first  line  of  19,  the  true  read¬ 
ing  is  ‘sprigantah.’  It  qualifies  ‘dutah’  in  the  last  line.  ‘Mumurshatam’ is  ‘state  of  being 
mumurshu.’  It  is-  not  a  genetive  plural.  Gangadhara  reads  ‘sprigantam’  and  takes  the 
verses  to  mean  that  what  the  messengers  say  unto  a  physician  who  has,  before  their  arrival,, 
touched  the  articles  named,  should  be  regarded  as  appertaining  to  patients  who  are  on 
the  point  of  death.  The  fact  is,  even  if  ‘sprigantah’  be  altered  into  ‘sprigantam’,  gram¬ 
mar  would  not  support  the  construction  put  by  Gangadhara.  He  is  obliged  to  introduce 
‘yat’  after  ‘vyaharanti’  and  construe  the  last  line  as  ‘yat  dutah  vyaharanti,  tat  mumursha¬ 
tam  vyaharanti.’  This  is  very  far-fetched. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA, 


919 

cian  should  conclude  the  death  of  the  patient  to  be  certain.  Or, 
if  these  inauspicious  omens  occur  while  the  report  is  being  made; 
the  same  conclusion  should  be  arrived  at.*  2T  23 

Thus  has-  the  whole  subject  been  explained  of  the  messengers; 
of  those  patients  whose  death  is  near. 

I  shall-  now  speak  of  the  death-indicating  omens  noticeable  by 
the  physician  on-  his  way  to  the  patient’s  house,  z4 

Sneezing,,  loud  notes-  of  sorrow,  tripping,  falling  down,  loud 
cries  of  rage  or  brawling,  affrays  and  free  fights,  prohibiting,  cen¬ 
sures  or  abuse,  sticking  of  the  cloth  worn  or  of  the  head-dress  and 
of  the  upper  garments  to  any  hook  or  nail  or  any  other  substance, 
breaking  or  tearing  of  the  umbrella  or  the  pair  of  shoes  worn,  or- 
the  sight  of  such  mishap  to  anybody  else’s  umbrella  or  shoes,  sight 
of  one  plunged  into  distress  on  account  of  a  death,  the  fall  of  a 
sacred  tree,  or  of  a  flagstaff  or  of  a  banner,  or  of  a  vessel  full  of 
water,  talk  upon  a  dead  man,  or  upon  a  mishap-  that  has  overtaken 
a  person;  clouding  of  the  atmosphere  by  dust  or  ashes  raised  by 
the  wind,  crossing  of  the  path  by  a  cat,  a  dog,  or  a  snake,  cries  of 
fierce  and  wicked  animals  and  birds  against  the  direction1  lighted 
by  the  sun,  sight  of  beds,  seats,  and  coveyances  upturned, — all  these 
have  been  declared  by  the  wise  to  be  inauspicious  omens.-]-  25-29 


*  The  grammatical  construction  of  the  last  verse  (numbered  23)  seems  to  be  this  r. 
‘Tatpurvamabhitah  dutanam  vyahritam  vakyam.’  The  ‘tat’  here  has  reference  to  ‘yatr 
in  the  previous  line.- 

‘Vakyakaie’  ought  to  be  taken  separately. 

Gangadhara  reads  ‘tatha’  as  the  first  word  of  verse  21.  This  is  incorrect.  It  should 
be  ‘yatha.’-  In  verse  20,  inauspicious  indications  are  spoken  of  in  general  terms.  In  21 
and  22  these  are  specified. — T. 

t  ‘Avakshuta’  or  ‘kshavatu’  is  sneezing.  It  is  regarded  as  an  evil  omen.'  If  one  hap¬ 
pens  to  sneeze  just  as  another  pe'rson  is  on  the  point  of  starting  on  a  journey,  the  latter  gives' 
lip  the  journey  either  completely  or  postpones  it  by  a  few'  minutes.  ‘Utkrushta’,  mean¬ 
ing  the  loud'  notes  of  sorrow,  is  another  unfavorable  omen,  just  as  all  sounds  of  cheerful¬ 
ness  or  religion  (such  as  the  chanting  of  Vedic  hymns),  are  auspicious  prognostications. 
‘Skhalanam’  is  tripping  or  sliding  ;  ‘patanam’,  falling.  The  physician  may  trip  or  fall 
down  himself,  or  may  see  another  person  tripping  or  falling  down.  A  fall  is  sometimes 
regarded  as  an  evil  omen.  The  story  of  William  the  Conqueror  may  be  recalled  to  the' 
reader’s  mind.  ‘Akro$a’  means  cries  of  rage  or  challenges  directed  to  others  present  or 
absent.  ‘Pratishedha’  implies  prohibition.  Somebody  is  intent  upon  doing  something. ' 
Somebody  else  is  loudly  forbidding  him  to  do  it.  The  physician  hears  it.  It  is  the  custom 
to  take  prohibitions  as  applying  to  one’s  own  self.  Hence  the  physician  takes  it  as  direct¬ 
ed  to  himself.  It  is  otherwise  called ‘Narankita.’  The  Hebrews  called  it ‘the  daughter 
of  an  echo  or  voice.’  ‘Asanga’  is  attachment  or  sticking.  The  physician’s  own  garments. 


920 


CHARAKA -SAM HIT  A. 


Seeing  or  hearing  these  on  his  way  to  the  house  of  the  patient, 
the  physician  possessed  of  wisdom  should  refrain  from  going 
thither.  Thus  has  the  subject  been  expounded  of  the  death- 
indicating  omens  on  the  way  which  are  always  condemned  by 
physicians.  The  following  should  be  known  to  be  the  condition  of 
the  house  occupied  by  a  patient  whose  death  is  near.  3Q-31 

When  the  physician  enters  the  house  of  a  patient  that  is  about 
to  die,  he  beholds  the  following,  viz.,  a  jar  or  vessel  full  of  water, 
fire,  earth,  seeds,  fruits,  ghee ,  a  bull,  a  Brahman,  jewels,  and  images 
of  deities,  coming  out  of  the  house.  Entering  the  house  he  sees 
vessels  for  the  keep  of  fire  broken  or  the  fire  itself  without  a 
blaze.  32-33 

The  inmates  of  the  house  of  a  patient  that  is  on  the  point  of 
death  are  seen  to  use  things  that  are  torn,  or  pierced,  or  burnt,  or 
broken,  or  crushed,  or  weak.  34 

There  is  no  treatment  for  that  patient  whose  bed,  seats,  vehicles 
(for  locomotion,  such  as  carriages  and  cars,  &c.),  movements  (in 
walking),  and  eating,  and  cries  are  heard  to  be  inauspicious.*  35 
That  patient  should  be  regarded  as  already  dead  whose  kins- 


or  head-gear  may  stick  to  a  hook  or  nail,  or  the  branch  of  a  shrub  or  tree.  Or,  he  may 
see  the  garments  of  another  person  thus  sticking  and  causing  obstruction  to  his  progress. 
Either  of  these  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  unfavourable  omen.  ‘Chaitya’  is  a  large  tree, 
generally  a  banian  or  a  peepul,  growing  in,  or  adjacent  to,  a  village,  and  held  sacred  by 
the  inhabitants.  Generally  speaking,  stones,  representing  particular  deities,  are  kept  at  the 
foot  of  a  Chaitya.  These  trees  are  circumambulated  by  the  villagers  on  certain  auspicious 
occasions.  A  Chaitya  sometimes  stands  at  a  place  where  four  roads  meet.  ‘Purna’  implies 
full.  It  stands  here  for  a  jar  or  pot  full  of  water.  An  empty  jar  or  pot  is  an  inauspicious 
omen,  while  a  full  one  is  an  auspicious  one.  A  journey  becomes  fruitless  if  the  person 
undertaking  it  seesan  empty  jar  at  the  point  of  setting  out.  ‘Pathachccheda’  implies  the 
crossing  of  one’s  way.  If  a  cat,  a  dog,  or  a  snake  crosses  one’s  way,  it  is  regarded  as 
highly  inauspicious.  The  Thugs,  or  professional  stranglers,  always  regarded  the  cross¬ 
ing  of  their  way  by  a  hare  as  inauspicious.  Enterprises  on  the  point  of  success  were 
abandoned  if  a  hare  crossed  their  path.  See  “Confessions  of  a  Thug”  by  Colonel 
Meadows,  ‘Diptam  di$am’  is  that  point  of  the  compass  which  is  lighted  by  the  sun. 
Thus  in  the  morning,  it  would  imply  the  east ;  in  the  afternoon,  the  west.  Chakrapani 
gives  another  meaning  of  the  word  ;  according  to  him  it  may  imply  the  south  or  the  region 
towards  which  is  situated  the  abode  of  Yama. — T. 

*  If  from  the  reports  the  physician  hears,  he  thinks  that  the  patient’s  bed  and 
seats,  &c.,  are  inauspicious  or  abnormal,  he  should  conclude  that  death  is  near.  What 
circumstances,  however,  are  inauspicious  in  respect  of  beds,  &c.,  are  not  laid  down 
here.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


921 

folk  and  friends  are  seen  to  use  beds  and  seats  and  vehicles  and 
other  (personal)  surroundings  resembling-those  of  the  dead.*  36 

There  is  no  treatment  for  that  patient  whose  food  (even  when 
carefully  cooked)  becomes  spoiled,  and  in  "whose  house  a  fire 
ignited  in  a  windless  place,  even  when  fed  with  fuel,  becomes 
extinguished.  37 

The  life  of  that  patient  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  save  in  whose 
house  vessels  break  or  fall  down  with  a  loud  crash.-}-  38 

( Here  occur  some  verses . ) 

Those  death-indicating  symptoms  of  persons  who  are  on  the 
point  of  death,  which  have  been  laid  down  in  detail  in  these  two 
and  ten  Lessons,  we  shall  now  recapitulate  in  brief,  adopting  a 
different  order  (or  method). 

Statements  made  according  to  order  or  method  help  to  a  right 
comprehension  of  the  meaning.  39-4° 

It  is  not  desirable  that  this  topic  should  once  more  be  elabo¬ 
rately  explained,  since  it  has  been  already  discussed  in  the  (previ¬ 
ous)  Lessons  devoted  to  it.  41 

Of  embodied  beings  dwelling  in  bodies,  while  their  last  hours 
come,  of  those  longing  for  dissolution,  of  those  that  are  about  to 
leave  their  material  tenements,  of  those  that  are  on  the  point  of 
renouncing  their  life-breaths  which  are  very  dear,  of  those  that  are 
for  forsaking  their  beloved  residence,  of  those  who,  upon  the  break¬ 
ing  and  tearing  of  their  arteries  and  organs  are  about  to  enter  the 
great  darkness,  certain  symptoms  and  changes  of  condition  occur, 
indicating  death.  I  shall  declare  them,  agreeably  to  what  is  stated 
in  the  medical  scriptures  and  to  what  has  been  said  above.j  42-43 


*  Perhaps,  filthy  and  torn  and  broken  beds  and  bedsteads  and  seats  and  vehicles  are 
intended. — T. 

t  ‘Amatra’,  as  explained  by  Wilson,  is  a  vessel  or  pot.  The  correct  reading,  of  course, 
is  ‘amatra’,  and  not  ‘amitra’  or  ‘amatra’  as  some  texts  have. — T. 

t  The  Rishi  indulges  here  in  various  modes  of  expression  for  indicating  a  dying 

‘(Jaririn’  is  the  Self  invested  with  body. 

‘Abhyugra’  (and  not  ‘Atyugra’)  is  the  correct  reading."  It  means  intent  or  longing. 
‘Kantam  vasam’  is  ‘the  dear  or  beloved  dwelling’;  of  course,  the  body  is  implied. 
‘Tantra’  implies  the  tubular  ducts  of  the  body,  i.  e.,  nerves  and  arteries. 

‘Yathoddegam’  is  ‘agreeably  to  the  object  (set  forth).’  The  object,  as  stated  in  verse 
40,  is  statement  or  enumeration  according  to  a  different  or  new  method. — T. 


922 


CHARAKA-SAMH1T A, 


The  life-breaths  become  afflicted  ; 

Consciousness  becomes  suspended  ; 

Limbs  cast  off  their  strength  ; 

Exertions  cease  ; 

The  senses  lose  their  functions  ; 

Perception  becomes  obstructed  ;* 

The  mind  becomes  subject  to  anxiety  ; 

Fear  overwhelms  the  heart ; 

Memory  leaves  (the  mind) ; 

Intelligence  also  (does  the  same)  ; 

Modesty  and  brightness  of  complexion  depart ; 

Disease  and  all  its  afflictions  disappear  ;f 
Anger  and  energy  are  lost ; 

Conduct  or  (disposition)  undergoes  a  thorough  change  ; 
Strength  flies  away ; 

The  shadow  (or  reflection)  becomes  abnormal ; 

The  brightness  of  complexion  becomes  lost ; 

The  emission  takes  place  of  vital  seed  (without  adequate  cause)  ; 
The  wind  moves  in  an  upward  direction  ; 

The  flesh  becomes  wasted  ; 

The  blood  also  sustains  diminution  and  decay  ; 

The  heat  (of  the  body)  disappears  ; 

The  joints  become  slackened  ; 

The  smells  become  abnormal 

The  complexion  and  the  voice  suffer  a  change  ; 

The  body  becomes  dry  ; 

The  pores  of  the  body  are  dried  up  ; 

Vapours  are  generated  on  the  crown  of  the  head  ; 

Scabs  occur  on  the  head,  of  the  kind  called  ‘Daruna’ ; 

Those  limbs  of  the  body  which  were  seen  to  move  continuously' 
become  paralyzed  and  do  not  move  at  all ; 


*  The  reading  I  adopt  is  ‘khilibhuteva  chetana.’  Some  texts  read  ‘kilibhuteva 
vedana.’  If  ‘vedana’  be  accepted,  it  should  be  taken  as  implying  knowledge,  or  percep¬ 
tion,  and  not  pain  or  agony. — T. 

f  ‘Papmana’,  as  explained  by  Chakrapani,  means  disease  and  the  pains  it  brings 
about.  The  pains  of  disease  are  often  seen  to  disappear  a  short  while  before  death.  This 
is  called  ‘the  lightning  before  death.’ — T. 

t  Gangadhara  takes  it  to  mean  that  the  body  of  the  patient  produces  abnormal  smells. 
I  think  the  sense  is  that  the  organ  of  smell  becomes  deranged,  so  that  agreeable  odours 
seem  disagreable,  and  vice  versa . — T. 


F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in-  the  University  Medical  Magazine  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  of  Cashmere : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-  Western 
University,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition : — I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecar  . 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  .-—Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  ftp,  East  38th  Street,  New  York : — Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mqns.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhojber  Traise,  Dramstadt : — The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A., 
Editor  Meyer  Brothers’  Druggist : — -I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 
advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere  174,  Boulevatse,  Saint  Germain  : — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  : — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  I  always 
arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop 
from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients 
according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and 
fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  X  look  forwasd  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of 
the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street,  Calcutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  Kabiia'na 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblem<  n  of 
whom  X  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you  [about 
drawing  their  attention  to]  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after. — An 

Ayurvedic  physician  of  note .  considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia : — I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  Medical^  literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing: — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector-. — Your  patriotic 

lobours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  bugun .  You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  H.  Skrine,  Esq.,  Magistrate  and  Collector  : — I  have  read  Charaka-Sarrihita  with 
interest.  It  is  marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonder¬ 
ful  to  note  the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how 
completely  they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to 
the  enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Gierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gya  : — It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynall,  Bangor,  North  Wales -The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Lohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  : — Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as  pos¬ 
sibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning  to 
find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every  system 
of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is  a  work 
that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji, — The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


THE  WESTERN  DRUGGIST, 

JUNE ,  1902. 

CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

“The  majority  of  the  readers  of  the  Western  Druggist  already 
are  familiar  with  the  interesting  ancient  Hindoo  medical  work 
known  as  Charaka-Samhita,  for  the  successive  fascicules  as  they  are 
now  appearing  in  English  translation  have  been  noticed  and  exten¬ 
sively  reviewed  in  these  columns  as  they  have  made  their  appear¬ 
ance.  It  will  be  recalled  that  this  valuable  work  is  being  translated 
from  the  Sanskrit  by  the  learned  Dr.  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna, 
who  has  undertaken  an  arduous  work  for  which  he  is  entitled  to 
the  gratitude  of  the  scientific,  and  more  particularly  the  medical 
world.  And  this  enterprise  is  one  born  of  love  of  the  good  cause 
rather  than  expectation  of  material  reward,  and  we  fear  that  this 
publication  is  entailing  upon  him  a  great  hardship  and  much  per¬ 
sonal  sacrifice  owing  to  the  comparative  apathy  of  those  most 
concerned.  Those  who  have  not  seen  this  work  thus  far,  have  no 
conception  of  the  vast  amount  of  wisdom,  philosophy,  and  practical 
knowledge  encountered  in  its  pages.  One  marvels  at  the  profound 
learning  of  the  men  who  lived  and  wrote  at  a  period  so  remote  as 
to  be  relegated  in  the  mind  to  the  age  of  barbarism  almost. 

The  latest  fascicules  of  this  work  before  us  are  numbers  XXV  to 
to  XXVII,  and  their  contents  are  interesting  as  ever.  They  deal 
with  and  are  a  continuation  of  the  subjects  of  conception,  preg¬ 
nancy,  and  delivery.  The  “Rishi”  shows  the  similarity  between 
the  external  universe  and  “purusha.”  In  fact,  the  human  body  is 
shown  to  be  an  epitome  of  the  universe.  It  is  in  every  respect  a 
microcosm.  Everything  existing  in  the  macrocosm  is  shown  to 
exist  in  this  microcosm.  The  points  of  similarity  as  brought  out 
are  certainly  very  interesting.  The  “Rishi”  expounds  in  detail  the 
conditions  favorable  and  unfavorable  to  conception  and  how  to 
insure  the  preservation  of  the  unborn  child,  giving  full  instructions 
as  to  how  the  expectant  mother  should  carry  herself  during  the 
critical  period,  the  lesson  concluding  with  a  discourse  on  the 
delivery  of  the  child.  Here  are  also  described  those  acts  which  a 
man  and  a  woman  desirous  of  good  offspring  should  do.  The 
course  of  discipline  to  which  each  is  to  be  subjected  is  laid  down 
in  full.  The  subject  is  extremely  interesting  and  deserves  to  be 
studied  with  care.  The  address  of  Dr.  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna 
is  200  Corwallis  street,  Calcutta,  E.  I.” 


From  Sir  Alfred  Croft  m.  a.,  d.  l.,  k.  c.  s.  i., 

Late  Director  of  Public  Instruction ,  Bengal. 

Rumleigh 
Bere  Alston,  R.  S.  O. 

DEVON. 

24  July ,  1902. 

My  dear  Sir, 

I  continue  to  read  with  great  interest  the  successive  Parts  of 
Charaka-Samhita  that  you  are  good  enough  to  send  me.  The  his¬ 
torical  interest  of  the  treatise  can  hardly  be  overrated  :  and  while 
I  do  not  suppose  that  its  publication  will  greatly  affect  the  practice 
of  medicine  in  Europe  and  America,  yet  its  importance  in  throw¬ 
ing  a  flood  of  light  on  the  history  and  progress  of  medical  science 
must  secure  for  it  the  careful  attention  of  all  writers  who  hereafter 
deal  with  that  great  subject. 

I  am  glad  to  see  that  you  have  a  press  of  your  own  and  I  wish 
you  all  success  in  that  enterprise. 

I  am, 

Pandit  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna,  Yours  very  truly. 

Calcutta.  (Sd.)  A.  Croft, 


*7357; 


it  bv-s 

l 


PART  XXX. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


( TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH) 


EDITED  AND  PUBLISHED  BY 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  Original)  WITH  COMMENT¬ 
ARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical, 
journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  the  Hindu 
SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C.,  &C. 


CALCUTTA : 

200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N.  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRATNA  PRESS, 
12,  SIMLAH  STREET  BYE-LANE. 

1902. 


( The  right  0]  reproduction  is  reserved. ) 


OPINIO  N  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters .) 

Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — .  I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  atracted  more  attention. 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Libiarian  to  the  India  Office — .  Your 

excellent  translation  .  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  ail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West  . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  yo.ur  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

.  Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable 'translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A. — I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing.  Be 
-assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons  A.  Birth.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men  ■ 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris : — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  ler  raed  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany  . — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 

I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsbureh,  Germany  : — English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal: — I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
w  rich  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life 
cann  )t  be  other  than  valuable. 

James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister,  Maryland,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  have  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  togic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California: —  .  As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent . 7.  ... 

There  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  See.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Ohio,  U.  S,  A.  : — The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly.  ■ 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge : — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccless,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York: — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis,  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  America7i  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila- 
de’phia: — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS 


OF 

PART  XXX. 

In  this  part,  the  Division  on  Indriyas  is  concluded  and  that  on 
Nidanam  commences. 

In  the  concluding  portion  of  the  12th  Lesson,  which  is  the  last 
in  the  Division  on  Indriyas,  some  more  premonitory  signs  of  death 
are  mentioned. 

The  physician,  even  when  he  sees  that  death  is  near,  should 
not  say  so  unasked  ;  nor  should  he  say  so  if  it  be  productive  of 
immediate  injury. 

Some  symptoms  of  recovery  are  mentioned,  under  the. headings 
of  (1)  messengers  sent  to  fetch  the  physician,  (2)  the  incidents  he 
observes  on  his  way  to  the  patient’s  house,  (3)  incidents  connected 
with  the  patient’s  family,  and  (4)  the  conduct  and  disposition  of  the 
patient  himself. 

The  whole  subject  is  exceedingly  curious  and  deserves  to  be 
studied.  Experience  seems  to  confirm  many  of  the  observations 
of  Punarvasu. 


The  Division  called  ‘Nidanam’  commences  at  page  928. 

The  first  Lesson  of  this  Division  treats  of  the  ‘Nidanam’  or  the 
causes  of  Fever. 

The  several  synonyms  of  ‘Nidanam’  are  given. 

‘Nidanam’  or  the  causes  of  disease,  is  stated  to  be  of  three 
kinds  :  (1)  union  with  such  objects  of  the  senses  as  are  unassimi- 
lable  ;  (2)  faults  of  judgments  ;  and  (3)  the  development  of  evil 
acts  of  both  this  and  previous  lives. 

Explanations  are  then  given  of  various  technical  terms  in  con¬ 
nection  with  disease.  It  is  highly  important  to  understand  these 
terms  as  they  frequently  occur  in  medical  treatises. 

The  first  disease  taken  up  is  Fever. 

It  is  of  eight  kinds.  The  symptoms  of  the  several  kinds  of 
fever  are  then  fully  set  forth.  . 


(  2  ) 


Lesson  II  also  commences  in  this  Part. 

It  treats  of  Blood-bile.  The  causes  and  the  symptoms  of  this 
disease  are  set  forth  elaborately. 

Then  occurs  Lesson  III,  which  treats  of  ‘Gulma’  or  abdominal 
tumours,  the  causes  and  symptoms  whereof  are  explained  fully. 

These  three  Lessons,  particularly  the  first,  deserve  tQ  be  care¬ 
fully  studied.  The  observations  of  the  Rishi  upon  the  causes,  &c., 
of  Fever,  are  fraught  with  great  wisdom.  These  will  prove  that 
Hindu  medicine,  instead  of  being  quackery,  is  a  sciencp  that,  is  as 
much  based  upon  observation  and  thought  as  any  other  system. 


THE  AYURVEDIC  INSTITUTE. 

The  Second  meeting  of  the  Ayurvedic  Institute  was  held  on 
the  ioth  of  September  last,  at  5-30  P.  M.,  in  the  premises  of  the 
Albert  Hall,  College  Square,  Calcutta.  The  invitation  cards  were 
signed  byBabu  Norendra  Nath  Sen,  Editor,  Indian  Mirror.  The 
audience  was  a  respectable  one,  numbering  from  two  to  three 
hundred.  Amongst  those  present  were  Rajah  Peary  Mohan 
Mookerjee,  the  Hon’ble  Justice  Saroda  Churn  Mitter,  Babu 
Norendro  Nath  Sen,  Editor,  I.  M.,  Moulvi  Buzlall  Karim,  Deputy 
Magistrate,  Sealdah,  Mr  P.  N.  Mukerjee,  Municipal  Magistrate, 
Mr.  R.  N.  Mukerjee,  of  Messrs.  Martin  &  Co.,  Babu  Satindra  Nath 
Roy  Choudhuri,  Zemindar,  Satkhira,  Dr.  Hem  Chandra  Sen,  M.  D., 
Rai  Chandra  Narain  Sing1' Bahadur,  Collector  of  Calcutta,  Rai 
Khettra  Nath  Chatterjee  Bahadur,  Babu  Kali  Prasanna  Dey, 
proprietor,  National  Magazine ,  Pandit  Tejash  Chandra  Vidyananda 
and  others  of  note.  There  was  a  strong  muster  of  Kavirajes, 
amongst  whom  were  some  possessing  a  large  practice.  We  may 
particularly  mention  Kaviraj  Hari  Nath  Visharad,  Kaviraj  Rajendra 
Narain  Sen  Gupta,  Kaviraj  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna,  Kaviraj 
Romesh  Chandra  Sen  Gupta,  B.  A.,  Kaviraj  Dina  Nath  Shastri, 
Kaviraj  Mahananda  Sen  Gupta,  Kaviraj  Bhubuneswar  Sen  Gupta, 
Kaviraj  Aghore  Nath  Sarrna  Shastri,  Kaviraj  Mani  Mohan  Sen 
Kaviraj  Prakriti  Mohan  Sen,  Kaviraj  Kader  Nath  Kavyatirtha,  and 
Kayiraj  Hari  Narayan  Kaviranjan.  Letters  were  received  from 
Babu  Ganesh  Chandra- Chandra,  Kumar  Manmatha  Nath  Roy 


(  3  ) 


Ghowdhury,  Babu  Kali  Nath  Mitra,  Rai  Chuni  Lai  Bose  Bahadur, 
announcing  their  inability  to  attend  owing  to  prior  engagements. 
The  chair  was  taken  by  Kaviraj  Mani  Mohan  Sen  Gupta. 

The  proceedings  were  opened  by  the  chairman  calling  upon  the 
well-known  Pandit  Tejash  Chandra  Vidyananda,  Editor  «f  the  (late) 
Brahman,  to  read  his  discourse  on  the  authenticity  of  Ayurveda  as 
a  portion  of  the  revealed  scriptures  of  the  Hindus.  The  discourse 
contained  many  thoughtful  observations.  The  lecturer  proved  the 
Obligation  of  the  world  to  the  Rishis  of  ancient  India.  He  endea¬ 
voured  to  establish  that  except  the  blind  forces  of  nature,  nothing 
moves  in  the  world  that  is  not  Brahmanic  in  origin.  The  lecture!: 
was  repeatedly  cheered  and  sat  down  amidst  acclamations  of 
applause.  The  next  speaker  was  Kaviraj  Hari  Nath  Visharad. 
His  topic  was  food  and  drink  according  to  Charaka  and  others. 
The  discourse  proved  eminently  interesting  and  showed  the  wisdom 
of  the  ancients  in  many  directions.  It  will  be  no  exaggeration  to 
state  that  there  would  be  fewer  diseases  and  premature  deaths  if 
people  strictly  followed  the  dietary  instructions  of  the  Rishis. 
Kaviraj  Visharad  showed  himself  to  be  a  thorough  master  of  his 
subject.  The  third  speaker  was  Pandit  Satya  Charan  Shastri 
whose  subject  was  the  drugs  of  the  Ayurvedic  Pharmacopcea. 
He  deplored  that  the  Hindus  did  nothing  to  cultivate  the  plants 
mentioned  in  their  medical  scriptures  but  were  content  to  cull 
them  from  forests  and  mountains  where  they  grow  spontaneously. 
In  course  of  time  many  plants  have  become  unidentifiable.  This 
meant  the  defective  preparation  of  medicines  and  consequent  dimi¬ 
nution^  success  in  treatment.  The  establishment  of  Ayurvedic 
gardens  would  achieve  a  great  desideratum.  The  meeting  was 
then  addressed  by  Kaviraj  Kedar  Nath  Kavyatirtha.  His  voice,  his 
gestures,  his  language,  and  the  thoughtfulness  of  his  observations, 
electrified  the  audience.  His  discourse  was  an  intellectual  treat. 
Kaviraj  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna  then  addressed  the  meeting 
in  brief,  after  which  it  was  dissolved.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that 
the  meeting  was  a  successful  one.  The  promoters  will  do  much 
good  by  printing  and  publishing  the  several  discourses. 


HINDU  MEDICINE  IN  AMERICA. 


The  attention  of  medical  men  and  laymen  alike  is  earnestly 
solicited  to  the  letter  received  by  Kaviraj  Avinash  Chandra  Kavi- 
ratna  of  200  Cornwallis  Street,  Calcutta,  from  an  eminent  physi¬ 
cian  in  San-Francisco,  California.  A  few  medical  men  of  that  part 
of  the  world,  convinced  of  the  efficacy  of  the  Hindu  method  of 
treating  disease,  have  established  an  Institute  for  promoting  the 
study  and  practice  of  Ayurveda.  The  Science  of  Life  as  expound¬ 
ed  by  the  Rishis  of  India  has  at  last  found  expositors  in  America. 
It  argues  no  small  moral'  courage  in  a  European  or  an  American 
medical  practitioner  to  openly  declare  himself  a  believer  in  the 
Hindu  medical  scriptures.  It  is  our  firm  belief  that  the  date  is 
not  far  distant  when  the  Hindu  system  of  medicine  will  regain  its 
footing  in  at  least  its  native  land.  Truth  will  never  hide  its  light 
under  a  bushel. 


INSTITUTE  OF  AYURVEDA, 
1422  Post  Street, 

San  Francisco,  Cal.,  U.  S.  A., 
October  28th ,  1902. 

Kaviraj  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna, 

200  Cornwallis  Street, 

Calcutta ,  India. 

My  dear  Kaviraj, 

The  sacred  memory  of  the  ancient  sages  of  India, — Agniveca, 
Charaka,  Susruta,  and  others, — lives  in  their  works.  While  some  of 
those  works  were  translated,  centuries  ago,  into  Arabic  and  again 
into  Latin,  and  a  knowledge  of  Ayurveda  passed  to  the  Greeks 


(  2  ) 


and  Arabs,  and  thence  to  Europe  and  America,  the  light  of  those 
teachings  has  been  practically  lost  to  the  Western  world  for  cen¬ 
turies,  the  full  knowledge  of  that  science  having  been  buried  in 
the  hitherto  unexplored  recesses  of  the  original  language  and  liter¬ 
ature— Sanskrit  Medical  Scriptures. 

The  name  of  Kaviratna,  already  honored  in  all  lands,  will  be 
handed  down  to  posterity  in  memory  of  him  who  held  up  as'  the 
light  of  the  world,  the  works  of  his  illustrious  predecessor,  in  the 
translation  into  English  of  Charaka-Samhita. 

I  also  desire  to  express  my  unqualified  appreciation  of  the 
departure  from  the  ancient  established  custom  by  the  most  promi¬ 
nent  "Ayurvedic  physicians  of  India,  in  the  organisation  of  the 
Ayurvedic  Institute,  having  for  its  object  the  establishment  of 
Medical  Colleges,  Hospitals,  and  Medical  Journals. 

„  With  all  deference  to  the  law,  and  the  consequent  teaching  of 
the  Riskis,  forbidding  the  sale  of  knowledge,  the  relations  of  India 
with  the  Western  world,  in  the  adoption  of  commercial,  educational, 
political,  and  general  bearings  of  the  present  age,  havefno'doubt, 
been  modified.  Some  central  organisation  for  the  protection  of 
the  ancient  science  has  become  imperative,  even  though  it  may 
revolutionise  established  customs  of  an  ancient  civilisation.  The 
innovation  need  not,  and  will  not,  sink  to  a  common  commercial¬ 
ism  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  will  have  no  other  effect  than  that  of  raising 
Ayurveda  to  the  dignity  that  belongs  to  it,  in  a  manner  that  can 
be  said  of  none  of  the  theories  of  other  schools  of  medicine, — recog¬ 
nition  by  the  world  of  science  as  a  regular  and  advanced  Medical 
Science,  based  upon  the  unerring  laws  of  nature,  and,  therefore, 
observant  of  the  rational  law  of  vis  medicatrix  natures  in  contra¬ 
distinction  to  contraria  contrariis  curantur,  and  similis  similibus 
curantur ;  the  Science  of  Life  that  aims  to  aid  and  assist  nature  to 
regulate  and  control  the  functions  of  the  organism  to  a  physiolo¬ 
gical  effect,  a  distinction  that  will  be  justly  accorded  to  Ayurveda 
through  the  publication  of  the  theory  and  practice  of  the  science. 

I  shall  esteem  it  a  favor  to  be  informed  from  time  to  time  of 
the  progress  of  your  learned  body  ;  indeed,  I  but  voice  the  senti¬ 
ment  of  the  Members  of  the  Institute  of  Ayurveda  in  the 
United  States,  in  saying  that  this  organisation  will  be  happy  to 


(  3  ) 


affiliate,  as  far  as  the  interests  of  the  two  associations  will  admit, 
with  the  Ayurvedic  Institute  of  Calcutta,  for  the  mutual  bene¬ 
fit  of  the  combined  body,  and  the  advancement  of  the  Science. 

It  may  interest  you  to  learn  something  of  this  organisation  and 
how  it  came  about  that  I  have  the  honor  of  filling  the  important 
position  of  Resident  Consulting  Physician  to  the  same. 

The  Institute  of  Ayurveda-  is  a  branch  of  the  Royal 
Asiatic  Academy  of  Science,  and  was  first  established  in  this 
country  five  years  ago  by  a  practitioner  of  Ayurveda,  whose  success¬ 
ful  practice  created  a  sensation  in  Europe  and  America.  Patients 
travelled  from  the  continent  of  Europe  to  the  United  States  to 
consult  him  ;  from  London  to  San  Francisco  ;  during  his  practice 
in  London  and  Paris,  many  members  of  the  nobility  were  treated 
by  him.  My  attention  was  called  to  the  marvellous  cures  effected 
by  this  physician  three  years  ago,  by  a  prominent  gentleman  of 
this  city,  with  a  view  to  my  calling  him  in  to  see  my  daughter, 
who  had  been  an  invalid  of  upwards  for  three  years,  and  whose  dis¬ 
solution  was  considered  by  the  best  medical  authorities,  called  in 
consultation,  to  be  but  a  matter  of  a  short  time,  at  the  time  to 
which  I  refer.  The  trouble  was  complete:  nervous  prostration, 
aggravated  by  heart  trouble,  which  kept  her  confined  to  her  couch. 
In  spite  of  close  and  constant  attention  by  the  best  medical  men 
the  country  could  afford,  the  patient  had  become  very  emaciated 
and  for  three  years  had  not  stepped  out  of  doors.  My  friend 
accompanied  the  physician  of  the  orient  to  my  residence  ;  more  to 
have  his  opinion  as  to  the  nature  of  the  case  than  from  any  hope 
of  his  being  able  to  help  the  patient ;  but,  to  the  utter  astonishment 
of  all  present,  he  politely  requested  the  patient  to  dress  that  he 
might  take  her  out.  Notwithstanding  that  I  am  a  physician,  and, 
being  familiar  with  the  history  of  the  case,  knew  that  any  undue 
exertion  or  excitement  might  terminate  fatally,  something  in  the 
manner  of  the  man  and  the  injunction  to  dress,  precluded  any 
attempt  on  my  part  to  remonstrate.  The  patient’s  clothing  being 
chiefly  packed  away,  she  was  attired  in  her  mother’s  wraps,  shoes, 
&c.,  and  this  unassuming  Orientalist  led  the  patient  out  on  the 
street,  where  he  walked  her  about  for  the  space  of  twenty  minutes 
before  our  astonished  eyes. 


The  patient  made  an  unbroken  and  rapid  recovery  ;  travelled 
anywhere  she  desired  to  from  that  day  on  ;  and  within  a  few  days 
was  actively  employed  at  her  profession,  as  composer  and  author. 

Wishing  to  investigate  a  science  that  could  be  demonstrated  by 
such  results,  I  attended  a  course  of  lectures  delivered  by  the  same 
physician  at  the  Hall  of  the  INSTITUTE  OF  AYURVEDA.  My  inter¬ 
est  grew  at  each  succeeding  lecture,  and  I  lost  no  time  in  associat¬ 
ing  myself  more  directly  with  the  distinguished  and  learned  profes¬ 
sor.  I  found  in  him  a  most  courteous  and  amiable  gentleman,  ever 
ready  to  render  a  service  where  needed.  I  attended  other  courses 
of  lectures  subsequently  delivered;  and  reckon  myself  fortunate 
in  having  been  honored  with  an  official  position  in  connection  with 
the  Institute  of  Ayurveda  ;  the  International  Polyclinic 
of  the  Institute  affords  me  many  opportunities  for  learning  and 
appreciating,  from  practical  clinics,  the  great  value  of  the  AYUR¬ 
VEDA  of  India.  The  name  of  our  President  and  Superintendent  is 
Mr.  J.  G UELPH-NoRM A N,  formerly  of  Burma. 

1  shall  be  pleased  to  hear  from  you  and  of  your  laudable  under¬ 
taking  in  the  organisation  of  the  AYURVEDIC  INSTITUTE,  and 
should  there  be  anything  in  which  this  Institution  can  serve  you, 
you  have  but  to  make  it  known. 

Sincerely  and  fraternally  yours 
Geo.  W.  Carpenders,  m.  d., 
Resident  Consulting  Physician  to  the 
Institute  of  Ayurveda. 


NOTICE. 

lVe  shall  feel  highly  obliged  to  our  Subscribers  if  they  kindly 
give  us  intimation  of  any  person  visiting  them  as  my  Agent.  The 
sp-called  Agent  should  be  known  as  an  impostor. 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA. 


NOTICE. 

Our  Subscribers  will,  no  doubt,  be  glad  to  learn 
that  we  have,  at  last,  established  a  Printing  Press 
of  our  own.  We  intend  to  bring  out  a  Part  every 
month.  Hitherto  we  could  not  do  it  as  we  were 
obliged  to  depend  upon  others.  We  have  laid  out 
a  good  sum  on  our  Printing  Press.  Parts  XXVIII. 
to  XXX.,  which  we  now  issue,  have  been  printed  in 
our  Press.  That  the  work  has  been  executed  in  a 
superior  style  will  at  once  be  manifest.  To  satisfy 
our  Subscribers  has  all  along  been  our  chief  aim. 
Now  that  we  have  got  a  Press  of  our  own,  sub¬ 
scribers  may  rely  upon  our  word  that  the  work  will 
be  completed  as  quickly  as  possible. 


IMPORTANT. 

We  have  dispensed  with  the  services  of  Agents 
in  the  matter  of  collecting  subscriptions.  Sub¬ 
scribers  are  requested  not  to  pay  the  arrears  of 
their  subscriptions  to  any  one  who  visits  them. 
They  should  remit  their  dues  directly  to  the  head- 
office  at  200  Cornwallis  Street,  Calcutta,  by  Postal 
Money  Orders  or  in  registered  Covers  addressed 
to  the  undersigned.  Our  last  Agents  were  Baba 
Narendra  Nath  Roy,  Babu  Kalidas  Sircar,  and  Babu 
Hem  Chandra  Dutt,  L.  M.  S.  The  first  was  ‘doing’ 
Behai  ,  the  Central  Provinces,  and  Bombay  City. 
The  second  was  ‘doing’  East  Bengal  and  Assam.  The 
third  was  travelling  in  Nuddea  and  the  contiguous 
Districts.  Our  relations  with  all  the  three  have  been 
suspended.  If  we  appoint  them  or  other  Agents  in 
future,  we  shall  publish  their  names  duly. 
10-6-1902.}  AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA. 


INSTITUTION. 


FOR  THE 

DIFFUSION  OF  AYURVEDIC  KNOWLEDGE. 

An  Association  of  Kavirajes  has  been  established  in  Calcutta 
under  the  name  of  “Ayurvedic  Institute.”  The  immediate 
object  is  a  diffusion  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Hindu  Medical  Script¬ 
ures  by  means  of  popular  lectures.  The  proceedings  of  the  first 
meeting  are  circulated  herewith.  The  ultimate  object  of  the  Insti¬ 
tute  is  the  establishment  of  an  Ayurvedic  College,  with  an  Hospital 
attached  to  it  where  patients  may  be  treated  according  to  the 
Ayurvedic  method  and  the  results  published  in  a  journal.  A  garden 
for  the  cultivation  of  the  plants,  &c.,  which  furnish  the  ingredients 
of  Ayurvedic  medicines,  is  also  in  contemplation. 

We  respectfully  invite  expressions  of  opinion  from  the  thinking 
portion  of  the  Indian  community.  We  shall,  indeed,  be  greatly 
obliged  if  men  of  culture  kindly  communicate  their  views  to  us  on 
this  all-important  subject. 

CALCUTTA  1 

200  Cornwallis  Street ,  [AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA. 

10-6-1902,  J 


THE  AYURVEDIC  INSTITUTE. 


We  are  very  glad  to  see  that  in  response  to  our  invitation  to 
the  thinking  portion  of  the  community  to  favour  us  with  expres¬ 
sions  of  opinion  on  the  proposed  Ayurvedic  Institute,  we  have 
received  several  letters  from  different  parts  of  India,  and  Europe 
as  well.  We  select  two  from  among  these.  One  of  them  is  from  an 
eminent  physician,  who  is  certainly  qualified  by  his  knowledge  and 
experience  to  give  an. opinion  on  this  all-important  subject.  His 
letter  will  speak  for  itself  far  better  than' anything  we  can  say. 
The. other  is  from  a  distinguished  patriot  whose  name  is  a  house¬ 
hold  word  in  every  part  of  India.  His  intelligence  and  culture 
have  already  placed  him  at  the  head  of  his  profession. 

We  shall  feel  highly  obliged  if  others  among  our  countrymen 
favour  us  with  their  opinions. 

CALCUTTA  j 

200  Cornwallis  Street  j-AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA. 
12-9-1962.  J 


Palamau,  Bengal 
The  20th  July  1902. 

My  dear  Panditjee, 

The  XXVIIIth  Part  of  the  Charaka-Samhita  has  just  reached 
me,  redirected  from  Bogra,  which  place  I  left  in  September  last. 
Since  then  one  other  Part,  I  think,  I  have  received,  but  I  thank  you 
all  the  same  for  remembering  me  occasionally.  On  opening  the 
present  Part,  I  was  most  agreeably  surprised  to  read,  on  its  very 
first  page,  an  account  of  the  Ayurvedic  Institute  which  you  have 
started  and  I  could  not  help  exclaiming — “At  last.” 

For  many  years  past  I  have  silently  watched  the  great  revival 
that  is  going  on  all  over  India.  Out  of  the  depths  of  a  dim  forgot¬ 
ten  past,  wave  after  wave  was  being  thrown  forward  by  some 
strange  and  mysterious  force,  and  on  the  crest  of  each,  came  borne 
along  India’s  old  religion,  her  philosophy,  her  literature,  her  science 
and  evert  some  of  her  manners  and  customs  long  since  dead.  As  one 
huge  wave  after  another  came  rolling  on,  each  ^grander  and  more 
majestic  than  its  predecessor,  my  heart  thrilled  in  expectancy,  but 
grew  weary  of  waiting  for  the  one  I  have  been  straining  my  vision 
for,  vis.,  India’s  great  system  of  medicine  long  relegated  to  the 
regions  of  darkness  and  oblivion.  At  last  it  has  come  and  may  the 
Ayurvedic  Institute  live  long  an'd  help  in  restoring  it  to  its  proper 
place  in  the  temple  of  India’s  future,  in  all  its  ancient  majesty  and 
grandeur  ! 

These  effusions  from  a  man  brought  up  in  an  alien  system  of 
medicine  and  practising  the  same  in  the  service  of  an  alien  Govern¬ 
ment  may  appear .  strange  to  you,  but  lama  firm  believer  in 
“ancient  ideals  in  modern  life.”  I  do  not  advocate  your  system  in 
detriment  to  the  one  in  which  I  have  been  brought  up,  but  I  take 
it  as  one  of  the  many  phases  of  Eternal  Truth,  as  one  of  the 
many  segments  of  a  great  whole  yet  unknown,  and,  as  such,  I  wel¬ 
come  its  revival  and  wish  your  Institute  all  success.  With  kindest 
regards, 

Believe  me, 

My  dear  Kaviraj-jee, 

.  Ever  yours  most  sincerely 
Nobin  Chandra  Dutt, 
Civil  Medical  Officer ,  Palamau , 
Pandit  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna, 

Calcutta. 


Kidderpur  House. 
Bedford  Park, 
CROYDON. 

ENGLAND. 
July  1 8th,  1902 


My  dear  Kaviratna  Mahashaya, 

*  *  *  As  I  told  you  when  you  first  spoke  to  me  about  your 

desire  to  establish  the  Institute,  I  take  great  interest  in  the  project 
and  sincerely  hope  it  will  be  a  success.  It  was  a  bad  time  for  our 
Ayurvedic  system  of  medicine  when  our  countrymen  first  took 
to  studying  allopathic  medicine.  Most  of  them  discarded  our 
system  altogether,  and  it  has  not  regained  its  old  strength  yet 
although  it  is  gaining  ground  every  day.  The  mistake  our  medical 
men  made  was  in  giving  up  the  study  of  our  system.  What  they 
ought  to  have  done  was  to  study  the  Western  system  in  connection 
with  our  own,  and  then  take  the  best  of.  both  and  make  a  new 
system.  Even  now  the  only  effort  that  was  made  in  this  direction 
was  by  you,  through  the  medium  of  your  “Chikitsa-Sammilani,” 
and  your  effort  did  not  receive  the  encouragement  that  it  ought  to 
have.  I  am  anxious  that  our  system  of  medicine  should  be 
properly  studied  and  brought  into  harmony  with  modern  disco-  ■ 
veries,  particularly  in  the  direction  of  Surgery.  Your  Institute,  if 
it  receives  proper  support,  will  be  sure  to  do  this,  and  I  heartily 
wish  it  every  success. 

Hoping  you  are  quite  well,  and  wishing  you  every  success  in  all 
your  ventures, 

I  remain, 

'  Yours  most  sincerely. 

(Sd.)  W.  C.  Bonnerjee. 

Pandit  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna, 

Calcutta, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


923 


The  attributes  of  particular  limbs  of  the  body,  vis.,  coolness,  heat, 
softness,  hardness,  &c.,  occur  in  a  state  of  contrariety.  In  other  parts, 
a  similar  condition  becomes  noticeable,*  S3  . 

Flowers  (Y.  e.,  marks  having  the  shape  of  flowers)  grow  on  the  nails  5 
clay-like  filth  appears  on  the  teeth  ;  the  eyelashes  become  matted  ; 
lines  appear  on  the  head,  at  which  the  hair  is  parted.  54 

Medicines  (in  such  cases)  fail  to  reach  the  disease  and  do  not 
become  suitable.  Those  which  are  administered  do  not  succeed 
in  showing  their  potency  (or  puissance).  SS 

Many  fierce  diseases,  of  diverse  natures,  and  having  various 
medicines  laid  doivn  for  them,  quickly  arise  (in  the  case  of  those 
whose  death  is  near  and  certain),  overcoming  both  strength  and  ojasi 
as  also  hearing,  touch,  taste,  sight,  smell,  exertions,  and  (cheerful) 
thoughts.  56 

In  course  of  the  treatment  of  such  diseases  (as  end  in  death), 
various  inauspicious  signs  manifest  themselves.  Terrible  dreams  are 
seen.  Various  supervening  symptoms,  of  a  disturbing  and  frightful 
character,  manifest  themselves.  57 

Servants  become  disobedient  and  act  against  the  wishes  of  their 
master  (lying  ill).  The  appearances  of  a  corpse  show  themselves  in 
the  patient  His  normal  character  and  disposition  become  exceed¬ 
ingly  altered.  58 

Sudder?  and  terrible  symptoms  of  death  become  noticeable. 

Even  these  are  the  signs  of  men  whose  death  is  near.  59 
The  physician,  even  if  he  marks  these  symptoms  of  death  which 
have  been  laid  down  (in  the  above  verses)  agreeably  to  medical  scrip¬ 
tures  and  in  accordance  with  the  purpose  in  view,  should  never, 
unasked,  say  that  death  is  near. 

Even  when  asked,  he  should  not  say  so  when  his  declaration  Is 


*  What  is  stated  in  the  first  sentence  is  this  :  a  contrariety  of  conditions  becomes  notice¬ 
able  in  a  dying  man.  Such  parts  of  the  body  as  remain  cool  in  health  become  hot  when 
death  approaches,  and  such  as  are  hot,  become  cool ;  such  as  are  soft,  become  hard  ;  and 
such  as  are  hard,  become  soft.  This  change  of  condition  occurs in  ‘garira-dega’,  that  is, 
particular  parts  of  the  body. 

In  the  second  sentence,  it  is  said  that  the  same  change  of  conditions  is  noticed  in  ‘anyeshu 
sthaneshu’,  i.  e.,  ‘in  other  places’;  what  are  those  other  places  which  do  not  fall  within 
‘garira-dega  ?’  Chalcrapani  takes  ‘  garira-dega’  as  implying  generally  those  parts  of  the  body 
which  have  the  attributes  of  coolnes  and  heat,  softness  and  hardness,  &c.  ;  while  ‘anyeshu 
sthaneshu’  is  taken  by  him  to  mean  those  other  parts  which  have  attributes  other  than  cool¬ 
ness  and  heat,  softness  and  hardness,  &c.  Hence,  according  to  him,  the  changes  implied  in 
the  second  sentence  refer  to  those  of  another  class  of  attributes,  such  as  oiliness  and 
dryness,  &c. — T. 


924 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


capable  of  producing  injury,  that  is,  when  the  patient  himself  or  any¬ 
body  else  is  likely  to  suffer  pain  or  torture  in  consequence. 

Without  telling  him  that  his  death  is  near,  the  intelligent  physi¬ 
cian  should  simply  decline  to  take  up  the  treatment  of  that  patient  in 
whom  signs  of  death  may  become  noticeable.  60-63 

When  the  physician,  guided  by  (his  observation  of)  messengers, 
inauspicious  incidents  occurring  on  his  way  (to  the  patient’s 
house),  similar  incidents  connected  with  the  patient’s  family, 
the  conduct  and  disposition  of  the  patient,  and 
.  the  signs  connected  with  the  possessions  of  the  patient, 
sees  symptoms  which  are  the  reverse  of  those  that  are  called 
death-indicating,  he  should  declare  the  certain  recovery  of  the  patient 
be  to  at  hand.*' 64-6s 

A  messenger  who  is  of  good  behaviour,  who  is  cheerful,  who  is 
not  defective  of  any  limb,  who  is  endued  with  fame,  who  is  dressed  . 
In  white  garments,  whose  head  is  not  shaved,  who  does  not  bear  mat¬ 
ted  locks,  whose  dress  and  acts  correspond  with  his  caste,  who  is  not 
mounted  on  a  camel  or  a  mule,  who  does  not  come  at  any  of  the 
twilights  (viz.,  morning  or  evening),  who  does  not  come  when  some 
inauspicious  planet  is  ascendant  or  when  some  fierce  or  inauspicious 
asterism  is  so,  who  does  not  come  when  the  asterism  called  Dhruba 
is  ascendant,  who  does  not  come  on  the  fourth,  or  the  ninth,  or  the 
fourteenth  lunar  day,  who  does  not  come  at  midday  or  midnight,  or 
when  an  earthquake  or  an  eclipse  (solar  or  lunar)  happens,  who  comes 
to  the  physician  when  the  latter  is  not  in  a  filthy  or  impure  place, 
and  who  comes  at  a  time  when  no  inauspicious  sign  is  noticeable,  and 
who  is  not  in  a  hurry,  should  not  be  regarded  as  inauspicious.  66-69 
Curds,  a  vessel  full  of  Atapa  rice,f  members  of  the  twice-born 


*  ‘Autpatikairbhavaih’  is  connected  with  both  ‘pathi’  and  ‘aturakulaprayaih.  ’  Inauspi¬ 
cious  incidents  connected  with  the  patient’s  family  include  those  which  are  noticeable  in 
the  patient’s  house  and  among  his  kinsfolk. 

‘Dravya-sampatti-lakshanaih’  has  reference  to  the  possessions  and  wealth  of  the  patient. 
Unless  the  patient  happens  to  have  good  rooms  and  good  clothes,  See.,  in  short,  the  ability 
tp  carry  out  the  instructions  of  the  physician,  his  cure  cannot  be  brought  about.  According 
to  Charaka,  the  treatment  of  those  that  are  poor  should  not  be  taken  up. 

“Guided  by  messengers,  &c.” — This  implies  that  if  messengers  do  not  arrive  at  unlucky 
hours,  if  inauspicious  incidents  are  not  observed  on  the  way  or  in  the  house  of  the  patient,  or 
among  his  kinsfolk,  if  the  patient’s  conduct  and  disposition  be  favourable,  &c.,  the  physician 
should  then  declare  recovery  to  be  at  hand. 

Chakrapani  reads ‘autpadikairbhavaih’ for ‘autpatikairbhavaih.’  ‘Autpadika’  for  ‘utpa- 
dika’  cannot  but  be  far-fetched. — T. 

+  ‘Akshata’  is,  literally,  uninjured,  or  not  defective,  that  is  full.  A  vessel,  generally  a 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


925 

class  (viz.,  Brahmans),  bovine,  bulls,  kings,  gems,  jars  full  of  water* 
a  white  horse,  flags  and  banners  raised  in  honour  of  Indra,*  fruits, 
a  beggar,  growing  maidens,  a  single  animal  tethered  (to  a  post  or 
tree),  a  field  in  course  of  being  ploughed,  a  blazing  fire,  sweetmeats, 
white  flowers,  sandal  wood,  agreeable  viands  and  drinks,  carriages 
and  vehicles  full  of  men,  a  cow  with  her  calf,  a  mare  with  her  colt 
or  filly,  a  woman  with  her  child,  a  partridge  (jivanjivaka),  or  ‘siddhar- 
tha’,  or  crane  (sarasa),  of  sweet  notes,  swans,  parrots,  blue  jays,  pea¬ 
cocks,  fish,  a  goat,  ivory,  conchs,  meat,  ghee,  any  brilliant  object, 
mirror,  white  mustard  seeds,  the  yellow  pigment  of  the  cow,  fragrant 
odours,  white  colours,  objects  endued  with  sweet  taste,  auspicious 
sounds  uttered  by  superior  animals  and  birds  and  human  beings; 
umbrellas  and  standards  and  banners  set  up  and  fluttering  in  the 
wind,  the  sound  of  drums  and  kettle-drums  and  conchs,  rejoicings 
such  as  are  heard  on  sacred  days,  the  chanting  of  Vedas,  delicious 
breezes  blowing  from  the  south, — the  sight  and  hearing  of  these  by 
the  physician  while  he  is  on  his  way  to  or  entering  the  house  of  the 
patient,  are  regarded  as  indications  of  recovery. j-  70-78 

If  all  the  inmates  of  the  house  along  with  the  patient  himself  be 
endued  with  auspicious  behaviour,  possessed  of  faith,  helpful  to  one 
another,  with  command  of  all  needful  things  in  abundance,  in  the 
enjoyment  of  wealth,  affluence,  and  happiness,  and  capable  of  obtain¬ 
ing  with  ease  whatever  object  is  desired,  and  if  there  be  administra- 


dish  or  plate,  full  of  Atapa  rice,  is  called  an  ‘akshata.’  By  atafa  rice  is  meant  that  rice  which- 
is  brought  out  of  paddy  by  simply  exposing  it  to  the  sun,  that  is,  without  boiling  it. 

*  Since  the  days  of  king  Uparichara  or  Vasu  of  the  Chedis,  bamboo  poles  are  set  up  on 
the  fourteenth  lunar  day  (lighted)  of  the  month  of  Bhadra  (August-September)  decorated 
with  banners,  in  honour  of  Indra.  Those  poles  are  duly  worshipped,  and  are  called  ‘Qakra- 
dhwajas’  or  flags  in  honour  of  Qakra  or  Indra,  the  chief  of  the  deities.  When  set  up  by 
kings  and  wealthy  men,  feasting  with  merriment  goes  on  for  days  together.  At  one  time, 
the  setting  up  of  these  flags  was  very  popular.  May-poles  in  England  are,  perhaps,  a  proto¬ 
type  of  ‘Qakradhawjas’  in  India. — T. 

f  In  verse  71,  the  reading  in  many  editions  is  ‘yachakasya’,  meaning  ‘of  a  beggar.’ 
Gangadhara  reads  ‘pavakasya’,  meaning  ‘of  a  fire.’  This  can  hardly  be  correct,  for  in  the 
first  line  of  72  occurs  ‘vahneh  prajwalitasya’,  meaning  ‘of  a  blazing  fire.’  ‘Vaddhasyaika- 
pajoh’  means  a  single  animal,  generally  a  cow  or  a  bull,  tethered  (to  a  post  or  tree). 

‘Modaka’  is  any  ball-shaped  sweet-meat  or  article  of  confectionery. 

‘Chandana’  or  sandal ;  of  course,  the  white  variety  is  used.  The  red  variety  is  nofi 
regarded  auspicious. 

The  adjective  ‘savatsayah’  qualifies  ‘dhenwah’,  ‘vadavayah’,  and  ‘striyah.’ 

•Jivanjiva’  is  a  ‘sarasa’  or  what  is  called  the  Greek  partridge.’  It  is  sometimes  applied 
to  a  pheasant.  Another  form  of  the  word  is  ‘jivajiva.’  Its  cry  ^supposed  to  resemble  the 
sound  ‘jiva-jiva’,  meaning  ‘live — live’ ;  hence,  it  is  an  auspicious  bird. 


926 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SAMHITA. 


tion  of  those  drugs  and  appliances  that  are  suited  (to  the  disease), 
success  (of  treatment)  cannot  but  ensue.  79-8° 

Getting  up,  in  dreams,  on  the  tops  of  houses  and  mansions 
and  hills,  riding  on  the  backs  of  elephants  and  bovine  bulls  and 
steeds  and  human  beings,  crossing  the  sea,  beholding  the  rise  of  its 
waters,  escaping  dangers  connected  with  the  sea,  conversing  with  the 
deities  and  deceased  ancestors  in  cheerful  mood,  seeing  the  moon, 
the  sun,  the  blazing  fires,  Brahmanas,  kine,  famous  men,  white  clothes, 
and  lakes  of  crystal  water,  80-83  accepting  gifts  of  meat,  fish,  poison, 
unclean  things,  umbrellas,  and  mirrors,  the  sight,  which  is  very  aus¬ 
picious,  of  white  flowers  in  dreams,  the  sight  of  such  vehicles  as 
horses  and  bullocks  and  cars,  journeying  towards  the  east  or  the 
north,  crying,  rising  up  after  a  fall,  and  crushing  one’s  foes,  these  are 
favourable  signs  which  indicate  recovery.  84-85 

Presence  of  indications  of  a  strong  mind,  and  devotion  to  the 
physician  and  Brahmans,  are  signs  of  recovery,  if  the  disease  itself  be 
curable  and  if  the  patient  be  not  penetrated  by  despair.  86 

The  result  of  recovery  is  (return  of)  strength,  life,  and  great 
happiness.  A  person  of  auspicious  indications,  derives,  through  cure, 
many  other  desirable  acquisitions  (such  as  penances,  religious  merit, 
and  emancipation).  87 


‘Siddhartha’  is  unidentifiable. 

‘Hansa’  is  applied  to  ducks  and  geese  and  swans.  The  latter  are  sometimes  called 
‘JRaja-hansa.’ 

‘Qatapatra’  is  applied  to  various  birds.  Literally,  it  means  a  bird  of  a  hundred  plumes. 
It  means  also  a  lotus  in  consequence  of  its  possessing  a  hundred  petals. 

In  the  first  line  of  75  occurs  ‘dwija.’  Literally,  it  implies  anything  which  grows  twice  ; 
hence,  it  applies  equally  to  the  teeth,  hair,  nails.  Some  of  the  translators  take  it  for  ivory, 
which  is  an.  auspicious  article.  In  the  same  line  occurs  ‘mangsasya’,  meaning  meat.  In  some 
editions,  occurs  ‘Priyangunam’,  meaning  Aglaia  Roxburgkiana.  It  is  difficult  to  settle  which 
5s  the  correct  reading.  In  the  second  line  of  75  occurs  ‘Rochiska’,  meaning,  as  I  suppose, 
any  brilliant  substance,  Some  texts  have  ‘ruchaka’  which  some  Bengali  translators  render 
"salt  of  a  particular  variety.’  Even  if  ‘ruchaka  be  the  correct  reading,  it  can  hardly  mean 
a  particular  kind  of  salt.  It  should  be  remembered  that  only  auspicious  things  are  mentioned 
here.  The  oldest  grandmother  has  never  heard  of  salt  being  regarded  as  an  auspicious 
article. 

‘RochonSL’  is  often  used  for  ‘Gorochana’  or  the  yellow  pigment  of  the  cow.  It  is  a  sacred 
thing,  used  in  many  religious  rites.  Whether,  however,  it  is  the  dried  bile  of  the  cow,  or 
something  obtained  from  its  head,  is  not  precisely  known. 

‘Bheri’  is  a  drum  or  kettle-drum. 

‘Mridanga’  is  also  a  drum  or  kettle-drum,  the  cylinder  being  made  of  earth  or  clay  instead 
of  wood.  ‘Mridanga’  is  compounded  of  ‘Mrit’,  earth  or  clay,  and  ‘anga,  body  or  limb.  Its 
sound  is  deep  and  grave,  and  it  forms  an  accompaniment  of  religious  songs  and  higher  music. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


927 


( Here  occur  two  verses  containing  a  summary .) 

In  this  Lesson  called  ‘Gomayachurniya’  have  been  set  forth 
the  signs  of  death  and  recovery,  in  connection  with  messengers, 
dreams,  the  patient  himself,  calamitous  occurrences,  treatment  and 
success.*  87 

Thus  has  been  expounded  the  entire  subject  agreeably  to  truth. 
The  physician  possessed  of  wisdom  should  always  study  these  (signs 
which  have  been  laid  down  above).  By  so  doing,  he  will  achieve 
success  and  eternal  fame,  and  wealth.f  88 

Thus  ends  Lesson  twelfth,  called  ‘Gomayachurniya,’  in  the  Divi¬ 
sion  called  Indriya,  of  Agnivega’s  treatise  as  revised  by  Charaka. 

The  Division  called  Indriya  finis. 


‘Punyaha’  is,  literally,  a  sacred  day.  •PunyahaQavda’,  literally,  implies  sounds  of  rejoic¬ 
ings  such  as  are  heard  on  sacred  days.  Sometimes  a  number  of  Brahmans  utter  the  word 
repeatedly  in  chorus  (Punyaha — Punyaha — &c.)-  That  is  also  known  as  ‘Punyaha-Qavda.’ 
In  Bengal  and  Behar  where  the  permanent  land  settlement  of  Lord  Cornwallis  prevails,  a 
certain  day,  in  the  year,  is  fixed  for  commencing  the  collection  of  rents  from  the  tenants. 
That  day  is  called  ‘Punyaha.’ 

‘Sukho  vayuh  pradakshinah’  means  delicious  breezes  blowing  from  the  south.  In  India, 
in  most  parts,  the  south  wind,  blowing  as  it  does  from  the  sea,  is  really  enjoyable. — T. 

*  Both  kinds  of  signs,  viz.,  those  indicating  death,  and  those  indicating  recovery,  have 
been  expounded.  So  far  as  they  are  connected  with  messengers,  dreams,  patients,  and 
calamitous  occurrences  which  the  physician  may  ohserve  while  on  his  way  to  the  patient’s 
house  or  in  the  house  itself  of  the  patient,  &c.,  no  explanation  is  needed.  As  regards  ‘yukti- 
vyapaijrayam’  death-signs,  they  are  explained_in  verse  5  of  this  Lesson.  Then,  ‘yukti-vyapa- 
grayam’  recovery  signs  are  referred  to  in  verses  79—80.  The'same  verses  also  illustrate 
‘siddhivyapagrayam’  recovery  signs.  ‘Siddhi-vyapagrayam’  death-signs  are  referred  to  in 
verse  6.  By  ‘yukti’  is  implied  the  administration  of  proper  medicaments,  or  their  non-admi¬ 
nistration  through  inability  to  ahtain  the  articles  needed,  &c. — T. 

f  ‘Siddhakarma  (Sans.)  siddhim  labhate*  is  a  pleonastic  form  which  cannot  be  rendered 
into  English  without  incurring  ridicule.  Literally-  rendered,  it  comes  to  this  :  ‘Becoming 
successful  in  treatment,  he  will  earn  success.’ — T. 


NIDANA  STHANAM. 


LESSON  I. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  ‘Nidana’  of  Fever. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.*  i 

Verily,  (it  should  be  stated)  in  this  connection  that  the  words 
‘Hetu,’  ‘Nimitta,’  ‘Ayatana,’  ‘Kartri,’  ‘Karana,’  ‘Pratyaya,’  ‘Samutthana.’ 
and  ‘Nidana,  are  expressive  of  the  same  meaning.j- 

Nidana’  is  of  three  kinds,  viz.,  union  with  such  objects  of  the 
senses  as  are'not  assimilable,  faults  of  judgment,  and  the  developments 
in  course  of  time,  of  evil  acts  (done  in  this  life  or  previous  ones)4 

From  these  arise  three  kinds  of  diseases,  viz.,  those  relating  to 
Agni  (heat),  those  relating  to  moon,  and  those  relating  to  the  wind. 


*  The  meaning  of  the  word  ‘Nidana’  will  appear  clearly  from  what  is  said  in  this- 
Lesson— T. 

+  Although  the  eight  words  given  here  are  declared  to  be  of  the  same  meaning,  yet 
there  are  differences  between  their  senses,  or  at  least  in  their  use.  Thus  ‘Hetu’  is  generally 
limited  to  the  circumstances  that  precede.  Of  course,  mere  priority  does  not  constitute  ‘Hetu.’ 
There  must  be  an  aptitude  in  those  circumstances  to  produce  the  change  of  condition  called 
disease. 

‘Nimitta’  implies  such  omens  of  a  calamitous  nature  as  are  succeeded  by  disease. 

‘Ayatana’  is  confined  to  the  seat  of  the  disease. 

‘Kartri’  indicates  those  active  agents  which  bring  about  the  effect  or  disease. 

‘Karana’  is  cause'as  usually  understood. 

‘Hetu’,  ‘Kartri’,  ‘and  Karana’  are  regarded  as  identical. 

‘Pratyaya’  implies  accidents  that  come  upon  a  person,  like  suffixes  upon  roots,  and  cause 
the  change  of  condition  called  disease. 

‘Samutthana’  is  something  which  gives  rise  to  something  else.  It  is  ‘hetu’  or  ‘kartri’,  or 
‘karana’  viewed  in  a  particular  light. 

‘Nidana  is  generally  taken  to  be  of  much  wider  signification.  It  includes  ‘purvarupa’ 
(symptoms  of  incubation),  ‘rupa’  or  ‘linga’  (actual  symptoms  of  the  disease),  ‘upajaya’ 
(certainty  derived  from  experimental  prognosis),  and  ‘samprapti’  (ascertainment  of  the  strength 
or  otherwise  of  the  disease). 

The  word  ‘nidana’  is  explained  as  ‘something  by  which  disease  is  ascertained  correctly.’ 

All  these  terms  will  be  explained  fully  in  course  of  this  and  the  following  Lessons. 

$  The  three  general  causes  of  disease,  viz.,  ‘asatmasamyoga’,  ‘prajnaparardha’,  and 
‘parinama’  have  been  fully  explained  in  the  previous  divisions  of  the  work. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


929 


There  are  two  other  kinds  of  diseases,  viz.,  those  arising  from  the 
attribute  of  ‘Rajas’,  and  those  from  the  attribute  of  ‘Tamas.’*  2 

In  this  connection  it  should  be  stated  that  the  words  ‘Vyadhi’, 
‘amaya’,  ‘gada’,  ‘atanka’,  ‘yakshman’,  ‘jwara’,  ‘vikara’,  and  ‘roga’,  are  of 
the  same  import.f 

The  ascertainment  of  disease  is  to  be  had  from  ‘Nidana’,  ‘Purva- 
>rupa’,  ‘Linga’,  ‘Upacaya’,  and  ‘Samprapti.’ 

Amongst  these,  ‘Nidana’  (Hetu)  is  the  cause,  as  said  at  the  outset. 

‘Purvarupa’  implies  those  indications  which  manifest  themselves 
before  the  appearance  of  the  disease.  (These  are  the  symptoms  of 
the  period  of  incubation). 

By  ‘Linga’  is  meant  those  symptoms  which  manifest  themselves 
on  the  appearance  of  the  disease. 

In  this  connection  it  should  be  stated  that  ‘Linga’,  ‘akriti’,  ‘lak- 
shana’,  ‘chihna’,  ‘samsthana’,  ‘vyanjana’,  and  ‘rupa’,  are  words  of  the 
same  import.j 

In  this  connection,  ‘upagaya’,  again,  is  the  prescribing,  followed 
by  happiness  (or  recovery)  as  the  result,  of  medicines,  diet,  and  prac- 


*  Physical  ailments,  as  regards  their  nature,  are  of  three  kinds,  viz. ,  ‘Agneya’,  ‘Saumya,’ 
and  ‘Vayavya’ ;  in  other  words,  these  relate  to  bile,  phlegm  and  wind. 

The  two  other  kinds  of  disease,  viz.,  Rajasa  and  Tamasa’,  are,  of  course,  mental. — T. 

t  The  etymology  of  these  words  is  certainly  instructive. 

‘Vyadhi’ comes  from  the  root ‘vyadh’,  to  beat  or  belabour.  'Disease,  owing  to  the  pain 
it  causes,  is  regarded  as  ‘beating’  or  ‘belabouring’  the  person  who  is  afflicted  by  it. 

‘Amaya’  is  from  ‘am’  which  means  pain. 

‘Gada’  is  from  ‘gad’,  meaning  inarticulate  sounds  Incapacity  to  speak  clearly  being  one 
of  the  symptoms  of  disease,  the  word  ‘Gada’  has  come  to  be  applied  to  it. 

‘Atanka’  comes  from  the  root  ‘tank’  meaning  distress  or  misery. 

‘Yakshman’  is  from  ‘yaksh’  meaning  to  worship.  Patients  become  generally  disposed  to 
worship  the  deities  or  honour  them  for  obtaining  relief  as  soon  as  possible. 

.  ‘Jwara’  is  from  ‘jwar’,  implying  heaviness  of  body. 

‘Vikara’  is  from  ‘vi’  and  ‘kri’,  meaning  the  reverse  of  what  is  normal. 

t  ‘Linga’  comes  from  the  root  ‘Ligi’  to  go.  Hence,  anything  by  which  one  can  go  to 
or  proceed  to  an  inference  is  called  ‘Linga.’  It  is  a  sign  or  symptom  by  which  disease  is  to 
be  inferred. 

‘Akriti’  is  literally,  appearance,  or  manifestation. 

‘Lakshana’  is  from  the  root  ‘laksha’  to  see  or  observe.  Hence,  that  by  which  anything 
else  is  seen  is  called  ‘Lakshana.’ 

‘Chihna’  is,  literally  ‘a  mark.’ 

‘Samsthana’  is  from  the  prefix  ‘sam’  and  the  root  ‘stha’  which  means  to  remain  or  stay  ; 
hence,  anything  that  remains  or  appears  on  the  patient  and  resides  in  him  as  long  as  the 

‘Vyanjana’  is  something  which  expresses  or  indicates. 

‘Rupa’  is  form, — T, 


930 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


tices,  that  are  contrary '"to  cause  and  disease,  or  contrary,  as  regards 
their  effects,  to  the  same.*  4 

*  Samprapti,  ‘  jati’,  and  1  agati’  of  disease,  are  words  of  the  same 
importf  5 

‘Samprapti’  is  distinguished  by  these  considerations,  viz.,  number 
(or  enumeration),  predominance,  kind  (or  order),  solution  of  doubt, 
strength](or  intensity),  and  Time.  6 

By  Number  or  (or  enumeration)  is  meant  such  as  these  :  Eight 
kinds  of  Fevers,  Five  kinds  of  tumours,  Seven  kinds  of  leprosy,  and 
so  on.  7 

Predominance,  again,  applies  to  faults,  and  consists  in  judging 
which  is  the  stronger  or  the  strongest. 


*  ‘Hetu’,  as  already  explained,  is  the  cause  of  disease. 

‘Upayoga’  is  administering  or  prescribing. 

‘Sukhanubandha’  is  ‘having  happiness  or  recovery  as  the  result.’  By  ‘heturvyadhi-vipa- 
ritanam’  are  implied  medicine,  diet,  and  practices  which  are  contrary  to  the  cause  or  causes 
of  the  disease  that  is  treated,  or  to  the  disease  itself  that  is  treated,  or  to  both  the  cause  or 
causes  and  the  disease. 

By  ‘Viparitarthakarinam’  are  implied  such  medicines,  diet,  and  practices  as  are,  without 
being  actually  contrary  to  cause  and  disease,  produce  effects  that  are  contrary  to  them, 
that  is,  lead  to  recovery  or  cure.  What  s  meant  by  ‘viparita’  (contrary)  and  ‘viparita.rthaka.ri’ 
(productive  of  contrary  effects  without  being  actually  contrary),  will  be  clearly  understood 
from  the  examples  adduced  by  the  Commentators. 

Among  medicines  contrary  to  the  cause  is  dry  ginger,  which  has  heating  virtues,  pres¬ 
cribed  in  fevers  brought  about  or  characterised  by  cold  and  phlegm.  Rice  mixed  with  soup 
of  meat  is  food  that  is  contrary  to  fevers  brought  about  by  toil  or  exhaustion  and  vitiated 
wind.  Among  practices  contrary  to  cause  is  night-keeping  in  vitiated  phlegm  brought  about 
by  sleep  at  daytime. 

Of  medicines  contrary  to  disease  is  Stephania  hernandifolia  (Patha  or  Aknadi),  which  has 
constipating  virtues,  in  diarrhoea;  Of  food  contrary  to  disease  is  Vicia  lens  (Masura)  in 
diarrhoea.  Of  practices  contrary  to  disease  is  strainiug  in  looseness  of  bowels. 

Of  medicines  which,  without  being  contrary  to  the  disease,  produce  effects  that  are  contrary,' 
are  the  fruits  of  Randia  dumetorum  in  nausea  and  vomiting.  The  fact  is,  these  fruits  have 
emetic  properties.  If  administered  in  little  doses,  they  check  nausea  and  vomiting.  Hence, 
without  being  contrary  to  the  disease,  they  produce  contrary  effects,  that  is,  lead  to  recovery 
or  cure.  Of  medicines  which  without  being  contrary  to  cause  produce  contrary  effects,  is  a 
warm  plaster  engendering  bile,  applied  in  cases  of  gangrenous  sores  brought  about  by  vitiat  ed 
bile.  Of  food  which,  without  being  contrary  to  disease,  produces  contrary  effects  is  milk  in 
diarrhoea.  Milk  is  calculated  to  increase  diarrhoea,  but  administered  in  regulated  measure  to 
patients  suffering  from  diarrhoea  of  certain  kinds,  it  does  great  good  and  cures  the  disease. 

The  object  of  ‘upacaya’  is  the  ascertainment  of  disease,  with  a  view  to  its  cure,  by  experi¬ 
mental  prescriptions  in  respect  of  drugs  and  diet  and  practices.  It  is  one  of  the  five  methods 
of  diagnosis  or  ascertainment  of  disease,  and  should  not  be  mistaken  for  treatment. — T. 

+  •Jati’  is  otherwise  called  ‘janma’  or  birth. 

‘Agati’  is  coming  in,  as  ‘gati’  means  ‘going  out,’ 

What  ‘samprapti’  means  is  explained  below.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


93* 


The  comparative  relates  to  two,  the  superlative  to  three.  8 

Kind  (or  Order)  is  as  follows  : — 

Diseases  are  of  two  kinds,  as  natural  and  accidental. 

They  are  of  three  kinds,  according  to  the  particular  fault  that 
has  been  excited  among  the  three  that  exist  (viz.,  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm). 

They  are  of  four  kinds,  considering  curability,  incurability,  mild¬ 
ness,  and  violence.  9 

Solution  of  doubt  (Vikalpa),  in  this  connection,  means  the  ascer¬ 
tainment  of  the  measure  in  which  the  faults,  existing  in  a  state  of 
union,  have  been  excited. 

The  distinctions  of  Strength  and  Time  (in  respect  of  disease)  are 
dependant  on  the  season  (in  which  the  disease  has  happened),  day, 
night,  the  hours  of  eating,  &c.  to 

Hence  the  physician,  with  unafflicted  mind  and  intelligence,  should 
duly  examine  diseases  by  the  considerations  of  Cause  and  the  rest. 

The  topics  in  brief  have  thus  been  referred  to  of  the  Division 
called  Nidana. 

We  shall  expound  them  again  in  detail  agreeably  to  truth.*  n 

Here  we  shall  at  first  expound  the  eight  initial  diseases  which  are 
born  of  cupidity  and  malice  and  wrath,  agreeably  to  the  order  of  the 
considerations  having  Nidana  for  their  first. 

Some  aphorisms  in  brief,  relating  to  treatment,  are  all  that  will  be 
set  forth  here.j-  12 

In  the  Division  called  Chikitsa,  which  will  come  hereafter,  we 
shall  expound  the  subject  of  diseases  (and  their  treatment)  with  desir¬ 
able  details.  *3 

Among  diseases,  we  shall  here,  at  the  outset,  expound  Fever,  in 
consequence  of  fever  being  the  foremost  of  all  diseases.!  u 


*  “Consideration  of  Cause  and  the  rest”  imply  ‘Nidana”  ‘Purvarupa’,  ‘Linga’,  ‘Upajaya’, 
and  ‘Samprapti’,  as  explained  in  the  foregoing  aphorisms. — T. 

t  Some  texts  read  ‘Atidroha’  for  ‘Abhidroha.’  The  sense  is  the  same,  viz.,  malice  or 
enmity.  After  ‘Abhidroha’  some  texts  omit  ‘Kopa’,  meaning  wrath. — T. 

$  ‘Qarira’  is  body.  ‘Qaririn’  is  one  invested  with  body.  The  word  used  here  is  ‘Qaririnam’,  . 
meaning  ‘of  diseases.’  Among  diseases,  fever  is  regarded  as  the  foremost.  When  the  infant 
first  comes  out  of  the  uterus,  it  is  afflicted  with  fever.  Death,  tgain,  never  takes  place  without 
fever  having  manifested  itself.  In  all  diseases,  again,  to  which  man  is  subject,  fever  super¬ 
venes  and  even  predominates  ovei  the  other  maladies.  Fever  is  also  regarded'  as  extending 
over  the  entire  body.  '  It  affects  the  mind  as  well.  The  other  diseases  are  not  so.  They  are 
local.  Hence,  in  Hindu  medical  treatises,  fever  is  regarded  as  the  first  or  foremost  of 
diseases. — T. 

ii8 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


■932 

Now,  the  disease  called  Fever,  which  men  suffer,  arises  from  eight 
causes. 

They  are  these  : 

1.  Wind,  2.  bile,  3.  phlegm,  4,  wind  and  bile,  5.  bile  and  phlegm, 
6.  wind  and  phlegm,  7.  wind  and  bile  and  phlegm,  and  8.  Accidental 
causes  numbering  the  eighth.  15 

We  shall  now  explain  the  particular  ‘Nidana’,  ‘Purvarupa’,  ‘Linga’, 
*Upagaya\  and  ‘Samprapti’  of  Fever. 

These  are  as  follows  : 

From  excessive  indulgence  in  things  which  are  dry,  light  and  cold, 
-emetics,  purgatives,  dry  enemeta,  errhines,  physical  exercises,  sup¬ 
pression  of  the  urgings  of  stools  and  urine,  and  fasts,  acts  that  lead  to 
violent  shocks,  sexual  congress,  anxiety,  grief,  operations  that  lead  to 
loss  of  blood,  night-keeping,  and  disposing  the  body  in  uneven  atti¬ 
tudes,  the  wind  becomes  excited.*  16-17 

When  it  becomes  excited,  it  enters  the  ‘amagaya,  (or  that  part  of 
the  stomach  where  food  and  drink  enter  in  the  first  instance). 

There  it  becomes  mingled  with  the  heat  (of  the  digestive  fire). 

Overtaking  in  that  state  the  food-juice  which  is  the  first  product 
(or  result)  of  food,  it  obstructs  those  ducts  which  bear  the  food-juice 
.and  the  sweat. 

It  then  affects  the  digestive  fire  and,  expelling  the  heat  from  the 
‘pakkagaya’  (or  that  part  of  the  stomach  where  digestion  takes  place), 
causes  it  to  spread  over  the  whole  body. 

It  is  then  that  Fever  is  generated. f  18 

These  are  the  symptoms  which  appear  of  Fever  (caused  by 
excited  wind). 

They  are,— 

Inequality  (or  irregularity)  in  respect  of  its  appearance  and 
disappearance 


*  ‘Abhighata’  means  shocks  or  wounds,  received  from  falls  or  other  causes.  The  Rishis 
knew  that  such  shocks  produce  fevers. 

‘Qonitabhisheka’  implies  operations  for  letting  out  blood.  Blood-letting,  therefore,  seems 
,to  be  an  ancient  practice. — T. 

f  ‘Aharaparinamadhatu.’  ‘Dhatus’  are  elements  or  ingredients  of  the  body,  which 
result  from  the  food  and  drink  one  takes.  These  ingredients  are  ‘Rasa’  or  food-juice,  blood, 
flesh,  &c.  ‘Parinama’  is  development  or  result.  The  first  thing  into  which  food  is  developed 
is  called  -Rasa’  or  food-juice.  The  heat  of  the  skin,  in  fever,  is  nothing  else  than  the  heat  of 
the  ‘pakkagaya’  expelled  by  the  wind  from  its  place  and  forced  to  spread  over  the  entire 
body. — T. 

t  ‘Arambha’  is  the  commencement  or  appearance,  and  ‘visarga’  is  end  or  disappearance. 
In  fevers  caused  by  excited  wind,  the  duration  of  intermissions  is  very  irregular.  Sometimes 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


933 


Inequality  of  the  heat  of  the  body  ;* 

Absence  of  steadiness  of  intensity,  or  the  reverse  ;f 
The  time  of  exacerbation,  or  of  intensity,  of  fevers,  caused  by  wind 
is  after  digestion,  or  at  the  close  of  the  day,  or  at  the  close  of 
the  night,  or  at  the  close  of  summer.! 

The  nails,  the  eyes,  the  face,  the  urine,  the  stools,  and  the  skin, 
manifest  a  marked  roughness:  and  redness  of  hue. 

The  whole  body,  besides,  shows  an  exceedingly  cracked  appear¬ 
ance. 

Many  kinds,  of  stationary  and  moving  pains  also  are  experienced 
in  several  parts  of  the  body  ;  these  are  as  follows  : 

A  sensation  of  stupour  (or  stupefaction)  of  the  feet  ;§ 

A-  sensation  of  the  calves  being  strongly  tied  round  with  cords  ;1T 
A  sensation  of  the  knees,  indeed,  of  all  the  joints,  being  dislocated  ; 
A  langour  or  excessive  weakness  of  the  thighs  ;  || 

In  the  waist,  the  sides,  the  back,  the  shoulder-joints,  the  arms, 
the  shoulders,  and  the  chest,  sensations  of  breaking,  aching, 
pounding,  crushing,  cracking,  pressing,  and  striking,  respectively  ;!£ 


the  exacerbation  occurs  in  the  morning,  sometimes  in  the  evening.  Similarly,  the  fever 
disappears  at  irregular  hours. 

*  Inequality  of  heat  is  a  characteristic  of  this  fever.  Certain  parts  of  the  body  are  hotter 
than  others. 

t  The  intensity  also  of  the  fever  is  unsteady.  At  one  time,  it  is  intense  ;  at  another  time* 
it  is  not  so,  all  the  symptoms  of  violence  at  once  abating. — T. 

t  ‘Jarana’  is  digestion.  Many  editions  omit  ‘niqante’,  meaning  'at  the  close  of  the  night/ 
Gangadhara  has  it  and  explains  that  the  last  hours  of  the  night,  or,  rather,  the  first  hours  of 
the  day,  taking  the  night  to  end  at  12  p.  M.,  are  favourable  to  the  excitement  of  the  wind. 

‘Gharmante’,  literally,  is  'at  the  end  of  the  season  of  sweat.’  This  is  taken  as  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  season  of  rains. — T. 

§  ‘Suptata’  is  literally,  sleepiness  j  hence,  a  sensation  of  stupour  or  stupefaction,  or  partial" 
paralysis.-— T. 

||  ‘Udveshtanam’  is  binding  with  cords  by  turning  these  round  and  round.  Gangadhara 
takes  it  as  meaning  'striking  with  a  club  or  heavy  stick.’  This  can  hardly  be  the  sense  of 
the  word.— T. 

IT  ‘Kevalanam’  means  here  ‘satnuhanam’,  i.  e.,  ‘of  all.’  It  qualifies  ‘sandhinam.’— T. 

£t  Seven  limbs  or  parts  of  the  body  are  mentioned,  and  seven  different  kinds  of  pain  are 
enumerated,  the  latter  corresponding  respectively  with  the  former.  Some  of  the  words 
expressive  of  pain  are  not  very  intelligible.  ‘Rugna’,  as  ordinarily  used,  is  a  general  term 
for  any  kind  of  pain.  Here,  it  probably  implies  aching  pain,  ‘Chatita’  is  explained  by 
Gangadhara  as  signifying  the  peeling  off  of  small  portions  of  the  skin.  This  is  incorrect. 
The  sense  of  the  word  is  ‘cracking.’  ‘Avatunna’  is  a  doubtful  word.  Gangadhara  explains, 
it  as  implying  ‘binding  forcibly  with  a  rope.’  Probably,  judged  by  the  actual  sensation  fels 
by  a  patient,  the  word  implies  'striking.’ 


934 


CHA  RAKA -SAM HIT  A, 


Stoppage  of  the  functions  of  the  jaw-bones  ;* 

Sounds  within  the  ears  ;  Throbbing  of  the  temporal  bones  ;f 
An  astringent  taste  in  the  mouth,  or  tastelessness ; 

Dryness  of  mouth,  palate,  and  throat ; 

Thirst ; 

.  Heaviness  in  the  chest  (as  if  it  were  pressed  down  by  a  heavy 
weight)  ; 

Dry  vomiting ; 

Dry  cough  : 

Stoppage  of  sneezing  and  eructations  ; 

Inability  to  enjoy  or  discriminate  the  taste  of  any  food  ; 

Watery  secretions  from  the  mouth  ; 

Disgust  for  food  and  drink  ; 

Inability  to  digest ; 

Cheerlessness  (of  both  body  and  mind)  ; 

Constant  yawning ; 

Inability  to  keep  the  head  erect ; 

Tremours,  of  shivering ; 

Exhaustion  or  fatigue ; 

Delusions  : 

Delirious  exclamations  and  talk  ; 

Insomnia  or  sleeplessness ; 

Horripilation  ; 

Tenderness  of  the  teeth  which  generates  an  intolerance  of  acids  ; 

A  fondness  for  hot  things. 

The  incidents  mentioned  among  the  ‘Nidana’  (or  Causes)  of  the 
disease,  are  aggravating  circumstances,  while  those  of  an  opposite 
character  are  alleviating  (or  curing)  ones4 


It  should  be  remarked  that  ‘skandha’  means  the  shoulder-joints ;  while  ‘amga’  implies 
shoulders,  that  is,  the  portion  from  the  joints  to  the  base  of  the  neck. — T. 

*  The  word  ‘aprasiddhi’  is  a  technical  one.  What  is  meant  by  the  ‘aprasiddhi’  of  the  two 
‘hanus’  or  jaw-bones,  is,  perhaps,  lock-jaw. — T. 

t  ‘Nistoda’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  implying  the  sensation  of  being  pricked  with 
a  hundred  needles.  This  can  scarcely  be  the  meaning  of  the  word.  It  implies  pain.  I  take 
it  as  indicating  a  throbbing  pain.— T. 

j  ‘Anupagaya’  implies  everything  that  aggravates  disease  ;  while  ‘upagaya’  implies  every¬ 
thing  that  diminishes  the  intensity  of  disease  or  cures  it.  These  meanings  arise  from  the 
definition  of  ‘upagaya’  as  given  in  aphorism  4  above  of  this  Lesson,  for  there  it  is  said  ‘upa- 
gaya’  is  ‘sukhanubandha’ :  hence,  its  reverse,  or  ‘anupacaya’,  must  be  ‘duhkhanubandha’. 
What  is  said  in  these  two  short  sentences,  therefore,  amounts  to  this  :  among  the  ‘nidana’ 
91  causes  of  this  particular  kind  of  fever,  occur  ‘ruksha’,  J^e,,  dryness,  &c.  Dryness  being 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


935 


Even  these  are  the  symptoms  of  Fever  caused  by  excited  wind.  19 

Through  excessive  indulgence  in  food  and  drink  that  are  hot, 
sour,  saline,  alkaline,  and  pungent,  and  eating  before  the  food  last 
taken  has  been  digested,  or  through  indulgence  in  things  that  are  of 
keen  potency,  or  exposure  to  excessive  heat  of  the  sun  or  fire,  or 
through  excessive  grief  or  toil,  or  wrath,  or  excessive  indulgence  in 
food  and  drink  consisting  of  inharmonious  ingredients, 

the  bile  becomes  excited. 

When  the  excited  bile,  entering  the  ‘amacaya’,  mingles  with  the 
digestive  fire,  and  possessing  the  ‘Rasa’  (or  juice)  into  which  the  food 
that  is  eaten  is  first  transmuted,  and  obstructing  the  ducts  which  bear 
the  juice  and  sweat,  weakens,  in  consequence  of  its  liquid  character, 
the  digestive  fire,  and  driving  out  the  heat  from  the  place  where 
digestion  goes  on,  spreads  itself  over  the  whole  body  and  afflicts  it 
greatly,  fever  sets  in.  2° 

The  symptoms  of  that  fever  are  these  : 

The  exacerbation  and  intensity  appear  simultaneously  in  every 
part  of  the  body.* 

The  time  of  its  appearance  is  when  digestion  goes  on  of  the  food 
taken,  or  midday,  or  midnight ;  or  the  season  of  autumn. 

These  symptoms  in  especial  show  themselves,  viz.,  bitter  taste  in 
the  mouth ; 

Cracks  and  sores  in  the  nose,  the  mouth,  the  throat,  the  lips,  and 
the  palate  ; 

Thirst  for  water  ; 

A  sort  of  inebriation  (like  to  what  results  from  taking  the  seeds 

of  Datura  fastuosd)  ;  f 

Delusions  ; 

Stupefaction  and  heedlessness  ; 

Swoons  and  fainting-fits ; 

Vomiting  of  bilious  matter  ; 

Diarrhoea  or  looseness  of  bowels  ; 

Disgust  for  food  ; 

Copious  perspiration  ; 

the  cause  of  this  kind  of  fever,  indulgence  in  dry  food  and  drink  aggravates  this  disease  ; 
that  is,  operates  as  ‘anupagaya’.  Similarly,  abstention  from  such  food  and  drink  or  indul¬ 
gence  in  food  and  drink  that  are  not  dry  but  oily,  leads  to  alleviation  or  cure. _ T. 

*  ‘Yugapat’  is  simultaneously  or  together.  The  exacerbation  and  intensity  of  this  kind 
of  fever  appear  together  or  simultaneously.  Then,  again,  these  manifest  themselves  over 
every  part  of  the  body,  unlike  what  is  seen  in  the  case  of  wind-born  fever.— T. 
t  ‘Mada’ does  not  occur  m  all  editions. — T. 


936 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA 


Langour  or  lassitude  of  the  whole  body  ; 

Delirium  ; 

The  appearance  of  large  round  red  spots  on  the  body  ; 

Excessive  greenness  or  yellowness  of  nails,  eyes,  face,  urine,  stools, 
and  skin  ; 

Violence  of  the  heat  of  the  body  ; 

Intense  burning  sensation  ;  and 

Fondness  for  everything  cold. 

The  incidents  mentioned  among  the  ‘Nidana’  (or  causes)  of  this 
disease,  are  aggravating  circumstances ;  while  those  of  an  opposite 
character,  are  alleviating  (or  curing)  ones.  * 

Even  these  are  the  symptoms  of  Fevers  caused  by  the  excited 
bile.  21 

Through  excessive  indulgence  in  food  that  is  oily,  or  sweet,  or 
heavy,  or  cool,  or  slimy,  or  sour,  or  saline,  or  in  sleep  at  day-time,  of 
in  practices  that  make  the  mind  cheerful,  or  from  complete  abstention 
from  physical  exercises  of  every  kind,  the  phlegm  becomes  excited.  . 

When  it  becomes  excited,  it  enters  the  ‘amagaya’  and  mingles 
with  the  digestive  fire,  and  possessing  the  ‘Rasa’  (juice)  into  which 
the  food  that  is  eaten  is  first  transmuted,  and  obstructing  the  ducts 
which  bear  the  juice  and  the  sweat,  weakens  the  digestive  fire,  and 
expelling  the  heat  from  the  place  where  digestion  goes  on,  spreads 
itself  over  the  whole  body  and  afflicts  it  greatly.  It  is  then  that  fever 
sets  in.  22 

The  symptoms  of  that  fever  are  these  : 

The  exacerbation  and  intensity  appear  simultaneously  in  every 
part  of  the  body. 

The  time  of  its  appearance  is  immediately  after  eating,  or  the 
forenoon,  or  the  first  part  of  the  night,  or  the  season  of  spring. 

These  symptoms  show  themselves  especially,  viz,, 

Heaviness  of  the  body  ; 

Disgust  or  disinclination  for  food  ; 

Secretion  of  mucous  matter  (from  the  throat,  the  nose,  &c.) ; 

A  sweet  taste  in  the  mouth  ; 

Urging  to  vomit ; 


*  Thus,  indulgence  in  food  that  is  hot  or  sour  or  saline,  &c.,  causes  bile-born  fevers.  When 
one  has  got  such  a  fever,  one  intensifies  it  by  taking  such  food  as  produces  the  disease.  Simi¬ 
larly,  abstention  from'  such  food,  or  indulgence  in  food  of  an  opposite  character,  operates  to 
bring  about  an  alleviation  or  cure  of  the  disease. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHIT A. 


93  ; 


A  sensation  of  the  chest  being  (internally)  covered  by  a  wet 
cloth ; 

A  sensation  of  the  whole  body  being  covered  with  a  wet  sheet  of 
cloth ; 

Vomiting ; 

Weakness  of  the  digestive  fire  ; 

Excessive  sleep  ; 

Stupefaction  of  the  body  (resembling  paralysis) ; 

Sleepiness ; 

Hard  and  heavy  breathing  as  in  asthma  ; 

Coughing ; 

Catarrhal  discharges  from  the  nose  ; 

Whiteness  (paleness)  of  nails,  eyes,  face,  urine,  stools,  and  skin  ; 

The  appearance  of  such  eruptions  on  the  body  as  have  cold  for 
their  cause  and  as  are  close  to  one  another ; 

Fondness  for  things  that  are  hot ; 

The  incidents  mentioned  among  the  ‘Nidana’  (or  causes)  of  this 
disease  are  aggravating  circumstances  ;  while  those  of  an  opposite 
character  are  alleviating  (or  curing)  ones. 

Even  these  are  the  symptoms  of  fevers  brought  about  by  the 
excitement  of  phlegm.  23 

Through  improper  eating,*  or  total  abstention  from  food,  or  inca¬ 
pacity  of  the  food  taken  to  be  transmuted  into  juice,  blood,  &c.,f  irre¬ 
gularities  of  season,J  or  smelling  such  odours  as  are  disagreeable, 
use  of  poisoned  water  or  of  poisons,  contiguity  to  hills  and  mount¬ 
ains, If  improper  administration  of  oils,  sweda  (vapours),  emetics,  pur¬ 
gatives,  dry  enemata,  oily  enemata,  and  cerebral  purgatives,  and,  as 


*  ‘Vishama’  eating,  which  I  have  rendered  as  ‘improper  eating’,  includes  eating  at  irre¬ 
gular  hours,  eating  more  or  less  than  what  leads  to  gratification,  and  eating  food  that  cons  ists 
of  inharmonious  ingredients. 

t  ‘Annasya  aparibarta’  means  the  inability  of  the  food  that  is  eaten  to  be  transmuted  into 
juice,  &c.  It  has  been  explained  that  the  food  we  eat  is  transmuted  into  juice,  blood,  flesh, 
adeps,  &c.,  under  particular  circumstances  ;  that  is,  during  the  period  of  incubation  of  certain 
diseases,  the  food  taken  is  not  so  transmuted.  It  remains  undigested  in  the  stomach  for  a 
long  period. — T. 

t  ‘Ritu-vyapatti’  means  irregularities  of  season,  as  cold  in  summer,  warmth  in  winter, 
the  absence  of  rain  during  the  rainy  season,  heavy  downpours  in  the  other  seasons.  These 
are  regarded  as  the  most  fruitful  causes  j>f  disease,—' T. 

IT  ‘UpaQlesha’  means  contiguity  or  nearness.  •  Here  it  implies  residence  or  habitation. 
Residence  on  mountain^breasts,  however  beneficial  to  people  accustomed  to  cold,  is  fraught 
with  risk  to  the  inhabitants  of  hot  countries.— T. 


938 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


regards  females,  .through  improper  delivery,  or,  through  injudicious 
food  and  drink  and’other  practices,  taken  or  indulged  in  after  delivery, 
as  also  through  a  conjunction  of  the  causes  set  forth  in  the  previous 
aphorisms  relating  to  each  of  the  separate  faults,  any  two  of  the 
faults,*  or  all  the  three,  according  as  the  case  may  be,  become 
excited.  24 

The  faults  becoming  excited,  and  acting  according  to  the  succes¬ 
sive  steps  already  laid  down,  bring  about  the  fevers  (of  which  we 
speak).f 

Observing  then  the  especial  kinds  of  conjunction  in  which  the 
symptoms  laid  down  above  present  themselves,  the  physician  should 
ascertain  whether  the  fever  is  due  to  the  excitement  of  any  particu¬ 
lar  pair  of  the  faults  or  to  the  excitement  of  all  the  three  faults.j  25 

Accidental  Fever,  with  pain  as  its  characteristic,  and  arising  from 
wounds,  companionship  of  passions  and  evil  spirits,  incantations,  and 
curses,  is  the  eighth  kind  of  Fever.1T  26 

Accidental  fever,  after  its  outbreak,  remains  as  such  for  sometime. 
It  is  then  followed  by  the  (excited)  faults. 

Accidental  fevers  born  of  wounds  are  followed  by  (excited)  wind 
having  vitiated  blood  for  its  seat. 

Those  born  of  the  companionship  of  passions  and  evil  spirits,  are 
followed  by  (excited)  wind  and  bile. 

Those  born  of  incantations,  as  also  those  born  of  curses,  are  fol¬ 
lowed  by  all  the  faults  (excited  simultaneously). 

Accidental  fevers  should  be  regarded  as  a  variety  distinguished 


*  ‘Dwandwanam  anyatama’  implies  any  one  of  the  couples  or  pairs,  such  as  wind  and 
bile,  wind  and  phlegm,  or  bile  and  phlegm. — T. 

t  ‘Anupurvya’  (instrumental),  implies  the  successive  steps  laid  down  by  which  the  faults, 
after  becoming  excited,  bring  about  the  fever.  It  has  been  explained  in  the  previous  aphor- 
sims  how  the  excited  fault  enters  the  -amagaya’,  mixes  itself  with  the  digestive  fire,  weakens 
it,  and  obstructs  the  ducts,  &c.,  before  producing  fever.— T. 

t  /.  whether  the  fever  is  due  to  the  excitement  of  wind  and  bile,  or  wind  and  phlegm, 
or  bile  and  phlegm,  or,  lastly,  to  the  excitement  of  all  the  three  faults. — T. 

IT  The  seven  other  kinds  have  been  already  'spoken  of.  They  are  wind-born,  bile-born, 
phlegm-born,  born  of  wind  and  bile,  born  of  wind  and  phlegm,  born  of  bile  and  phlegm,  and 

born  of  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm. 

‘Abhighata’  implies  wounds  caused  by  weapons  or.  clubs  or  brick-bats,  &c. 

‘Abhisanga’  has  reference  to-the  passions  of  lust,  wrath,  fear,  grief,  as  also  the  action  of 
evil  spirits  and  witches. 

‘Abhichara’  means  incantations  or  Atharvan  rites,  by  which  disease,  death,  and  other 
injuries  are  brought  about. 

‘Abhi5apa’  means  the  curses  denounced  by  BrShmans,  preceptors,  seniors,  and  others 


CHAR  AKA- SAM  HIT  A. 


939 


from  the  seven  other  varieties  of  fever,  in  consequence  of  their  symp¬ 
toms,  treatment,  and  growth  being  distinct  from  those  of  the  others.  2? 

Accidental  fevers  should  be  treated  according  to  both  ways  {viz., 
by  administration  of  drugs  as  also  by  having  recourse  to  rites  of 
propitiating  the  deities,  Sic.).* 

Thus  has  the  topic  been  explained  of  the  eight  varieties  of  the 
nature  of  Fever.  28 

Fever  is  of  one  kind,  judged  by  the  symptom  of  (bodily)  heat. 

Considered  from  a  particular  point  of  view,  it  is  of  two  kinds,  viz., 
Constitutional  and  Accidental. 

Constitutional  fevers,  again,  are  said  to  be  of  two,  of  three,  or  four, 
or  five,  or  seven  kinds,  agreeably  to  the  distinctions  of  wind  and 
the  rest.-j-  29 

These  are  the  premonitory  symptoms  of  fever  :  J 

Tastelessness  of  the  mouth  ; 

Heaviness  of  the  body  ; 

Disgust  (or  total  absence  of  desire)  for  food  ; 

Turbidness  of  the  eyes  ; 


*  Bodily  diseases  are  treated  with  medicines  founded  upon  reason  and  those  founded  upon 
acts  in  respect  of  the  deities.  ( Vide  .  Sutrasthana,  Lesson  I,  p.  6,  aphorism  57.)  What  is 
said  here  is  that  Accidental  fevers  should  be  treated  by  both  means.  Drugs  should  be  admi¬ 
nistered,  as  also  should  aid  be  taken  of  the  rites  of  propitiating  the  deities,  &c. — T, 

t  Fevers  may  be  of  two  kinds,  such  as  those  which  arise  from  mental  and- those  which 
arise  from  physical  causes  ;  or,  those  which  are  characterised  by  heat  (fire),  and  those  which 
are  characterised  by  cold  (the  moon)  ;  or  those  whose  intensity  is  external ;  and  those  whose 
intensity  is  not  so  ;  or,  those  which  are  curable  and.  those  which  are  not  so  ;  or,  those  which 
accord  with  the  season  and  those  which  do  not  accord  with  the  season.  ( Vide  Chikitsha- 
sthana,  Lesson  III.). 

Fevers  may  be  of  three  kinds,  such  as  those  born  of  the  -.excitement  of  one  fault,  those 
born  of  the  excitement  of  two  faults,  and  those  born  of  the  excitement  of  three  faults.  Or, 
they  may  be  of  the  nature  of  fire,  of  the  moon,  and  of  the  air. 

-  Fevers  may  be  classed  under  four  heads  thus  :  curable,  incurable,  violent,  'and  mild  ;  or 
as  easily  curable,  curable  with  difficulty,  incurabe  but  suppressible,  and  incurable  and,  there¬ 
fore,  not  to  be  taken  up  for  treatment. 

The  five  heads  under  which  fevers  may  be  classed  are  1.  continuous  or  remittent,  2.  hav¬ 
ing  exacerbations  once  or  twice  a  day,  3.  breaking  out  evey  other  day,  4.  breaking  out  every 
third  day,  and  5.  breaking  out  every  fourth  day. 

The  seven  heads  under  which  fevers  may  be  classed  have  already  been  explained.  Vide 
note  under  aphorism  26  of  this  Lesson,  ante. 

Another  way  of  classifying  them  under  seven  heads  is  1.  fevers  affecting  ‘Rasa’  or  food- 
juice,  2.  those  affecting  blood,  3.  those  affecting  the  flesh,  4.  those  affecting  the  adeps, 
5.  those  affecting  the  bones,  6.  those  affecting  the  marrow,  and  7,  those  affecting  the 
semen. — T, 

t  I.  e.  the  symptoms  that  manifest  themselves  during  the  period  of  incubalioii,— T, 


g4o 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SA  MHIT-A, 


Appearance  of  tears ; 

Excess  of  sleep  ; 

Aversion  to  every  kind  of  work  or  exertion  ; 

Yawning  at  frequent  intervals  ; 

Bending  down  of  the  head  ; 

Shivering ; 

A  sense  of  fatigue  without  having  undergone  any  labour  ; 

Delusions  and  errors  ; 

Delirium  and  incoherent  talk  ; 

Sleeplessness  or  Insomnia  ; 

Horripilation  ; 

Grinding  of  the  teeth  ; 

Ability  to  bear,  quickly  succeeded  by  inability  to  bear,  sounds, 
cold,  wind,  and  sunshine  ;* 

Inability  to  eat  notwithstanding  the  desire  to  do  so  ; 

Incapacity  to  digest  the  food  taken  ; 

Weakness  and  lassitude  of  the  whole  body  ; 

Loss  or  absence  of  all  energy  ; 

Decrease  of  strength  and  inability  for  continued  exertion  ; 
Procrastination  ; 

Inactivity  and  idleness  ; 

Abandonment  of  necessary  acts  ; 

Disposition  to  thwart  one’s  own  projects  and  plans  ; 

Condemning  the  counsels  of  seniors  and  others  entitled  to  rever¬ 
ence  and  respect ; 

Aversion  to  and  hatred  of  children  ; 

Indifference  and  want  of  attention  to  one’s  duties  ; 

Pain  in  wearing  garlands,  using  unguents,  and  eating  ; 

Aversion  to  all  articles  of  food  that  are  sweet ;  and 
Liking  for  food  that  is  hot,  or  sour,  or  saline,  or  pungent. 

Even  these  are  the  symptoms  of  fever  that  manifest  themselves 
in  the  incubatory  stage.  3° 

These  individual  symptoms  of  fever  manifest  themselves  partly  or 
wholly,  either  before  the  appearance  of  bodily  heat  or  after  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  heat  in  the  patient.f  3* 


*  The  patient  sometimes  likes  sounds,  cold,  wind  and  sunshine,  and  sometimes  does  not 
like  them. — T. 

t  This  aphorism  is  differently  read  by  Gangadhara.  But  X  think  his  reading  is  not' 
correct.— T-, 


C'H A  RA  KA  -  SA  M HIT A . 


941 


Fever  has,  verily,  its  origin  in  the  wrath  of  Mahegwara„* * * § 

It  is  the  destroyer  of  the  lives  of  all  living  creatures.-^ 

It  is  the  torturer  of  the  body,  the  senses,  and  the  mind. 

It  is  the  weakener  of  intelligence,  strength,  complexion,  joy,  and 
energy. 

It  is  the  producer  of  fatigue,  langour,  heedlessness  (or  stupefac¬ 
tion),  and  impediments  to  eating.  32 

Fever  is  called  ‘Jwara’  because  it  pains  the  body.J 
Other  diseases  are  not  so  fierce,  so  characterised  by  supervening 
afflictions,  and  so  difficult  to  be  treated,  as  this  disease  {viz.,  fever).  33 
Fever  is  the  king  of  all  diseases. 

In  the  intermediate  order  of  being  it  is  known  by  various  other 
names.  § 

All  creatures  endued  with  life  take  birth,  with  fever  upon  them,, 
and  die  also  with  fever  upon  them.  34 
Fever  is  called  the  great  Stupefier. 

Afflicted  by  it,  embodied  creatures  fail  to  recollect  any  act  of  their 
former  lives.  IT 

It  is  fever,  again,  that  snatches  away  the  life-breaths  from  every 
creature.  35 


*  This  sentence,  which  explains  the  origin  of  fever  to  be  the  wrath  of  Mahegwara,  is- 
evidently  an  interpolation.  Neither  Agnivega,  nor  Charaka,  could  ascribe  fever  to  such  a 
fanciful  origin,  although  it  is  repeated  with  details  in  Chikitsasthana,  Lesson  III,  head.  Fever. 
The  Pauranik  account  is  that  Mahadeva  having  adopted  the  vow  of  abstention  from  wrath, 
the  Asuras  became  very  unruly  and  began  to  persecute  the  deities  and  Brahmanas.  The  gods 
then  induced  the  celestial  Rishi,  Daksha,  to  prepare  a  great  sacrifice  in  which  Mahadeva  was 
insulted  by  the  sacrificer  refusing  to  give  him  a  share  of  the  oblations.  Mahadeva  became 
angry.  From  the  eye  in  his  forehead  issued  a  fierce  being  who,  after  destroying  Daksha’s 
sacrifice,  chastised  the  Asuras  as  well-  It  was  this  being  who  then  took  the  name  and 
nature  of  Fever. — T. 

t  Whatever  the  disease,  there  must  be  fever  before  death  can  ensue.  Hence  fever  is 
regarded  as  the  destroyer  of  the  life  of  all  living  creatures. — T. 

t  ‘Jwara’  is  derived  from  the  root  ‘jwar’  which  means  ‘to  pain’  or  ‘to  afflict.’  It  is  called 
‘jwara’  because  it  pains  or  afflicts  all  the  limbs  of  the  body. — T. 

§  Thus  fever  in  elephants  is  called  ‘Palaka ;’  in  horses,  ‘Abhitapa ;’  in  cows,  ‘Iswara.’ 
In  sheep  and  goats,  it  is  called  .‘Rralapa  ;  in  camels,  ‘Alasa  ;’  in  buffaloes,  ‘Haridra  ;’  in  deer, 
‘Mriga  in  birds,  ‘Abhighata  ;’  in  fishes,  ‘Indramada  ;’  in  snakes,  ‘Akshika.’  The  earth 
jtself  may  get  fever.  It  is  called ‘ushara’ (unfertility).  Trees  may  have  fever.  It  is  called 
‘kotara.’  ‘Kotara’  means  holes  and  cavities.  The  commentators  quote  a  work  called 
‘Palakapyiya’  in  which  these  terms  occur. — T. 

IT  A  human  being,  immediately  after  birth,  becomes  afflicted  by  fever.  This  stupefies 
his  memory,  so  that  it  becomes  impossible  for  him  to  recollect  the  acts  of  his  past  life.  Hence 
fever  is  called  ‘Mahamoha’  or  the  Great  Stupefier.  ‘Moha’  may  also  mean  darkness.  Fever 
is  an  impenetrable  veil  of  darkness  which  shrouds  one’s  past  life  from  one’s  view. 


94* 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA . 


When  the  symptoms  of  the  incubatory  stage  are  seen,  or  at  the 
outset  of  the  disease,  light  and  beneficial  food  only  should  be  taken,, 
or  the  patient  should  fast  (i.  e.,  totally  abstain  from  food  of  every 
kind),  since  fever  arises  from  the  ‘amagaya.’ 

After  this,  the  drinking  of  astringent  decoctions,  rubbing  of  (medi¬ 
cated)  oils,  drinking  of  medicated:  oils  and  ghees,,  application  of 
vapours  and  heat  (in  the  various  ways  already  indicated),  application  of 
plasters,  bathing  the  body  or  sprinkling  hot  or  cold  water  over  it,  the 
use  of  unguents,  administration  of  emetics  or  of  purgatives,  the  use  of 
enemata  either  dry  or  oily,  the  use  of  alleviative  or  curative  medica¬ 
ments,  administration  of  errhines,  fumigation  (of  clothes  and  beds  and 
the  sick-room),  inhaling  the  smoke  of  medicaments,  the  use  of  colly- 
rium,  and  the  drinking  of  medicated  milk,  should  be  prescribed  with 
discretion  according  to  the  nature  of  the  fever,  the  temparament  of 
the  patient,  season  and  place.  3& 

In  all  mature  fevers,  the  drinking  is  regarded  as  highly  beneficial: 
of  ghees,  boiled  with  the  particular  medicines  that  are  suitable  to* 
them. 

Ghees,  in  consequence  of  their  oiliness,  alleviate  the  (excited) 
wind.  In  consequence  of  their  correction  (by  means  of  suitable  drugs), 
they  alleviate  the  (excited)  phlegm..  In  consequence,  again,  of  their 
cooling  properties  they  alleviate  the  (excited)  bile  and  heat. 

Hence,  in  all  mature  fevers,  ghees  are  beneficial,  even  as  water  te 
things  burning  in  a  conflagration.  37 

( Here  are  some  verses }. 

As  men,  desirous  of  extinguishing  the  flames,  pour  water  upon  a 
burning  house,  even  so  physicians  administer  ghee  in  mature  fevers.  38, 

In  consequence  of  its  oiliness  it  alleviates  the  (excited)  wind  ' 
of  its  cooling  properties,  it  checks  the  (excited)  bile  :  and  though 
its  quality  is  similar  to  that  of  phlegm,  yet,  in  consequence  of  its  cor¬ 
rection  by  particular  drugs,  it  overcomes  the  (excited)  phlegm  also.*  39 


*  The  quality  of  ghee  by  itself  is  similar  to  that  of  phlegm.  Hence,  if  ghee  be  adminis¬ 
tered  in  cases  of  excited  phlegm,  it  is  sure  to  excite  the  phlegm  still  further,  for  ‘of  all  things, 
at  all  times,  similarity  is  the  cause  of  increase.’  (  Vide  aphorism  43,  Lesson  I.,  Sutrasthana, 
ante.)  In  consequence,  however,  of  ghee being  boiled  with  particular  drugs  that  are  known 
to  be  alleviative  of  phlegm,  such  boiled  ghee  checks  excited  phlegm.  The  process  of  boiling 
ghee  with  particular  drugs  for  adding  some  new  properties  to  it  and  neutralising  properties- 
already  existing,  is  called  ‘samskara’  or  correction, — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


943 


No  other  oily  substance  admits  so  well  of  correction  as  gheer 
Hence,  ghee  is  regarded  as  the  foremost  of  all  oily  substances.*  4° 

The  repetition  in  verse  of  matter  which  has  been  already  explained 
in  prose,  should  not  be  taken  as  saying  the  same  thing  twice  over 
and,  therefore  censurable  ;  for  the  repetition  in  verse  is  made  simply 
to  help  the  physician  in  his  profession.!  41 

( Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary.) 

The  three  kinds  of  the  causes  of  disease,  together  with  the  various 
names  applied  to  cause,  the  five  classes  of  disease,  the  synonyms  of 
the  word  ‘gada’  or  disease,  as  also  of  the  word  ‘lakshmana’  or  symp¬ 
tom,  the  five  methods  by  which  disease  may  be  diagnosed,  the  eight 
kinds  of  fever,  the  remote  and  immediate  causes  of  fever,  and  the 
incubatory  indications,  in  brief,  of  fever, — all  these  have  been  ex¬ 
pounded,  in  brief,  at  the  outset  of  the  Division,  called  Nidana,  by  the 
holy  Punarvasu,  who  himself  transcended  fever  of  every  kind,  unto 
Agnive^a  with  head  bent  in  reverence.  *-3 

Thus  ends  Lesson  I,  called  ‘Jwara-nidana,’  in  the  Division  called 
‘Nidana,’  of  Agnivega’s  treatise  as  revised  by  Charaka, 


LESSON  II. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  causes  of  blood-bile! 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  1 

We  shall  first  explain  what  the  conditions  should  be  of  the  bile  iii 
order  that  it  might  acquire  the  appellation  of  “blood-bile.” 


*  For  the  meaning  of  the  word  ‘correction’,  vide  note  above,  It  is  a  technical  word  in 
Hindu  Medicine. — T. 

+  Verse  is  more  easily  remembered  than  prose.  Hence  the  repetition,  when  it  is  prompted 
by  the  desire  of  enabling  the  physician  (including  students)  to  remember  the  matter  easily, 
should  not  be  regarded  as  censurable.  The  last  half  of  the  second  line  is  read  in  some  texts 
as  ‘dwiruktam  tanna  garbate.’  The  other  reading  is  ‘dwiruktah  sa  na  grihyale.’ — T. 

+  ‘Rakta-plta’  is,  literally,  blood- bile.  The  bile,  under  certain  circumstances,  becoming 
excited,  vitiates  the  blood  and  causes  it  to  come  out  through  the  several  outlets  of  the  body. 
The  disease  called  ‘Rakta-pitta’  is  nothing  else  than  hoemorrhage,  which,  according  to  Hindu 
physicians,  is  brought  about  by  excited  bile. — T. 


944 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA 


When  a  person  takes  every  day  food  in  which  barley,  Kodda- 
laka  (a),  and  Koradushaka  (J>)  occur  largely  ;  or  other  kinds  of  food 
of  exceedingly  heating  and  keen  virtues,  and  mixed  with  the  soup  of 
Nishpava  (c),  of  Masha  (d),  of  Kulattha  (e),  as  also  with  any  alkaline 
substance  ;  or  food  mixed  with  curds,  inspissated  curds,  or  whey,  or 
with  any  thing  that  is  pungent  or  sour,  or  Kanji ;  or  flesh  of  the  boar, 
the  buffallo,  the  sheep,  fish,  and  the  cow,  mixed  with  sessame  reduced 
to  paste,  or  Pindalu(/),  or  dried  pot-herbs  ;  or  sauces  as  are  made  of 
radishes,  mustards,  garlics,  Karanja  (g),  Sigru  (h),  Madhu-Sigru  (z), 
Khara-yusha  (_/),  Bhustrina  (k),  Sumukha  (/),  Surasa  (m),  Kutheraka  (zz), 
Gandira  (o),  Kalamalaka  (/),  Parnasa  (q),  Kshavaka  (r),  and  Phanij- 
jhaka  ( s )  ;  or  such  food  and  drink  as  consist  of  Sura  (/),  Sauvi- 
raka  (zz),  T ushodaka  (v),  Maireya  (w),  Medaka  (x),  Madhulaka  (_y). 


а.  A  variety  of  paddy  that  grows  in  marshy  lands.  It  is  never  cultivated  but  grows 
of  itself. 

б.  Otherwise  called  Kodrava.  ‘Kodo  dhan’  in  Bengali.  Paspalum  serobiculalum,  Linn. 

c.  Otherwise  called  ‘Simbi-vija’  ;  i.  e.,  the  seeds  of  the  long,  flat  cods  commonly  called 
‘Simbi’  or  ‘Sim’  in  Bengal.  A  kind  of  flour  is  made  of  the  seeds. 

d.  Phascolus  radiatus,  Roxb. 

e.  Dolichos  unijlorus,  Lamk ;  syn.  Dolichos  bijlorus,  Roxb. 

f.  Dioscorea  globosa,  Roxb. 

g.  Pongamia  glabra ,  Vent ;  syn.  Galedupa  Indica,  Lamb.  (The  fruits  are  used). 

h.  Moringa  plerygosperma,  Gaertn ;  syn.  Hyperanthera  moringa,  Willd.  (The  fruits 

i.  A  variety  of  the  above,  characterised  by  sweetness  of  taste. 

j.  The  commentators  are  silent  as  to  what  is  meant  by  this  word.  One  of  the  Bengali 
translators  notes  that  ‘Khara-yusha’  means  a  particular  kind  of  cooked  food.  This  can  scarcely 
be  the  meaning.  ‘UpadanQa’,  implying  sauce,  is  connected  with  all  the  words  preceding  it. 
‘Upadanga’  of  ‘Kharayusha’  would  mean  nothing  if  ‘Khara-yusha’  were  a  kind  of  cooked 
food.— T. 

k.  Otherwise  called  Gandhatrina.  Andropogon  Schcenanthus ,  Linn. 

l.  A  variety  of  Ocimurn  sanctum,  Linn.  m.  A  variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum,  Linn, 

n.  A  variety  of  ditto.  o.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

p.  A  variety  of  ditto.  q.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

r.  A  variety  of  ditto.  s.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

t.  A  general  name  for  wines  or  alcoholic  drinks. 

u.  A  variety  of  wine. 

v.  A  variety  of  Kanji  or  fermented  rice-water. 

w.  A  variety  of  strong  wine. 

x.  A  variety  of  ditto. 

y.  The  commentators  are  silent  as  regards  the  meaning  of  this  word.  One  of  the  Bengali 
translators  takes  it  as  implying  a  variety  of  Madhuka  ( Bassia  latifolia)  growing  in  aquatic  or 
marshy  regions.  Another  translator  takes  it  as  implying  a  kind  of  wheat.  It  is  evident  that 
it  stands  here  for  some  kind  of  wine.  Whether,  however,  it  is  manufactured  from  a  variety 
of  Bassia  latifolia,  or  of  wheat,  is  not  certain. — T. 


CHARAKA -SAM HIT  A. 


945 


£ukta  ( a),  Kuvara  (b)t  Vadara  (c),  and  others  in  which  the  sour  taste 
predominates  ;  or  when  a  person  finishes  his  meals  by  taking  a  large 
quantity  of  cakes  of  different  kinds,  or  when  one,  at  a  time  when  one 
is  afflicted  by  heat,  takes,  in  a  large  measure,  at  irregular  intervals,  and 
with  milk,  the  articles  named  before  ;  or  when  one  takes  Rohinika  (d) 
or  the  flesh  of  Kanakapota  (e)  fried  or  boiled  in  mustard  oil  or  with 
any  alkaline  substance  ;  or  where  one,  at  a  time  when  one  is  afflicted 
by  heat,  takes  Kulattha  (/),  or  Pinyaka  (g),  or  Jamvava  (/«),  or 
Nikucha  (*),  in  a  state  of  ripeness,  or  (^auktika  (/.),  with  boiled  milk, 
in  a  large  measure ;  his  bile  becomes  excited  and  his  blood  also 
increases  beyond  its  normal  measure.  2 

The  blood  increasing  beyond  its  normal  measure,  the  excited  bile 
travels  over  the  entire  body.  When  the  bile,  in  this  condition,  reaches 
the  mouths,  widened  in  consequence  of  the  function  they  perform  of 
discharging  the  blood,  of  the  blood-bearing  ducts  originating  in  the 
spleen  and  the  liver,  it  then  vitiates  the  blood.  3 

In  consequence  of  its  contact  with  that  blood,  in  consequence  also 
of  its  vitiating  the  blood,  and  in  consequence,  again,  of  its  assuming 
the  smell  and  colour  of  the  blood,  the  bile  comes  to  be  called  blood- 
bile.  4 

These  are  its  incubatory  symptoms  : 

Unwillingness  to  take  (or  disgust  for)  food,  acidity  of  the  food 
that  is  taken,  eructations  having  the  acid  smell  of  pickles  and  with 
acid  exhalations,  constant  nausea,  foetid  smell  of  the  matter  vomited, 
hoarseness  of  voice,  stupour  of  limbs,  a  burning  sensation  of  the  skin, 
exhalation  of  vapour  from  the  mouth,  the  scent  of  blood  or  of  fish  in 
the  mouth,  redness  or  greenness,  or  yellowness  of  all  the -limbs  of  the 


a.  Some  texts  omit  this  word.  ‘Qmkta’  means  a  sour  preparation  known  as  ‘Achara.’ 
It  is  a  kind  of  sauce  that  is  manufactured  chiefly  from  the  raw  mango  and  ripe  tamarind 
fruits.— T. 

b.  ‘Kuvara’,  or,  as  some  texts  read,  ‘ICuvala’,  is  a  larger  variety  of  ‘Kola’  or  jujubes. 
One  of  the  Bengali  translators  wrongly  takes  it  as  another  form  of  the  word  ‘Tuvara’  mean¬ 
ing  an  astringent  substance.  (  Vide  ‘Amarakosha,  Colebrook’s,  pp.  35  and  401,  footnotes). — T. 

c.  Jujubes.  Zizyphus  jujuba,  Lamk. 

d.  A  kind  of  pot-herb. 

e.  A  species  of  pigeon. 

f.  Dolichos  bijlorus,  Roxb.  syn.  Dolichos  unijlorus,  Lamk. 

g.  Sesame  seeds  pounded  into  a  paste  with  water. 

h.  Eugenia  Jambolana,  Lamk. 

i.  A  variety  of  Artocarpus  Lakoocha,  Roxb.  called  also  ‘Lakucha.’ 

j.  A  variety  of  pickles. 


946 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


body,  stools,  urine,  perspiration,  saliva,  secretions  from  the  nose,  those 
from  the  mouth,  those  from  the  ears,  those  from  the  eyes,  as  also  of 
the  pimples  and  other  eruptions  on  the  body,  pains  in  every  part  of 
the  body,  and  repeated  dreams  of  frightful  forms  that  are  luminous, 
or  red,  or  blue,  or  yellow,  or  dark  in  colour. 

These  are  the  incubatory  symptoms  of  blood-bile.*  5 
The  following  supervening  symptoms  are  always  to  be  seen,  viz., 
weakness,  disgust  for  food,  indigestion,  difficulty  of  breathing  or 
asthma,  cough,  fever  with  diarrhoea,  consumption,  dropsical  swellings 
with  or  without  inflammation,  jaundice,  and  hoarseness  of  voice.  6 
The  blood-bile  has  two  courses  or  paths,  one  is  upwards ;  and 
the  other,  downwards. 

In  bodies  in  which  the  phlegm  predominates,  the  blood-bile,  in 
consequence  of  its  contact  with  the  phlegm,  moves  upwards,  and  finds 
egress  through  the  ears,  or  the  nose,  or  the  mouth. 

In  bodies  in  which  the  wind  predominates,  the  blood-bile,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  its  contact  with  the  wind,  moves  downwards,  and  finds 
egress  through  the  urinary  and  fecal  ducts. 

In  bodies  in  which  both  the  phlegm  and  the  wind  predominates, 
the  blood-bile,  in  consequence  of  its  contact  with  the  phlegm  and 
the  wind,  moves  along  both  the  paths.  Moving  along  those  paths, 
it  finds  egress  through  all  the  organs  or  outlets  of  the  body.j-  7 

Here  it  should  be  stated  that  that  blood-bile  which  escapes  through 
the  upper  outlets  of  the  body,  is  capable  of  cure,  in  consequence  of 
the  facility  of  treating  it  by  means  of  purgatives  as  also  for  the  many 
medicines  that  are  capable  of  administration.  8 

That  blood-bile  which  escapes  through  the  lower  outlets  of  the 
body,  is  capable  of  being  suppressed  (not  cured)  since  it  may  be 
treated  by  means  of  emetics  and  since  there  are  not  many  medicines 
that  are  prescribable  in  it.J  9 


*  The  whole  of  this  passage  is  vitiated  in  most  editions  by  many  incorrect  readings. 
Gangadhara,  I  think,  gives  it  correctly.  I  adopt  his  readings. — T. 

t  The  normal  course  of  the  phlegm  is  upward  ;  while  that  of  the  wind  is  downward. 
Hence,  when  the  blood-bile  comes  in  contact  with  the  phlegm,  it  escapes  through  the  outlets 
in  the  upper  part  of  the  body  ;  when  it  comes  in  contact  with  the  wind,  it  escapes  through  the 
outlets  in  the  lower  part  of  the  body.  When,  again,  it  comes  in  contact  with  both  the  phlegm 
and  the  wind,  it  escapes  through  the  organs  or  outlets  in  both  the  upper  and  the  lower  part 
of  the  body.— T. 

t  The  blood-bile  escapes  through  the  upper  outlets  of  the  body  or  the  lower  ones.  If  it 
escapes  through  the  upper  ones,  purgatives  are  to  be  administered,  as  these  may  change  its 
upward  into  a  downward  course.  There  are  sis  centuries  of  purgatives.  That  blood-bile 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


947 


That  blood-bile  which  escapes  through  both  the  upper  and  the 
lower  outlets  of  the  body  is  incurable,  since  neither  purgatives,  nor 
emetics,  can  be  administered,  and  there  being  no  medicines  that  are 
suitable.*  i° 

Verily,  the  provocation  of  blood-bile  came  into  existence,  after 
the  appearance  of  fever,  in  days  of  old,  on  the  occasion  of  the 
obstruction  of  Daksha’s  sacrifice,  for  assailing  living  creatures  whose 
bodies  and  life-breaths  had  already  been  pervaded  by  the  fire  born  of 
the  wrath  and  fury  of  Rudra.f  11 

Efforts  should  be  made  for  the  speedy  cure  of  this  grave  disease 
whose  progress  is  rapid  and  which  overtakes  a  person  with  the  fury 
of  a  forest-conflagration. 

The  physician  should,  with  concentrated  faculties,  treat  this  dis¬ 
ease,  carefully  observing  the  measure  (of  the  medicines  to  be  admi¬ 
nistered),  the  seat  of  the  ailment  as  also  the  habitat  of  the  patient, 
the  season  when  the  ailment  has  appeared,  as  also  the  age  of  the 
patient. 


which  escapes  through  the  lower  outlets  of  the  body  requires  to  be  treated  by  means  of 
emetics.  This  latter  may  alter  its  downward  course  into  an  upward  one  ;  emetics,  however, 
are  not  many.  Hence,  blood-bile  escaping  through  the  upper  outlets  is  curable,  while  that 
escaping  through  the  lower  ones  is  only  suppressible. — T. 

*  The  administration  of  purgatives,  while  checking  the  discharge  through  the  upper 
outlets,  would  enhance  the  discharge  through  the  lower  ones.  Similarly,  emetics,  while 
checking  the  discharge  through  the  lower  outlets,  would  enhance  the  discharge  through  the 
upper  ones.  Hence,  in  such  a  case,  that  is,  when  the  discharge  is  simultaneous  through  the 
upper  and  the  lower  outlets,  it  is  incapable  of  treatment  or  check.  There  is  no  medicine  that 
is  prescribable. — T. 

+  It  is  curious  to  see  how  such  crude  notions  were  imbibed  by  the  Rishis  about  the  origin 
of  this  disease.  Probably,  these  passages  are  interpolations  of  a  later  age.  The  story  of 
Daksha’s  sacrifice  is  this  :  Daksha  was  one  of  the  sons  of  Brahman,  the  Grand-sire,  created 
by  a  fiat  of  the  latter’s  will.  Daksha  was  one  of  the  ‘Prajapatis,’  or  lords,  or  progenitors,  of 
the  Creation.  He  had  eight  and  twenty  daughters.  Seven  and  twenty  of  these  he  married 
to  Chandramas  (the  deity  of  the  moon)  ;  and  the  remaining  one  to  Siva  or  Mahadeva.  The 
latter  is  supposed  to  reside  in  crematoria..  He  is  adorned  with  snakes  and  human  skulls  and 
bones  and  the.  ashes  of  funeral  pyres.  All  that  is  rejected  by  others  is  acceptable  to  Mahadeva. 
Disgusted  and  angry  with  Mahadeva,  Daksha  resolved  to  perform  a  grand  sacrifice  to  which 
everybody  would  be  invited  with  the  exception  of  Mahadeva.  No  portion  of  sacrificial  offer¬ 
ings  was  to  be  given  to  Mahadeva.  When  the  sacrifice  commenced,  Mahadeva’s  spouse,  who 
was  Daksha’s  daughter,  came  to  her  father’s  abode,  although  she  had  not  been  invited.' 
Seeing  her,  Daksha  became  angry  and  began  to  speak  ill  of  her  lord.  Unable  to  bear  her 
father’s  words,  she  cast  off  her  life-breaths  by  Yoga.  When  Mahadeva  heard  of  this,  he 
came  to  Daksha’s  sacrifice,  accompanied  by  a  large  army  of  spirits  and  ghostly  beings,  and 
destroyed  everything  in  wrath.  It  was  this  wrath  of  Mahadeva  which  gave  rise  to  Fever  and 
Blood-bile.— T. 


120 


943 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


He  should,  in  dealing  with  the  disease,  have  recourse  either  to 
those  methods  which  are  called  ‘Santarpana,’  or  those  named  ‘Apatar¬ 
pana  or  to  such  food  and  drink  as  are  mild,  sweet,  cooling,  bitter,  or 
•astringent ;  or  to  plasters  and  sprinkling  and  baths  and  unguents,  or 
to  emetics  and  drugs  of  similar  virtues.*  12 

( Here  occur  some  verses.) 

That  blood-bile  is  curable  which  escapes  through  the  upper  outlets 
-of  the  body.  This  is  so  because  of  the  adaptablity  of  purgatives  and 
the  existence  of  a  profusion  of  (suitable)  drugs.  I3 

Verily,  for  conquering  the  bile,  purgatives  are  the  best  remedy. 
They  are  not  even  a  bad  remedy  for  the  -phlegm  that  is  excited  with 
the  bile.  »4 

In  treating  blood-bile  that  escapes  through  the  upper  outlets  of 
the  body,  things  that  are  astringent,  or  bitter,  are  capable  of  being 
applied  in  diverse  ways.  Hence,  blood-bile  that  escapes  through  the 
upper  outlets  is  regarded  as  capable  of  easy  cure.  TS 

That  blood-bile  which  escapes  through  the  lower  outlets  is,  it  is 
certain,  only  suppressible.  This  is  so  because  of  the  little  adaptability 
of  emetics  to  this  disease  and  the  paucity  of  (suitable)  drugs.  16 

Emetics  are  not  regarded  as  the  best  of  remedies  for  conquering 
the  bile.  They  are  also  said  to  be  unfit  for  alleviating  the  wind  that, 
is  excited  with  the  bile.  l7 

In  the  treatment  of  this  disease,  things  that  are  sweet  are  capable 
of  being  applied  in  diverse  ways.  Hence,  blood-bile  that  escapes 
through  the  lower  outlets  is  said  to  be  only  suppressible.f  18 

That  blood-bile  which  escapes  through  both  the  upper  and  the 
lower  outlets  should  be  known  as  incurable  for  the  reasons  laid  down 
before.  J9 

There  is  no  counteracting  corrective  for  this  bile.  In  blood-bile, 


*  For  ‘Santarpana’  and  ‘Apatarpana’  vide  Lesson  XXI,  Sutrasthana,  ante.  Generally 
speakings  by  ‘Santarpana’  is  meant  the  administration  of  such  food  and  drink  as  lead  to  the 
nourishment  of  the  body.  By  ‘Apatarpana’  is  meant  the  reverse  of  this,  that  is,  fasts,  sparing 
diet,  &c.  ‘Pradeha  means  plasters,  ‘liarisheka’  implies  sprinkling  water  upon  the  patient’s 
body.  Shower-baths  are  included  in  the  word.  ‘Avagaha’  is  that  kind  of  bath  in  which  the 
whole  body  is  dipped  or  immersed. 

‘Samsparfana’  is,  literally,  contact ;  hence  the  contact  of  cool  unguents,  such  as  sandal- 
paste,  &c.,  or  medicated  oils  for  rubbing  the  body  with. 

‘Vamanadyaih,’  meaning  emetics  and  rest,  implies  the  administration  of  both  emetic 
purgatives. — T. 

t  ‘Anuloma’,  here,  is  used  in  the  sense 


of  downwards. — T. 


charaka-samhita. 


949 


Its  expulsion  In  a  counter  direction  is  laid  down  (as  the  proper  treat¬ 
ment).* * * §  20 

Thus  no  alleviative  exists  of  this,  capable  of  operating  in  all  direc¬ 
tions. 

When  the  (excited)  faults  exist  in  a  state  of  union,  that  alleviative 
is  approved  which  can  subdue  both  or  all  at  the  same  time.  21 

Thus,  agreeably  to  the  course  it  takes,  has  blood-bile  been  explain¬ 
ed,  having  three  eventualities.* 

Verily,  through  these  (that  is  the  following)  reasons,  blood-bile 
that  is  curable  becomes  incapable  of  cure  : 

Through  want  of  attendant  (or  nurse),  as  also  of  the  requisite 
means,  and  in  consequence  of  the  patient’s  perversity  (or  folly)  or  of 
the  fault  of  the  physician,  or  of  improper  treatment,  some  disease 
(that  is  really  curable)  transcends  the  bounds  of  curability .{  22_23  • 

In  this  connection  it  should  be  stated  that,  overstepping  as  it  does 
the  distinctions  of  curability  and  suppressibility,  incurability  is  (really) 
of  only  one  kind. 

Here  (that  is,  below)  are  laid  down  the  indications  of  the  incu¬ 
rability  of  blood-bile.  §  24 


*  By  ‘Samgodhana’  is  meant  a  corrective  medicine,  that  is,  an  emetio  or  a  purgative. 
‘Pratimargaga’  is  something  that  goes  in  an  opposite  or  contrary  way.  What  is  stated  here 
is  that  when  blood-bile  escapes  through  both  the  upper  and  the  lower  outlets,  no  corrective 
capable  of  checking  it  by  acting  in  a  contrary  way  is  to  be  found.  Emetics  would  increase 
the  upward  flow  ;  while  purgatives  would  increase  the  downward  flow.  The  treatment  laid 
down  for  blood-bile  is  its  ‘harana’  or  expulsion  in  a  contrary  or  counter  direction.  No  medi¬ 
cine,  therefore,  exists  which  can  operate  completely  against  this  kind  of  blood-bile,  for  that 
remedy  only  is  approved  which  simultaneously  checks  the  disease  in  all  directions. — T. 

+  The  three  eventualities,  as  explained  by  Gangadhara,  are,  curability,  suppressibility, 
and  incurability. — T. 

t  Some  Bengali  translators  take  ‘preshya’  to  imply  a  messenger,  that  is,  one  whom  the 
patient  or  his  friends  may  send  to  call  in  the  physician.  The  word,  however,  as  correctly 
explained  by  Gangadhara,  means  attendant  or  nurse.  In  ‘Sutrasthana’  (Lessons  IX  and  X) 
■it  has  been  laid  down  that  an  obedient  patient,  a  good  physician,  proper  medicines,  and  a 
skilful  attendant  or  nurse,  are  the  four  requisites  of  successful  treatment. 

‘Upakarana’  implies  all  kinds  of  means  necessay  to  effect  a  cure,  such  as  drugs,  a  well- 
lighted  and  well-ventilated  room  or  house  for  placing  the  patient  in,  good  beds  and  clothes, 
&C.,  vehicles  and  media  for  administering  medicines,  &c. 

By  ‘dauratmya’  is  meant  the  perversity  or  folly  of  the  patient,  leading  to  disobedience  of 
the  physician’s  behests,  the  use  of  forbidden  food  and  drink,  &c. 

‘Akarma’  is  improper  treatment. — T. 

§  The  result  of  treatment  is  of  three  kinds,  viz.,  i.  ‘sadhya’  or  curable,  2.  ‘yapya’ 
or  suppressible,  and  3.  ‘asadhya’  or  incurable.  In  verses  22  and  23,  the  Rishi  has  spoken  of 
“certain  causes  which  convert  a  ‘sadhya’  or  curable  disease  into  an  ‘asadhya’  or  incurable  one. 


950 


CHA  RA  K A  -  SA  M HIT  A . 


That  blood-bile  whose  colour  is  dark,  or  blue,  or  like  that  of  the 
rain-bow,  or  which  stains  a  cloth  so  deeply  as  to  be  ineradicable  after 
even  a  wash  in  water,  is  incurable.  25 

That  blood-bile  which  is  of  a  very  foetid  scent,  or  which  is  accom¬ 
panied  by  all  the  supervening  symptoms,  or  which  affeets  patient’s 
whole  strength  and  flesh  have  decreased.,  does  not  yield  to  treatment.26 

That  blood-bile  also  is,  without  doubt,  incurable,  afflicted  by  which 
a  man  beholds  all  visual  objects,' including  the  sky  also,  to  be  red  or 
of  the  colour  of  blood.  27 

Here  it  should  be  said  that  that  variety  of  the  disease  which  is  in¬ 
curable  should  not  be  taken  up  (by  the  physician  for  treatment)  ;  that 
which  is  suppressible  should  with  care  be  suppressed  ;  that  which  is 
curable  should  be  cured  by  the  physician,  with  concentrated  attention, 
by  means  of  such  medicines  whose  effects  have  been  tested.  2S 
( Here  are  two  verses  containing  a  summary .) 

In  this  Lesson  on  the  ‘Nidana’  (or  causes)  of  blood-bile,  Punarvasu, 
who  was  freed  from  heedlessness,  the  faults  of  passion,  cupidity,  pride, 
and  the  inebriety  of  arrogance,  and  who  was  emancipated  from  desire, 
has  expounded  the  causes,  the  origin  of  the  designation,  the  incuba¬ 
tory.  symptoms,  the  supervening  ones,  the  two  courses  or  paths,  the; 
characteristics  when  united  with  particular  faults  {viz.,  wind,  &c.),  and, 
lastly,  curability  and  the  reverse,  with  the  reasons  thereof.*  12 

Thus  ends  the  second  Lesson,  called  ‘Raktapitta-nidana,’  in  the 
Division  called  Nidana,  of  the  treatise  of  Agnivega,  as  revised  by 
Charaka. 


LESSON  III. 

We  shall,  after  this,  explain  the  causes  of  ‘Gulina1  or  abdominal 
tumours. 


In  verse  24  what  he  means  to  lay  down  Is  this  :  although  several  causes  have  been  laid 
down  which  make  a  curable  disease  incurable,  yet  incurability  is  only  of  one  kind,  the  two 
other  distinctions,  as  regards  the  result  of  treatment,  being  curable  and  suppressible.  Having 
said  this  in  the  first  line  of  24,  in  the  second  line  he  proceeds  to  say  that  he  will  (in  the 
verses  that  follow)  lay  down  the  indications  presaging  the  incurability  of  blood-bile. — T. 

*  In  aphorism  2  have  been  set  forth  the  causes  of  blood-bile  ;  in  3  and  4  the  origin  and 
reasons  of  its  designation  ;  in  5  its  incubatory  symptoms  ;  in  6  its  supervening  symptoms  j 
in  7  the  two  paths  or  the  outlets  through  which  it  escapes  ;  in  &  its-  curability  ;  in  9  its  sup- 
pressibility  ;  and  in  10  its  incurability.  In  1 1  (which  is  evidently  an  interpolation)  has  been 


CHAR  A  K A-S AM  HIT  A. 


95* 


Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  1 
There  are  verily  five  kinds  of  ‘Gulina’ 

They  are  i.  wind-born,  2.  bile-born,  3.  phlegm-born,  4.  that  which 
is  bom  of  all  the  faults  in  a  combined  state,  and  5.  that  which  is  born 
of  blood.  2 

Unto  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  who  said  so,  Agniveca  said, — 
O  holy  one,  we  wish  to  know  what  the  differentiating  characteristics 
are  of  these  five  varieties  of  ‘Gulma.’  Even  a  physician  that  is  endued 
with  a  knowledge  of  medicines  is  unable  to  alleviate  diseases  if  he 
has  no  knowledge  of  their  characteristics.  3 

Unto  him  answered  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri, — O  Agnivega,  the 
especial  knowledge  of  the  different  varieties  of  ‘Gulma’,  as,  indeed, 
of  other  diseases,  arises  from  (a  knowledge  of)  causes,  incubatory  indi¬ 
cations,  developed  symptoms,  diagnosis,  and  treatment.  Listen  now 
to  the  causes,  and  the  rest  of  the  different  varieties  of  ‘Gulma*  as  I 
expound  them  for  you. 

When  a  person  in  whose  constitution  the  wind  predominates, 
takes  such  food  as  is  cold  or  as  excites  the  wind,  at  a  time  when 
he  is  afflicted  by  one  or  other  of  these  wasting  diseases  and 
causes,  viz.,  fever,  emetics,  purgatives,  and  diarrhoea,  or 
•  drinks  emetics  and  purgatives  both  of  which  abound  with  oily 
matter,  or 

throws  out  the  contents  of  the  stomach  without  feeling  a  pro¬ 
nounced  urging  for  it,  or 

suppresses  the  urgings  that  are  pronounced  of  the  downward  wind 
and  stools  and  urine,  or 
takes  food  in  excess,  or 
drinks  to  excess  new  water,*  or 

travels  in  a  vehicle  that  moves  the  bodily  organs  and  limbs  with 
great  violence,  or 

indulges  to  excess  in  sexual  congress,  physical  exercises,  wines 
and  alcoholic  drinks,  and  grief,  or 
sustains  wounds,  or 

indulges  in  food  of  inharmonious  ingredients,  or 
uses  uneven  beds  and  seats,  or  frequently 

laid  down  the  circumstances  under  which  the  disease  first  arose  ;  in  12  has  been  laid  down 
the  course  of  treatment.  From  13  downwards  the  same  things  are  repeated  in  verse,  includ¬ 
ing  the  characteristics  of  the  disease  when  it  is  united  with  excited  wind  and  phlegm,  and 
certain  observations  on  curability  and  incurability,  &c. — T. 

*  That  is,  water  discharged  from  the  clouds  in  the  beginning  of  the  rainy  season. — T. 


952 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA 


takes  long  walks,  or 

goes  through  other  exercises  of  the  kind,  his  wind  becomes  excit¬ 
ed  in  consequence  of  such  baneful  practices.  5 

The  wind,  thus  excited,  enters  the  principal  ducts.*  In  conse¬ 
quence  of  its  dryness,  it  becomes  hard  ;  and  having  stopped  up  the 
great  Mucts,  it  remains  in  a  globular  and  condensed  form.  It  then 
generates  ‘gula’  or  pain  in  the  thorax,  the  rectum,  the  sides,  and  the 
navel,  and  causes  diverse  other  kinds  of  particular  pains  all  of  which 
are  regarded  as  wind-born.  Having  assumed  a  globular  and  con¬ 
densed  form,  the  excited  wind  causes  also  diverse  kinds  of  knots  in 
in  the  system.  Owing  to  its  assuming  a  globular  and  condensed  form, 
it  comes  to  be  called  by  the  name  of  ‘Gulma.’f  6 

That  condensed  wind  sometimes  increases  in  volume  ;  sometimes 
decreases  ;  sometimes  it  produces  very  great  pain  ;  and  sometimes  the 
pain  it  causes  is  not  great,  there  being  no  fixed  time  for  the  increase 
or  decrease  of  pain. 

These  results  are  due  to  the  mobility  of  the  wind. 

In  consequence,  again,  of  the  mobility  of  the  wind,  the  patient 
feels  a  sensation  like  that  of  the  crawling  of  ants  through  his  nerves 
and  arteries. 

Further,  he  feels  throbbing,  or  cutting,  or  thrilling  pains  ;  a  sensa¬ 
tion  of  distension  or  contraction  ;  absence  of  sensibility  (to  touch), 
and  horripilation.  These  appear  and  disappear. 

The  patient  also  feels  as  if  he  is- pierced  with  numberless  needles 
or  spikes. 

Towards  the  close  of  the  day  he  feels  feverish  ;  his  mouth  becomes 
dry  ;  his  breathing  becomes  difficult  or  obstructed  ;  his  hair  stands  on 
end.  When  the  pain  is  predominant,  the  following  ailments  super¬ 
vene  :  enlargement  of  spleen,  rumbling  noise  in  the  stomach,  noises 
in  the  intestines,  indigestion,  flatulence,  langour  of  the  body,  wry¬ 
neck,  intense  pain  in  the  head  and  the  temples,  and  swelling  of  the 
testicles. 

The  skin,  nails,  eyes,  face,  urine  and  stools,  become  dark  or  red, 
and  rough. 


*  ‘Mahagrota’  is,  literally,  a  large  duct,  such  as  the  ‘Grahanl,’  &c. 
t  ‘Pindita’  is,  literally,  disposed  in  the  form  of  a  ‘pinda’  or  ball.  Here  it  implies  that 
the  wind  assumes  a  globular  and  condensed  form. 

‘Gulma’  literally  means,  according  to  Susruta,  a  shrub,  with  a  round  top. 

The  condensed  wind  comes  to  be  called  ‘Gulma’  because  of  the  globular  form  it  takes. _ T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


953 


By  exposing  oneself  to  such  causes  as  originate  the  disease,  the 
disease  increases  in  intensity,  while  by  avoiding  them,  one  shakes  it 
off  and  gets  cured.  7 

Of  one  who  is  afflicted  by  the  same  causes  of  waste,  the  bile  also, 
along  with  the  wind,  becomes  excited  in  consequence 
of  eating  food  that  is  sour,  or  saline,  or  pungent,  or  consisting  of 
alkaline  ashes,  or  of  keen  virtues,  or  dry, 
or  of  drinking  wines  that  are  vitiated, 

or  of  taking  green  (or  unripe)  fruits  of  sour  taste,  or  such  potherbs 
and  rice  and  meat  as  cause  a  burning  sensation, 
or  of  eating  at  a  time  when  the  food  previously  taken  has  not 
been  digested, 

or  of  the  ‘amagaya’  becoming  dry, 
or  of  using  emetics  and  purgatives  copiously, 
or  of  suppressing  the  urgings  of  stools  and  urine, 
or  of  exposyre  to  the  sun  or  fire.  3 

The  wind,  condensing  the  excited  bile  in  a  particular  part  of  the 
‘amagaya’,  generates  those  very  kinds  of  pain  which  have  been  men¬ 
tioned  while  we  were  speaking  of  wind-born  ‘Gulma.’ 

The  (excited)  bile  burns  the  patient  in  the  abdomen,  the  heart, 
the  thorax,  and  the  throat. 

The  patient,  burning  the  while,  throws  out  acid  eructations  which 
seem  to  be  vapoury. 

The  seat  of  the  ‘Gulma’  seems  to  him  to  burn,  and  ache,  and  reek, 
and  smoulder,  and  perspires  and  becomes  sticky. 

Further,  losing  its  compactness,  the  seat  of  the  pain  seems  to 
relax.  It  becomes  so  sensitive  that  it  cannot  be  touched  without 
pain.  Partial  horripilation  also  appears. 

Fever,  vertigo,  burning,  thirst,  dryness  of  the  throat,  the  palate, 
and  the  mouth,  swoons,  sudden  and  copious  purging,  are  seen  to 
supervene, 

The  skin,  the  nails,  the  eyes,  the  face,  the  urine,  and  the  stools 
become  green  or  yellow. 

By  exposure  to  causes  which  generate  the  disease,  it  increases  in 
intensity  ;  while  the  opposite  course  of  action  alleviates  it. 

This  is  about  bile-born  ‘Gulma.’*  9 

Of  a  person  afflicted  by  the  causes  of  waste  already  mentioned, 


*  This  passage,  like  that  marked  7,  is  vitiated  by  many  incorrect  readings.  Gangadhara’s 
;t  has  been  carefully  revised.  I  have  followed  it  without  differing  from  it  in  any  place. — T. 


954 


CHARAKA-SA  MH1 TA. 


the  phlegm  becomes  excited  along  with  the  wind  in  consequence 
of  eating  to  excess,  or 

of  eating  foocl  that  is  excessively  oily,  or  heavy,  or  sweet,  or 
cold,  qr 

of  indulgence  in  cakes,  or  in  food  consisting  of  sugarcane,  or  milk, 
or  the  seeds  of  Phaseolus  radiatus ,  or  sesame  seeds,  or  treacle, 
transformed,  or 

of  drinking  wines  to  excess,  or 

of  taking  to  excess  green  or  unripe  fruits  and  vegetables,  or 
of  eating  to  excess  the  meat  of  aquatic  animals,  or  those  living  in 
marshy  regions,  or  those' that  are  domesticated  and  that  live, 
therefore,  in  villages  and  inhabited  places,  or 
of  suppressing  the  urgings  of  stools  and  urine,  or 
of  drinking  a  copious  quantity  of  water  after  one  has  eaten  be¬ 
yond  the  measure  of  gratification  or 
of  violent  shocking  of  the  body  (after  a  full  meal)  owing  to  riding 
on  horses  or  camels,  or  springless  cars  and  vehicles,  &c.*  10 
The  wind,  condensing  the  excited  phlegm  in  a  particular  part  of 
the  ‘amagaya,’  generates  all  those  pains  of  diverse  ,  kinds  which  have 
been  spoken  of  in  wind-born  ‘Gulma.’  u 

The  excited  phlegm  generates  in  the  person  the  following,  viz., 
the  cold  fever,f  disgust  for  food,  indigestion,  relaxation  and  langour 
of  the  body,  horripilation,  diseases  of  the  chest,  vomiting,  drowsiness 
and  sleep,  sloth,  a  sensation  of  the  body  covered  with  a  piece  of  wet 
cloth  or  blanket,  heaviness  of  the  limbs,  and  heat  in  the  head.  12 

Further  (it  should  be  observed  that),  phlegm-born  ‘Gulma’  is 
characterised  by  these  particular  features,  viz.,  immobility,  heaviness, 
hardness,  and  utter  insensibility  to  touch! 

When  it  is  aggravated,  the  excited  phlegm  generates  asthma, 
cough,  or  bronchitis,  catarrh,  in  the  nose,  and  phthisis. 

It  also  causes  whiteness  of  the  skin,  the  nails,  the  eyes,  the  face, 
the  urine,  and  the  stools. 


*  This  passage,  like  the  preceding  ones,  is  disfigured  by  any  incorrect  readings.  ‘Aga- 
nat’,  and  not  ‘Aganan’,  is  correct.  ‘Snigdha’ is  preceded  by  ‘ati.’  ‘Vikriti’  is  connected 
with  all  the  preceding  words,  except,  perhaps,  ‘pishta.’  ‘Suhita’  means  one  that  has  eaten 
beyond  the  measure  of  gratification  ;  that  is,,  one  that  has  gorged  oneself. — T. 

+  By  ‘gita-jwara’  is  meant  a  special  kind  of  fever  or  ague.  Vide  note  ante,  Nidansthana, 
fevers.— T. 

i  ‘Avagarha’  is  explained  by  GangSdhara  as  implying  ‘excessive.’  By  ‘suptata’  is  meant 
insensibility  to  touch. — T. 


F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  of  Cashmere : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-Western 
University,  Secretary  to  tke  Congress  of  the  World's  Columbian  Exposition : — I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  : — Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  iq.  East 38th  Street,  New  York: — Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Traise,  Dramstadt : — The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A., 
Editor  Meyer  Brother s’  Druggist : — I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 
advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere  174,  Boulevatse,  Saint  Germain-. — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  : — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  I  always 
arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the'physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop 
from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients 
according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and 
fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forwasd  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of 
the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street,  Calcutta : — My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you  [about 
drawing  their  attention  to]  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after. — An 

Ayurvedic  physician'  of  note  .  considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia : — I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  Medical  literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing: — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector Your  patriotic 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so"  admirably  bugun  .  You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  H.  Skrine,  Esq.,  Magistrate  and  Collector : — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with 
interest.  It  is  marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonder¬ 
ful  to  note  the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how 
completely  they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to 
the  enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Gierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gya  It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obli  ;ed  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynall,  Bangor,  North  Wales  r— ' The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin  growth 


an  1  development  of  medical  science,  and  al  -■  1  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India 
The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as  pos¬ 
sibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning  to 
find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every  system 
of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is  a  work 
that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji.— The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
-physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to. the  general  reader  as  well. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


THE  WESTERN  DRUGGIST. 

JUNE,  i902. 

CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

“  The  majority  of  the  readers  of  the  Western  Druggist  already 
are  familiar  with  the  interesting  ancient  Hindu  medical  work 
known  as  Charaka-Samhita,  for  the  successive  fascicules  as  they  are 
now  appearing  in  English  translation  have  been  noticed  and  exten¬ 
sively  reviewed  in  these  columns  as  they  have  made  their  appear¬ 
ance.  It  will  be  recalled  that  this  valuable  work  is  being  translated 
from  the  Sanskrit  by  the  learned  Dr.  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna, 
who  has  undertaken  an  arduous  work  for  which  he  is  entitled  to 
the  gratitude  of  the  scientific,  and  more  particularly  the  medical 
world.  And  this  enterprise  is  one  born  of  love  of  the  good  cause 
rather  than  expectation  of  material  reward,  and  we  fear  that  this 
publication  is  entailing  upon  him  a  great  hardship  and  much  per¬ 
sonal  sacrifice  owing  to  the  comparative  apathy  of  those  most 
concerned.  Those  who  have  not  seen  this  work  thus  far,  have  no 
conception  of  the  vast  amount  of  wisdom,  philosophy,  and  practical 
knowledge  encountered  in  its  pages.  One  marvels  at  the  profound 
learning  of  the  men  who  lived  and  wrote  at  a  period  so  remote  as 
to  be  relegated  in  the  mind  to  the  age  of  barbarism  almost. 

The  latest  fascicules  of  this  work  before  us  are  numbers  XXV 
to  XXVII,  and  their  contents  are  interesting  as  ever.  They  deal 
with  and  are  a  continuation  of  the  subjects  of  conception,  preg¬ 
nancy,  and  delivery.  The  “Rishi”  shows  the  similarity  between 
the  external  universe  and  “purusha.”  In  fact,  the  human  body  is 
shown  to  be  an  epitome  of  the  universe.  It  is  in  every  respect  a 
microcosm.  Everything  existing  in  the  macrocosm  is  shown  to 
exist  in  this  microcosm.  The  points  of  similarity  as  brought  out 
are  certainly  very  interesting.  The  “Rishi”  expounds  in  detail  the 
conditions  favorable  and  unfavorable  to  conception  and  how  to 
insure  the  preservation  of  the  unborn  child,  giving  full  instructions 
as  to  how  the  expectant  mother  should  carry  herself  during  the 
critical  period,  the  lesson  concluding  with  a  discourse  on  the 
delivery  of  the  child.  Here  are  also  described  those  acts  which  a 
man  and  a  woman  desirous  of  good  offspring  should  do,  The 
course  of  discipline  to  which  each  is  to  be  subjected  is  laid  down 
in  full.  The  subject  is  extremely  interesting  and  deserves  to  be 
studied  with  care.  The  address  of  Dr.  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna 
is  200  Cornwallis  street,  Calcutta,  E.  I.” 

From  Sir  Alfred  Croft  m.  a.,  d.  l.,  k.  c.  s.  i., 

Late  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal. 

RUMLEIGH 

Bere  Alston,  R.  S.  O. 

DEVON. 

24.  July,  1902. 

My  dear  Sir, 

I  continue  to  read  with  great  interest  the  successive  Parts  of 
Charaka-Samhita  that  you  are  good  enough  to  send  me.  The  his¬ 
torical  interest  of  the  treatise  can  hardly  be  overrated  :  and  while 
I  do  not  suppose  that  its  publication  will  greatly  affect  in  practice 
of  medicine  in  Europe  and  America,  yet  its  importance  in  throw¬ 
ing  a  flood  of  light  on  the  history  and  progress  of  medical  science 
must  secure  for  it  the  careful  attention  of  all  writers  who  hereafter 
deal  with  that  great  subject. 

I  am  glad  to  see  that  you  have  a  press  of  your  own  and  I  wish 
you  all  success  in  that  enterprise. 

Pandit  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna,  Yours  very  truly, 

Calcutta.  -  (Sd.)  A.  CROFT. 


PART  XXXl! 


^ _ .  A  '*2 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


(TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH) 


PUBLISHED  BY 

AYINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OP  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  original)  WITH  COMMENT¬ 
ARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  I  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 
journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  the  Hindu 
SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C.,  &C. 


CALCUTTA : 

2oo,  Cornwallis  Street, 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N,  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRATNA  PRESS* 
12,  SIMLAH  STREET  BYE-LANE. 

1903. 


(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved* ) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters .) 

Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — .  Iam 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  atracted  more  attention. 

. .  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office — . Your 

excellent  translation  .  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West  . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

.  Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not.say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  suhject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A.— I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing.  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons  A.  Birth.,  Paris:— Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris : — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  Utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany  The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for'  the  history  of  their  science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  JContgsburgh,  Germany  .-—English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal:—  I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life 
cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS 

OF 

PART  XkXI. 

The  reader  will  find  many  wise  and  weighty  observations  in 
this  Part.  These  are  incapable  of  being  condensed  in  a  few 
sentences.  Even  a  cursory  perusal  will  show  that  the  Rishis 
thoroughly  under  diseases  discussed  here.  Lesson  III  on  ‘Gulma’ 
or  abdominal  tumours  is  concluded  in  this  Part.  The  varieties  of 
this  disease,  its  causes,  incubatory  symptoms,  developed  indica¬ 
tions,  and  instructions  about  its  treatment,  have  been  fully  set 
forth. 

Lesson  IV,  on  the  ‘Nidan’  or  causes  of  ,Prameha’  or  ‘Gonorrhoea 
is  most  instructive. 

There  are,  in  all)  twenty  varieties  of  ‘Prameha.’  Of  these,  ten 
are  born  of  excited  phlegm,  six  of  excited  bile,  and  four  of  excited 
wind. 

The  causes  which  excite  the  phlegm,  those  that  excite  the  bile, 
and  those  that  excite  the  wind,  and  produce  the  different  varieties 
of  ‘Prameha,’  have  been  set  forth  with  a  minuteness  that  proves 
how  well  this  disease  was  studied  by  the  Rishis. 

Those  causes  are  such  as  can  be  easily  avoided  by  every  care¬ 
ful  man  or  woman. 

The  distinctive  characteristics  of  each  variety  of  ‘Prameha’  have 
also  been  set  forth  fully,  so  that  the  diagnosis  of  the  disease  may 
not  be  at  all  difficult. 

‘Prameha’  caused  by  the  excitement  of  all  the  faults  has  also 
been  explained.  The  especial  symptoms  have  been  laid  down. 

The  characteristics  of  the  curable  and  the  incurable  varieties 
also  have  been  shown. 

Lesson  V  treats  of  ‘Kushtha’  or  skin-diseases. 

‘Kushtha’  is  of  seven  varieties,  or  of  eighteen,  or  innumerable. 

All  these  varieties,  with  their  causes,  have  been  explained. 

The  whole  Lesson  contains  instructions  on  hygiene  that  are 
fraught  with  great  wisdom  and  that  have  a  high  practical  value. 

Lesson  VI  treats  of  ‘phthisis.’ 

The  four  principal  causes  have  been  set  forth  of  this  grave  dis¬ 
ease.  These  are  acts  of  rashness,  suppression  of  the  urgings  of 
nature,  loss  or  waste  of  the  ingredients,  and  food  consisting  of 
inharmonious  ingredients. 

The  causes  that  lead  to  waste  have  been  set  forth  in  detail. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


955 


By  exposure  to  causes  which  generate  the  disease,  it  increases  in 
Intensity,  while  the  opposite  course  of  action  alleviates  it. 

All  this  about  phlegm-born  ‘Gulma.’  *3 

That  Gulma  which  is  born  of  the  union  of  the  causes  and  the 
symptoms  of  the  three  several  faults,  is  called  by  experts  ‘Sannni- 
patika1  (or  born  of  all  the  three  faults). 

This  ‘sannipatika’  or  ‘nichaya’  Gulma  is  incurable  in  consequence 
of  the  contrariety  of  remedies  prescribable  for  its  treatment*  14 

As  regards  blood-born  ‘Gulma,’  only  women  can  have  it,  and  not 
men,  because  of  the  distinguishing  characteristic  which  women  have 
of  menstrual  blood  accumulating  in  the  uterus.  *5 

In  consequence  of  their  state  of  dependence,  of  ignorance,  and  of 
the  obligation  of  attending  to  domestic  concerns,  women  are  forced  to 
suppress  the  urgings  of  stools  and  urine  and  the  rest  even  when  these 
are  pronounced. 

Owing  to  this  cause,  as  also  through  indulgence  in  wind-exciting 
articles  and  practices  at  a  time  when  conception  has  just  set  in,  or 
abortion  has  taken  place,  or  delivery  has  occurred,  or  during  the  con¬ 
tinuance  of  the  menstrual  flow,  the  wind  becomes  quickly  excited.f  15 
The  wind,  becoming  excited,  enters  the  mouth  of  the  genital 
organ,  and  stops  up  the  menstrual  flow. 


*  What  is  stated  in  the  first  part  of  the  aphorism  is  this  :  ‘sannipatika’  or  ‘nichaya’ 
Gulma  means  that  Gulma  which  is  generated  by  all  the  three  faults  excited  together. 

When  there  is  a  ‘sannipata’  or  union  of  the  ‘hetus’  or  causes  that  excite  each  of  the  three 
faults  or  all  of  them  simultaneously,  and  when  the  Gulma  generated  by  the  united  causes 
discovers  the  symptoms,  in  a  state  of  union,  of  each  simple  variety  of  Gulma,  viz.,  the  wind- 
born,  the  bile-born,  and  the  phlegm-born,  such  Gulma  is  called  ‘sannipatika’,  or  ‘nichaya’, 
that  is,  born  of  all  the  faults. 

The  power  of  the  Sanskrit  language  is  abundantly'illustrated  by  the  compound  ‘Tridosha- 
hetu-linga-sannipata.’  It  is  impossible  to  render  it  in  any  other  language  with  equal  brevity. 

‘Pratisiddhopakrama,’  or,  as  some  texts  read,  ‘viruddhopakrama,’  means,  literally,  ‘hostile 
treatment.’  The  sense  is  this  :  if  any  course  of  treatment  is  adopted  for  alleviating  a  particular 
fault,  another  fault  may  thereby  be  more  excited  than  already.  Thus  the  difficulty  of  apply¬ 
ing  remedies  makes  this  variety  of  Gulma  incurable. — T. 

t  Women  are  in  a  state  of  dependence.  They  cannot  act  freely.  Their  liberty  is 
restrained  by  considerations  of  modesty  and  social  opinion.  They  have  frequently,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  this,  to  check  hunger  and  the  urgings  of  stools  and  urine. 

‘Vaisaradya’  is  knowledge  or  experience.  The  reverse  of  it  is  ignorance. 

‘Upachara’  is  service.  Women  have  to  attend  to  domestic  concerns  of  every  kind.  They 
have  to  keep  the  premises  clear,  attend  to  cooking,  and  distribute  the  food  to  all  the  members 
of  the  hou  sehold.  In  consequence  of  the  engrossing  nature  of  their  work,  they  are  simply 
forced  to  suppress  the  urgings  of  appetite,  of  stools,  of  urine,  and  the  rest. — T, 

121 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA 


§56 

The  menstrual  blood,  thus  stopped  month  after  month,  increases 
(or  inflates)  the  womb.  *7 

The  following  diseases  then  attack  her,  viz.,  ‘fula,’  cough  and  bron¬ 
chitis,  diarrhoea,  vomiting,  disgust  for  food,  indigestion,  relaxation,  and 
langour  of  the  limbs,  drowsiness  and  sleep,  dulness  and  sloth  (of  both 
body  and  mind),  stupefaction,  and  discharge  of  phlegmonous 
secretions. 

Besides  the  above,  the  following  symptoms  appear  : 

Milk  in  the  breasts  ; 

Blackness  of  the  lips  as  also  of  the  nipples  of  the  breasts  ; 

•Excessive  dulness  of  the  eyes  ; 

Bwoons  or  loss  of  consciousness  ; 

Nausea  or  a  tendency  to  vomit ; 

Desire  for  diverse  kinds  of  food  and  drink  ; 

Inflammatory  swellings  in  the  feet ; 

Partial  horripilation 

Distension  of  the  mons  veneris  ; 

Foetid  smell  of  the  genital  organ  ;  and 

Discharge  therefrom  of  watery  and  other  secretions.*  18 

The  round  and  condensed  ‘Gulma’  alone  moves  about  in  the 
womb. 

Though  the  woman  is  not  really  pregnant,  she  is  regarded  so, 
from  the  above  symptoms,  by  ignorant  persons.^  *9 

Before  the  appearance  (or  formation)  of  these  five  varieties  of 
‘Gulma,’  the  following  incubatory  symptoms  manifest  themselves : 
They  are — 

Unwillingness  for  food  (even  when  there  is  hunger)  ; 

Disgust  for  food  ; 

Indigestion  ; 


*  ‘Dohada’  is  the  correct  reading,  and  not  ‘daha’  as  given  by  Gangadhara.  By  ‘dohada’ 
is  meant  desire  for  various  kinds  of  food,  such  as  is  manifested  by  women  in  a  state  of  preg¬ 
nancy.  Hence,  the  ceremony  or  rite  Of  ‘Garbhadohada,’  viz,,  that  in  which  various  kinds  of 
food  are  placed  before  a  pregnant  woman  in  the  9th  month  of  pregnancy.  This  rite  is  other¬ 
wise  called  ‘swada,’  or  ‘desire.’ 

The  word  ‘chatala,’  literally,  wide  or  broad,  shows  that  Charaka’s  age  cannot  be  very 
remote.  The  word  belongs  to  colloquial  Bengali. — T. 

t  The  commentators  explain  that  when  the  Gulma  moves,  the  whole  of  it  moves.  When, 
however,  the  fcetus  moves,  it  is  only  a  hand  or  a  leg  that  moves.  Hence,  there  is  a  differ¬ 
ence  between  the  movements  of  the  Gulma  and  those  of  the  fcetus.  A  physician  of  knowledge 
and  experience  can  easily  detect,  from  observation  of  the  movements,  whether  it  is  a  case  of 
Gulma  or  of  pregnancy. — T. 


CHAR  AKA -SAM HIT  A. 


957- 


Inequality  of  the  strength  of  the  digestive  fire,  (that  is,  keenness 
of  the  digestive  fire  followed  by  weakness  of  the  same ;  hence 
digestion  followed  by  indigestion) ; 

Burning  (both  internal  and  external) ; 

Excessive  vomiting  and  eructations  during  the  time  the  digestion- 
takes  place  of  the  food  eaten  ; 

Pronounced  urgings  of  the  downward  wind,  the  stools,  and  the 
urine ; 

Non-expulsion  of  the  wind,  stools,  and  the  urine,  notwithstanding 
those  pronounced  urgings*  or  scanty  expulsion  thereof  -y 

‘£ula’  (or  pains  in  the  abdomen,  the  thorax,  the  sides,  &c.) 

Rumbling  noise  in  the  stomach ; 

Similar  noise  in  the  bowels  • 

Horripilation  all  over  the  body  ; 

The  formation  of  scybalse  in  the  stools  ; 

Loss  of  appetite  ; 

Weakness  or  debility  of  the  entire  system  ;  and 

Incapacity  to  eat  and  drink  to  the  point  of  gratification  ; 

These  are  the  incubatory  symtoms  of  ‘Gulma.’ 

Among  all  the  varieties  of  ‘Gulma,’  there  is  not  one  which  is  not 
generated  by  the  (excited)  wind. 

Of  all  the  varieties  of  this  disease,  that}' which  is  born  of  all  the 
faults  is  incurable.  Its  treatment  should  not  be  taken  up. 

As  regards  ‘Gulma’  that  is  born  of  one  fault,  it  should  be  treated 
agreeably  to  the  methods  laid  down  for  alleviating  that  particular 
fault. 

As  regards  that  ‘Gulma’  which  is  due  to  two  faults  combined' 
together,  its  treatment  should  consist  of  the  use  of  such  drugs  or 
adoption  of  such  operations  as  alleviate  both  the  faults.  21 

As  regards  any  other  ‘Gulma’,  even  if  it  be  not  hostile,  it  should 
still  be  treated  carefully,  distinguishing  the  gravity  or  lightness  of  the 
supervening  symptoms. 

Those  supervening  symptoms  which  are  grave  should  be  treated 
without  loss  of  time.  Afterwards  should  the  lighter  ones  be  attended 
to  without  loss  of  time. 

If,  without  being  able  to  distinguish  the  ‘Gulma’  (that  confronts 
him),  the  physician  apprehends  fatal  results,  he  should  then  adopt  the 
treatment  of  the  wind.*  22 


*  I  think  Gangadhara  has  misunderstood  the  sense  of  the  first  portion  of  this  aphorism. 
In  2i  the  Rishi  says  that  there  can  be  no  Gulma  without  the,  excited  wind  as  its 


■958 


CHARAKA-  SAM  HIT  A. 


Those  oils  and  those  kinds  of  ‘sweda’,  which  are  alleviative  of 
the  wind,  those  mild  purgatives  which  have  oils  entering  into 
their  composition, 

such  enemata  as  have  oily  substances  entering  into  their  compo¬ 
sition,  and 

articles  that  are'sour  or  saline,  or  sweet  in  taste, 
should,  with  discretion,  be  administered  or  applied. 

When  the  wind  has  been  alleviated,  the  other  faults,  in  all  varieties 
of  Gulma,  may  be  checked  with  even  a  little  exertion,  23 

( Here  occurs  the  following  j  : 

The  alleviation  of  the  wind  of  persons  afflicted  with  ‘Gulma7, 
should  be  duly  brought  about  by  all  means  the  physician  can 
command. 

When  the  wind  has  been  alleviated,  any  other  fault  which  may 
have  become  excited  is  capable  of  being  checked  by  slight  or  easy 
means,*  24 

( Here  is  a  verse  containing  a  summary ). 

In  this  Lesson  on  the  Nidana  of  Gulmas,  are  seen  the  varieties, 
the  causes,  the  incubatory  indications,  and  the  symptoms  of  this  dis¬ 
ease,  as  also  instructions  about  the  treatment.  1 


characteristic.  He  then  lays- down  that  Gulma  generated  by  all  the  three  faults' is  incurable  j 
that  Gulma  caused  by  one  fault  should  be  treated  with  medicines  alleviating  that  particular 
fault,  and,  lastly,  that  Gulma  born  of  two  faults  should  be  treated  with  such  drugs  as  have 
the  virtue  of  alleviating  both  the  faults.  After  this  comes  aphorism  22.  ‘Yachcha  any  ad  a- 
pyabiruddham’  certainly  means  “any  other  Gulma  which  is  not  hostile,’  that  is,  whose  symp¬ 
toms  do  not  portend  danger.  ‘Anyadapyabiruddham’  can  never  mean  what  Gangadhara 
understands  by  it,  vis.,  some  drug  or  operation  that  is  ‘anyadoshabirudham.’  What  the 
Rishi  really  says  in  22  is  this  :  when  a  particular  Gulma  is  not  hostile  by  itself,  its  treatment 
should  still  be  taken  up  without  loss  of  time.  Its  supervening;  symptoms  should  be  noted. 
Those  which  are  grave  should  be  first  checked  ;  then  those  which  are  light.  Lastly,  when 
the  physician  is  unable  to  determine  what  kind  of  Gulma  it  is  which  he  is  called  upon  to 
treat,  he  should  adopt  that  treatment  which  alleviates  the  wind,  for  there  can  be  no  Gulma 
which  is  not  characterised  by  excited  wind. — T. 

*  The  heading  ‘bhavati  chatra’  generally  introduces  a  verse.  Charaka  Is  the  editor, 
reviser,  &c.,  of  Agnivega’s  treatise.  He  gives  the  substance  of  the  original  work  in  his  owii 
language  and  now  and  then  cites  the  verses  of  the  original  work  for  supporting  his  own 
statements.  Here,  however,  the  passage  introduced  is  not  in  metrical  language.  Hence, 
the  correctness  of  the  reading  may  be  questioned, — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


959 


Thus  ends  Lesson  III,  on  Gulmas,  in  the  Division  called  Nidana, 
of  the  treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  IV. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  Nidana  (causes)  of 
Prameha.* 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  1 

Those  varieties  of  Prameha  that  have  for  their  causes  the  excite¬ 
ment  of  all  the  three  faults,  are  twenty  in  number. 

Those  varieties  which  are  born  otherwise  are  numberless.f 

Amongst  these  all,  we  shall  expound  only  those  varieties  of 
Prameha  which  are  caused  by  the  excitement  of  all  the  three  faults.  2 

Here  (in  the  world),  verily,  from  the  particular  characteristics  of 
‘Nidana’  or  causes,  ‘doshas’  or  faults,  and  ‘dushyas’  or  the  ingre¬ 
dients  or  ‘dhatus’  composing  the  body,  arise  the  manifestation,  the 
non-manifestation,  and  the  partial  manifestation  of  diseases  in 
general.J  3 


*  Prameha’  includes  many  urinary  affections,  such  as  Diabetes,  Gonorrhoea,  &c. — T. 

t  ‘Prameha’  may  arise  from  other  causes  than  the  excitement  of  all  the  three  faults.  Thus 
it  may  arise  from  one  fault,  or  two.  The  fact  is,  ‘dosha’  (faults),  ‘dushya’  (dhatus  or  ingre¬ 
dients  of  the  body,  such  as  the  juices,  blood,  flesh,  &c.),  and  ‘Nidana’  (causes),  by  their 
permutations  and  combinations,  may  produce  many  varieties  of  this  disease.  It  is  not  the 
Rishi’s  intention  to  mention  any  of  these.  Those  only  which  arise  from  excitement]  of  all  the 
three  faults  will  form  the  subject  of  this  Lesson. — T. 

$  The  particle  ‘Iha,’  meaning  ‘here,’  is  variously  explained.  Gangadhara  takes  it  as 
implying  the  human  body.  Others  take  it  as  implying  the  Science  of  Life.  There  is  no 
necessity  for  stretching  the  sense  of  the  word.  I  take  it  as  meaning  ‘in  this  world,’  the  sense 
in  which  it  is  very  generally  used.  Or,  it  may  be  taken  as  implying  ‘in  this  connection.’ 

By  ‘Nidana’  is,  of  course,  meant  the  causes  of  disease,  or,  rather,  those  circumstances 
which  excite  or  provoke  the ‘doshas’ or  faults.  By  ‘doshas’  or  faults  is  meant  wind,  bile, 
and  phlegm.  ‘Dushyas’  imply  those  which  are  capable  of  being  affected  by  the  faults  ;  hence, 
the  ingredients  composing  the  body,  viz.,  ‘rasa’  or  the  juices,  the  blood,  &c.,  including 
the  impurities,  &c. 

‘Vighatabhava,’  as  referring  to  ‘vikaras’  or  diseases,  implies  non-manifestation  ;  ‘vighata- 
bhava’  means  manifestation ;  and,  lastly,  ‘vighatabhava-prativigeshah’  implies  ‘partial  or 
incomplete  manifestation.’ 

What  is  said  here  by  the  Rishi  is  this  :  diseases  manifest  themselves  ;  or  they  do  not  mani¬ 
fest  themselves  j  or,  if  they  manifest  themselves,  they  do  so  partially  or  incompletely,  or  not 


960 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


When  these  three,  viz.,  the  characteristics  of  causes,  faults,  and 
ingredients,  are  not  united  in  sequence,  no  manifestion  of  disease 
takes  place. 

Or,  when  they,  through  absence  of  predominance,  unite  as  weak 
factors,  no  manifestation  occurs  of  disease ;  or  there  is  lateness  in. 
manifestation  ;  or  the  manifestation  takes  place  in  a  weak  form  ;  or  all 
the  symptoms  laid  down  do  not  show  themselves. 

When  the  reverse  of  the  above  is  the  case,  consequences  other 
than  the  above  arise. 

Thus  have  been  explained  the  causes  of  manifestation,  non-mani¬ 
festation,  and  partial  (or  late)  manifestation  of  diseases.*  4 

The  following  are  the  particulars  of  Nidana  and  the  rest,  which 
speedily  bring  about  those  varieties  of  Prameha  which  are  regarded 
as  phlegm-bom  : 

They  are — 

Eating  in  excessive  measure  and  repeatedly  new  rice  obtained 
from  these  varieties  of  paddy,  viz.,  Hayanaka,  Yavaka,  Chinaka,  Kod- 
dalaka,  Naishadha,  Itkata,  Mukunda,  Mahavrihi,  Pramodaka,  and 
Sugandha.f 


immediately.  The  reasons  of  these  phenomena  are  the  ‘vigesha’  or  differences  in  respect  of 
characteristics  appertaining  to  causes,  faults,  and  ingredients.  Thus,  if  the  causes  exist  in 
their  entirety,  the  faults  are  excited,  and  the  ingredients  affected.  The  result  is  manifestation 
of  disease.  So,  if  the  causes  do  not  exist,  the  faults  and  the  ingredients  are  unaffected,  and 
the  result  is  non-manifestation  of  disease,  or  the  continuance  of  health.  If  the  causes  are  not 
powerful  enough,  there  may  be  disease,  but  then  there  is  an  absence  of  intensity  ;  or,  delay 
in  the  appearance  of  disease  :  or  an  absence  of  some  of  the  symptoms.  Then,  again,  if  causes 
exist  and  affect  the  faults,  still  if  the  ingredients  of  the  body,  or  the  constitution  be  strong,, 
there  will  be  no  disease,  or  disease  in  only  a  partial  form.  Hence,  the  manifestation,  non¬ 
manifestation,  or  partial  manifestation  (including  lateness  of  manifestation)  are  due  to  the 
‘Vigesha’  of  ‘Nidana,’  of  ‘doshas,’  and  of  ‘dushyas.’ — T. 

*  After  what  has  been  stated  in  the  note  to  the  previous  aphorism,  the  sense  of  this  would 
become  clear.  What  the  Rishi  wishes  to  inculcate  here  is  this  :  when  causes,  faults,  and 
‘dhatus’  become  united,  it  is  then  only  that  disease  appears.  If  these  be  not  united,  there 
can  be  no  disease.  If,  again,  there  be  union,  but  an  absence  of  predominance,  the  same 
result  follows.  Thus,  if  the  causes  be  weak,  or,  if,  in  spite  of  their  strength,  they  cannot 
affect  the  faults  adequately,  &c.,  disease  does  not  arise. 

Having  stated  what  the  consequences  are  of  an  absence  of  union,  or  of  the  absence  of 
predominance  even  if  there  be  union,  the  Rishi  points  out  the  consequences  of  the  reverse  of 
every  assertion.  Thus,  when  there  is  union,  disease  manifests  itself;  &c. _ T. 

+  Xt  is  necessary  to  state  that  many  of  these  varieties  of  paddy  cannot  be  identified. 
Gangadhara  supposes  that  the  names  are  those  of  the  countries  or  provinces  in  which  they 
grow.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


961 

Also  eating  (in  excess  and  repeatedly)  the  following,  viz.,  the  soup 
of  new  Harenu  (a)  and  M&sha  (b),  as  also  the  meat  of  animals  that 
are  domestic,  or  that  live  in  marshy  regions,  or  that  are  aquatic, 
mixed  largely  with  ghee. 

Also  eating  (in  excess  and  repeatedly)  the  following,  viz.,  pot¬ 
herbs,  sesame  paste,  cakes,  frumenty,  krigara  (c),  gruels,  and  all  things 
which  are  tranformations  of  sugarcane  ;  also  milk  thickened  by  boiling, 
ill-formed  curds,  and  all  such  things  as  are  liquid,  sweet,  and  new 
or  raw. 

Avoidance  of  rubbing  or  cleaning  the  body,  and  physical  exercises. 

Addiction  to  sleep  at  daytime,  or  lying  on  beds,  and  sitting  (on 
soft  seats). 

And,  lastly,  indulgence  in  such  other  food  and  drink  and  practices 
as  generate  phlegm,  adeps,  and  urine. 

All  these  constitute  the  distinctive  causes  of  phlem-born  Prameha.5 

'‘Dosha’  of  this  disease  is  a  copious  measure  of  liquefied  phlegm. 

The  ‘dushyas’  which  (when. afflicted  by  phlegm)  produce  this  dis¬ 
ease  are  accumulated  adeps,  flesh,  impurities  (stools,  urine,  &c),  vital 
seed,  blood,  fat,  marrow,  the  watery  matter  between  the  outer  skin 
and  the  flesh,  food-juice,  and  ‘ojas.’ 

Thus  are  enumerated  the  ‘dushyas.’*  6 

When  these  three,  viz.,  the  distinctive  ‘nidanas’  or  causes,  and  the 
rest,  unite,  the  phlegm  becomes  quickly  excited,  in  consequence  of  its 
prior  accumulation. 

Becoming  excited,  it  quickly  spreads  over  the  entire  body. 

In  consequence  of  the  relaxation  of  the  body,  the  excited  phlegm, 
when  spreading  over  the  whole  body,  becomes  mingled  at  the  outset 
with  the  adeps. 

In  consequence  of  the  accumulation  of  the  adeps  (through  indul¬ 
gence  in  and  exposure  to  the  same  ‘nidana’  which  increases  and 
excites  the  phlegm),  as  also  of  the  properties  of  phlegm  agreeing  in 


a.  A  name  applied  to  pease  in  general ;  also  the  particular  variety  called  ‘Matar’  (in 
Bengal),  Pisum  sativum. 

b .  Phaseolus  radiatus,  Roxb. 

c.  Called  ‘khichri’  in  Bengali ;  a  hodgepodge  of  rice,  pulses,  ghee,  spices,  fish,  &c. 

*  ‘Nidana’,  ‘dosha’  and  ‘dushya’  must  be  in  a  state  of  union  before  there  can  be  disease. 
‘Nidana  affects  the  ‘doshas’  which,  in  their  turn,  affect  the  ‘dushyas.’  Having  first  laid  down 
the  ‘nidanas’  or  causes  which  generate  phlegm-born  Prameha,  the  Rishi  then  speaks  of  the 
particular  ‘dosha’  which  is  acted  upon  by  those  causes.  Liquefied  phlegm  is  the  ‘dosha’  of 


962 


CHAR  AKA -SAM HI  TA. 


a  large  measure  with  those  of  the  adeps,  the  phlegm  mingles  with  the 
adeps  and  vitiates  it  owing  to  itself  having  been  vitiated. 

The  vitiated  phlegm,  acted  upon  by  the  vitiated  adeps,  then  com¬ 
bines  with  the  flesh  and  the  impurities  of  the  body. 

Owing,  again,  to  the  excessive  increase  beyond  their  normal  mea¬ 
sure,  of  both  the  impurities  and  the  flesh,  the  excited  phlegm  gene¬ 
rates  on  the  flesh,  in  consequence  of  the  vitiation  of  the  flesh  itself, 
eruptions  with  foetid  sores,  such  as  ‘garavika,’  ‘kachcchapika,’  &c.* 

As  regards  the  impurities,  owing  to  their  having  fallen  away  from 
their  normal  condition,  the  phlegm  having  vitiated  them,  transforms 
them  into  urine. 

Acted  upon  by  the  adeps  and  impurities,  the  excited  phlegm,  com¬ 
ing  at  the  larger  mouths  of  the  urine-bearing  ducts  of  the  pubic 
regions  and  the  anal  canal,  obstructs  them  completely. 

Thus,  having  altered  the  normal  conditions,  the  excited  phlegm 
causes  different  varieties  of  Prameha  to  become  either  chronic  or 
incurable.  7 

The  impurities  of  the  body,  united  with  phlegm  and  adeps,  enter 
the  kidneys,  are  transformed  into  urine,  and  become  affected  by  these 
ten  abnormal  attributes  of  phlegm  : 

They  are  I.  white,  2.  cold,  3.  hard,  4.  slimy,  5.  limpid,  6.  oily, 
7.  heavy,  8.  sweet,  9.  condensed  or  solid,  and  10.  partially  condensed 
and  partially  liquid.  ( a ) 

It  then  receives  a  distinctive  appellation,  which  is  essentially  a 
qualitative,  according  as  it  is  decidedly  affected  by  one  or  more  of  the 
above  qualities.!  8 


this  particular  disease.  Lastly  are  laid  down  the  ‘dushyas’  or  those  ingredients  of  the  body 
which  are  assailed  by  the  particular  ‘dosha.’  The  origin  of  the  disease  is  thus  expounded 
fully.— T. 

*  Large  circular  eruptions,  characterised  by  pain  and  foetid  sores,  are  called  ‘garavika.’ 

By  ‘kachcchapika’  is  meant  enlarged  scrofulous  glands. — T. 

(a)  The  crrect  reading,  it  seems,  is  ‘*  *  sandra-sandraprasadagunaih’  and  not  ‘*  *  ‘san- 
draprasadagandhaih.’  The  fact  is,  ‘sandra’  is  the  9th  in  the  list,  and  ‘sandraprasada’  is  the 
10th.  This  is  supported  by  the  enumeration  of  the  several  varieties  of  Meha  in  the  next 
aphorism. — T. 

+  What  is  said  in  the  second  portion  of  this  aphorism  is  this  :  the  impurities  become 
transformed  into  urine.  They,  or,  rather,  the  urine  is  then  affected  by  one  or  more  of  the 
properties  en  umerated  above.  The  result  of  this  is  that  the  urine  (or  the  disease)  comes 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


963 


Those  ten  varieties  of  'Prameha’  are  known  by  the  following  ten 
distinctive  appellations  : 

They  are  1.  Udaka-meha,  2.  Ikshuvalikarasa-meha,  3.  Sandra- 
meha,  4.  Sandraprasada-meha,  5.  (^ukla-meha  6.  (^ukra-meha,  7.  £ita- 
meha,  8.  Sikata-meha,  and  9.  £anair-meha,  and  10.  Alala-meha.*  9 
These  ten  varieties  of  Prameha  are  all  curable,  in  consequence 

1.  of  the  adeps  (whose  njorbid  condition  produces  them)  being  pos¬ 
sessed  of  the  same  properties  (as  the  phlegm  which  excites  the  adeps), 

2.  of  the  predominance  of  the  phlegm,  and  3.  of  the  same  treatment 
being  efficacious  in  checking  both  the  phlegm  and  the  adeps. f  10 

Here  occur  some  verses  which  explain  the  nature  of  the  different 
varieties  of  Prameha  due  to  the  action  of  the  phlegm.  11 

In  consequence  of  the  excitement  of  the  phlegm,  the,  man  who 
is  afflicted  by  ‘Udameha’  passes  urine  that  is  limpid,  copious,  white, 
cold,  inodorous,  and  like  unto  water.!  12 

In  consequence  of  the  excitement  of  the  phlegm,  one  passes  urine 
that  is  exceedingly  sweet,  cold,  slightly  slimy,  turbid,  and  like  unto 
the  expressed  juice  of  the  sugarcane.  §  r3 


to  be  called  by  the  name  of  that  particular  property  which  decidedly  or  considerably  affects 
it.  If  more  properties  than  one  affect  it,  they  give  their  name  to  it.  This  will  be  understood 
from  the  aphorisms  that  follow. 

The  word  ‘gauna’  here  simply  means  ‘appertaining  to  ‘guna’  or  property.  Literally,  it 
may  be  rendered  ‘qualitative.’  It  is  not  a  correlative  of  ‘mukhya’  here,  though  Gangadhara 
endeavours  to  explain  it  that  way. — T. 

*  These  names  have  been  explained  lower  down. — T. 

t  Phlegm  is  the  ‘dosha’  which  produces  the  disease  ;  and  the  adeps  are  the  ‘dushya’  which 
are  affected  by  that  ‘dosha.’  Both  the  phlegm  and  the  adeps  being  of  the  name  nature,  and 
the  same  treatment  being  efficacious  in  checking  them  when  morbid,  all  these  varieties 
of  ‘Prameha’  are  curable. — T. 

t  It  will  be  seen  that  the  urine  in  ‘Uda-meha’  possesses  more  than  one  of  the  ten  proper¬ 
ties  enumerated  in  aphorism  8.  Indeed,  it  possesses  3  of  those  attributes.  Without-  being 
named  after  any  of  those  three  attributes,  this  Meha  is  called ‘Uda-meha,’  ‘Uda’ meaning 
water.  The  observation,  therefore,  about  designation,  that  occurs  in  aphorism  8,  does  not 
apply  to  every  variety  of  Meha.  Gangadhara  endeavours  to  show  that  that  observation  does 
apply  to  ‘Uda-meha’  as  well,  for  out  of  the  three  attributes,  white,  cold,  and  limpid,  two  at 
least  belong  to  water.  Hence  the  name  is  derived  from  that  of  water.  The  endeavour  is 
certainly  absurd,  for  none  of  the  three  attributes  themselves  furnishes  the  name. — T. 

§  The  frame  of  the  definitions  in  both  12  and  13  should  be  observed.  In  12,  some  indi¬ 
cation  is  afforded  of  the  designation  by  the  word  ‘uda-meha,’  that  is  one  afflicted  by  ‘uda- 
meha.’  In  13,  no  direct  indication  occurs  of  the  name.  It  is  to  be  gathered  from  the  words 
‘ka.ndekshurasa-sanka.Qam,’  implying '  ‘like  unto  the  expressed  juice  of  the  sugarcane.’  This 
variety  of  ‘meha,’  it  should  be  inferred,  is  designated  ‘kandekshurasa-meha.’ 


96  4 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA 


He  whose  urine,  sometime  after  its  emission,  becomes,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  excitement  of  phlegm,  condensed  in  the  vessel  which 
holds  it,  is  regarded  as  afflicted1  by  ‘Sandra-meha.’* * * §  H 

He  whose  urine,  in  consequence  of  the  excitement  of  the  phlegm, 
becomes  partially  condensed  and  is  partially  watery,  is  regarded  as 
afflicted  with  ‘Sandraprasada-meha.’f  15 

That  person  who,  in  consequence  of  the  excitement  of  the  phlegm, 
repeatedly  passes  urine  that  is  white  in  hue  and  like  unto  pasted  rice 
dissolved  in  water,  is  regarded  as  afflicted  with  ‘(^ukla-meha.’J  16 

That  man  who,  in  consequence  of  the  excitement  of  the  phlegm, 
repeatedly  passes  urine  that  is  of  the  colour  of  the  semen,  and  that  is, 
besides,  mixed  with  semen,  is  regarded  as  afflicted  with  ‘£ukra- 
meha.’  *7 

He  who,  in  consequence  of  the  excitement  of  the  phlegm,  passes 
urine  that  is  exceedingly  sweet  and  cold,  and  that  is  of  copious  mea¬ 
sure,  is  regarded  as  afflicted  with  ‘£ita-meha.’  18 

That  man  who,  in  consequence  of  the  excitement  of  the  phlegm, 
passes  with  his  urine  small  solid  particles  as  also  minute  phlegmonous 
threads,  should  be  regarded  as  afflicted  with  ‘Sikata-meha.’§  19 

That  man  who,  in  consequence  of  the  excitement  of  the  phlegm, 
passes  urine  with  great  difficulty  and  in  drops,  without  feeling  the 
urgings  of  urination,  is  regarded  as  afflicted  with  ‘^anair-meha.’H  20 


*  ‘Paryushita’  implies  stale.  Cooked  food  becomes  ‘paryushita’  when  it  remains  for 
12  hours  after  it  is  taken  down  from  the  fire.  Generally  speaking,  cooked  food  prepared  today 
becomes  ‘paryushita’  the  day  after.  ‘Paryushita’  urine  would  mean  urine  as  it  would  he 
sometime  after  it  is  passed.  If  passed  during  the  night,  it  would  be  ‘paryushita’  the  next 
morning. — T. 

t  ‘Sandra’  is  condensed,  ‘prasada,’  liquid  or  watery.  Hence,  ‘sandraprasada’  implies 
partially  dense  and  partially  watery. — T. 

+  ‘Pishta’  literally  implies  reduced  to  paste  by  pounding  or  grinding.  Here  it  is  used  to 
signify  rice  reduced  to  paste  and  dissolved  in  water.  Rice  reduced  to  paste  is  called  in 
Bengali  ‘Pitali,’  which  is  evidently  a  corruption  of  ‘pishtalika,’  the  feminine  form  of 
‘pishtala.’  The  particle  ‘la’  or  ‘ra’  implies  presence  in  excess,  as  ‘Madhula’  or  ‘Madhura,’ 
‘Vatala,’  &c. — T. 

§  ‘Murtan’  implies  ‘having  shape,’  in  other  words,  solid. 

‘Anun’  means  ‘particles  resembling  grains  of  sand.’ 

‘Mutragatan  doshan’  signifies  particles  of  that  ‘dosha,’  viz.,  phlegm,  which  has  entered 
into  or  affected  the  urine.  Hence,  minute  phlegmonous  threads. — T. 

IT  ‘Ktichechram’  implies  ‘with  difficulty.’  ‘Mandam-mandam’  means  ‘in  very  small 
quantities,’  that  is,  in  drops. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


96s 


That  man  who,  in  consequence  of  the  excitement  of  the  phlegm, 
passes  urine  that  is  slimy  and  that  issues  in  a  thin  and  thread-like 
current,  should  be  regarded  as  afflicted  with  ‘Alala-meha.’*  21 

Thus  have  been  explained  the  ten  varieties  of  Prameha  generated 
by  the  excited  phlegm.  22 

Of  one  who  indulges  in  food  that  is  hot,  or  sour,  or  saline,  or  con¬ 
sisting  of  alkaline  ashes,  or  pungent,  or  who  eats  before  the  food  last 
taken  has  been  digested,  as  also 

of  one  who  exposes  oneself  to  the  heat  of  the  sun  when  the  latter 
is  in  his  strength,  or  of  a  blazing  fire,  or  who  undergoes  fatiguing 
labour,  or  indulges  in  wrath,  or  who  takes  food  that  consists  of 
inharmonious  elements, 

if  he  happens  to  have  a  body  like  to  what  has  been  already 
mentioned, f 

bile  becomes  soon  excited.  23 

The  bile  becoming  excited  soon  generates,  agreeably  to  the  order 
already  laid  down,  the  following  six  varieties  of  Prameha.  24 

The  distinctive  designations  of  these  varieties  also  are  derived 
from  the  distinctive  attributes  of  the  bile. 

They  are  as  follow  :  1.  Kshara-meha,  2.  Kala-meha,  3.  Nila-meha, 
4.  Lohita-meha,  5.  Manjishtha-meha,  and  6.  Haridra-meha. 

These  designations  are  connected  with  the  six  following  attributes 
of  the  bile,  viz.,  1.  Kshara  (alkaline),  2.  Amla  (sour),  3.  Lavana 
(saline),  4.  Katuka  (pungent),  5.  Visra  (endued  with  the  scent  of  raw 
meat),  and  6.  Ushna  (hot). 

All  these  varieties  of  Meha,  it  should  be  known,  are  suppressible. 

.  This  is  so  in  consequence  of  two  faults  in  a  state  of  union  (viz., 
phlegm  and  bile)  seizing  (or  affecting)  the  adeps,  and  the  treatment 
being  necessarily  hostile.!  25 


‘Avegam’  is  explained  as  signifying  ‘without  experiencing  a  pronounced  urging  for 
urination.’ — T. 

*  ‘Alala’  implies  ‘dhara,’  i.  e.,  stream  or  current. — T. 

t  That  is,  a  body  in  which  impurities,  &c.,  have  already  accumulated. — T. 

5  The  phlegm-born  varieties  of  Meha  are  all  curable.  As  already  explained,  the  phlegm 
seizes  the  adeps,  and  produces  those  varieties.  The  phlegm,  however,  and  the  adeps  are 
nearly  of  the  name  nature.  The  treatment,  again,  is  not  hostile,  for  that  which  alleviates  the 
phlegm,  alleviates  the  adeps  also.  Not  so  in  the  case  of  the  bile-born  varieties.  In  the  first 
place,  there  is  the  excited  bile  ;  the  excited  phlegm  also  is  united  with  it,  for  there  can  be  no 
Meha  without  the  excited  phlegm  being  present.  In  the  bile-born  varieties,  therefore,  there 


966 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Here  occur  some  verses  which  explain  the  nature  of  the  different 
varieties  of  Prameha  generated  by  the  excited  bile.  26 

The  man  who  is  afflicted  with  ‘Khara-meha’  passes,  in  consequence 
of  the  excited  bile,  urine  that  resembles  ‘Kshara’  (alkaline  ashes)  in 
smell,  colour,  taste,  and  touch.  27 

He  who,  through  excitement  of  the  bile,  repeatedly  passes  urine 
that  is  hot  and  of  the  colour  of  ink,  is  regarded  as  afflicted  with 
‘Kala-meha.’  28 

That  man  who,  through  excitement  of  the  bile,  passes  urine  that 
is  sour  in  taste  and  that  is  of  the  colour  of  the  blue  jay  ( Coracias 
Indica),  is  regarded  as  afflicted  with  ‘Nila-meha.’*  29 

That  man  who,  through  excitement  of  the  bile,  passes  urine  that 
is  of  the  smell  of  raw  meat,  that  is  saline  in  taste,  that  is  hot,  and 
that  is  bloody,  is  regarded  as  afflicted  with  Rakta-meha.j-  3° 

He  who,  in  consequence  of  the"  excitementjof  the  bile,  passes 
urine,  repeatedly  and  in  copious  measure,  that  is  of  the  colour  of 
Manjishtha  J  and  that  is  of  a  foetid  smell,  is  regarded  as  afflicted 
with  ‘Manjishtha-meha.’  31 

He  who,  in  consequence  of  the  excitement  of  the  bile,  passes 
urine  that  is  of  the  colour  of  the  infusion  of  turmeric,  and  that  is 
pungent  in  taste,  is  regarded  as  afflicted  with  ‘Haridra-meha.’§  32 

Thus  have  been  explained  the  six  varieties  of  Prameha  born  of 
the  excitement  of  the  phlegm.  33 
Of  one  who  is  addicted 

to  food  and 'drink  that  are  pungent, ^or'astringent,  or  bitter,  or  dry, 
or  light,  or  cold, 


are  two  excited  faults  which  have  to  be  dealt  with.  They  take  possession  of  the  adeps.  The 
bile  differs  in  nature  from  the  adeps.  Hence  anything  that  alleviates  the  bile  does  not  allevi¬ 
ate  the  adeps.  The  treatment,  therefore,  cannot  but  be  hostile.  Hence,  these  diseases,  instead 
of  being  curable,  are  only  suppressible. — T. 

*  This  variety  of  Meha  is  called  by  some  ‘Amla-meha,’  from  the  taste  of  the  urine  which 
is  ‘amla’  or  sour.— T. 

t  This  is  the  same  as  ‘Lohita-meha,’  the  words  ‘lohita’  and  ‘rakta’  implying  the  same 
thing. — T, 

+  Rubia  cordifolia,  Linn .,  sya.^Rabia  Manjishtha ,  Roxb.  The  infusion  of  this  plant  is 
of  a  reddish  hue. — T. 

§  ‘Haridrodaka’fis,  literally,  ‘turmeric  water.’  It  may  mean  either  the  infusion  or  the 
decoction  of  turmeric,  or  water  in  which  turmeric  reduced  to  paste  has  been  dissolved.  It  is 
difficult  to  ascertain  which  of  these  is  implied  here.  The  colour  meant  is  yellowish, — T, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


967 


or  to  sexual  indulgence, 
or  to  physical  exercises, 

or  to  the  use  of  emetics,  or  purgatives,  or  enemeta,  or  cerebral 
purgatives, 

or  to  the  suppression  of  the  urgings  o£  stools  and  urine, 
or  to  fasts,  34 

as  also  of  one  who  has  received  wounds, 
or  of  one  who  exposes  oneself  to  the  heat  of  the  sun, 
or  of  one  who  is  afflicted  by  anxieties  or  grief, 
or  of  one  who  suffers  loss  of  blood,* * * § 
or  is  addicted  to  night-keeping, 

or  who  suffers  his  body  or  limbs  to  be  disposed  in  uneven 
attitudes, 

the  wind  speedily  becomes  excited,  if  the  physical  organism  be  of 
the  condition  already  described. f  35 
When  the  wind,  becoming  excited  in  a  body  of  the  condition 
already  described,  begins  to  travel  and  seizes  the  fat  and  reaches  the 
urine-bearing  ducts,  it  then  generates  what  is  called  ‘fat-born  meha.’  36 
When  the  wind,  thus  excited,  forces  the  marrow  into  the  urine¬ 
bearing  ducts,  it  generates  what  is  called  ‘marrow-born  meha.’]  37 
When  the  excited  wind,  bearing  the  ‘dhatu’  called  ‘Lasika,’  into 
the  urinary  ducts,  causes  the  urine  to  flow  obstructedly,  and  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  abundance,  in  measure,  of  the  said  ‘Lasika,’  and  its 
own  mobility,  it  verily  induces,  in  a  person  whose  body  is  in  the 
aforesaid  condition,  a  tendency  towards  copious  urination  accompan¬ 
ied  by  that  for  retention,  then  the  person,  like  an  elephant  in  rut 
continually  passes  urine  without  feeling  any  urging  for  it. 

Such  a  person  is  said  to  be  afflicted  with  ‘Hasti-meha.’§  38 


*  ‘Qonitabhisheka’  is,  literally,  blood-letting.  It  includes  both  the  surgical  operation 
for  letting  out  blood,  and  extraction  of  blood  through  other  means,  such  as  the  application  of 
leeches,  &c.— T. 

t  ‘Tathabidhagarira  &c’  implies  that  condition  of  the  body  which  has  been  described  in 
aphorisms  5  and  6,  ante ,  of  this  Lesson. — T. 

t  The  correct  reading  is  ‘mutravastau’  and  not  ‘mutram  vastau.’  The  compound  Mutra- 
vasti’  implies  the  urinary  ducts  and  vessels. — T. 

§  There  seems  to  be  some  error  or  omission  in  this  aphorism.  ‘Lasika’  is,  as  explained 
in  a  foot-note,  ante,  of  this  Lesson,  the  watery  substance  which  lies  between  the  skin  and  the 
flesh.  At  the  outset  it  is  said  that  when  the  excited  wind  bears  the  ‘Lasika’  to  the  kidneys,  it 
causes  an  obstructed  flow  of  the  urine  ;  that  is,  the  urine,  instead  of  flowing  freely,  is  obstructed 
now  and  then.  Then  comes  the  statements  about  the  copious  measure  of  ‘Lasika’  and  the 


968 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  ojas  is  naturally  of  a  sweet  taste.  The  excited  wind,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  its  dryness,  seizes  it  and  converts  its  taste  from  sweetness 
into  astringency.  When  the  wind,  thus  transforming  the  ojas,  bears 
it  into  the  urinary  ducts,  the  result  is  the  generation  of  what  is  called 
‘Madhu-meha,’*  39 

These  four  varieties  of  Meha,  that  are  born  of  the  wind,  are  said 
to  be  incurable  in  consequence  of  their  becoming  fatal  very  soon,  as 
also  of  the  hostile  character  of  the  treatment  that  requires  to  be 
followed. 

As  in  the  case  of  those  varieties  of  the  disease  which  are  born  of 
the  phlegm  and  the  bile,  the  designations  of  the  wind-born  varieties 
of  Meha  are  derived  from  the  distinctive  attributes  of  the  wind. 

They  are  as  follow :  i.  ‘Vasa-meha,’  2.  ‘Majja-meha,’  3.  ‘Hasti- 
meha,’  and  4.  ‘Madhu-meha.’f  4° 


mobile  character  of  the  wind.  The  former  tends  to  increase  the  measure  of  the  urine,  while 
the  latter  has  a  tendency  to  restrict  the  continuous  flow,  in  other  words,  to  cause  obstruction 
in  the  flow.  ‘Asya’ — of  this  person — implies  one  whose  body  is  in  the  condition  described  in 
aphorisms  5  and  6,  ante ,  of  this  Lesson.  ‘Atimutrapravritti  sangam,’  as  explained  by  Ganga- 
dhara,  is  a  conjunctive  compound  (samahara  dwanda).  ‘Mutrapravritti’  is  tendency  to  urinate  ; 
while  ‘sanga’  is  tendency  to  restrict  or  or  retain  the  urine  from  flowing.  In  the  concluding 
portion  it  is  said  that  the  person  passes  urine  like  an  elephant  in  rut,  that  is,  ‘ajasram,’  which 
implies  ‘continually’  or  ‘ceaselessly.’  Further,  that  flow  is  characterised  as  ‘avegam,’  that  is, 
without  experiencing  any  urging  to  urinate.  -The  question  arises  that  if  the  flow  be  conti¬ 
nuous  and  characterised  by  an  absence  of  urging,  what  becomes  of  the  ‘anubandha’  or  ‘sanga,’ 
that  is,  obstruction,  referred  to  in  the  previous  portions  ?  Hence,  it  is  evident  that  there  is 
some  error  in  the  passage  which  the  commentators  do  not  clear  up.  In  ‘Nidana’ — a  much 
Jater  work  than  Charaka,  ‘Hasti-meha’  is  described  as  characterised  by  a  flow  that  is  conti¬ 
nuous,  with  obstructions  at  intervals.  In  other  words,  the  urine,  while  flowing,  is  passed 
unobstructedly  for  some  time  ;  then  it  ceases  outright  or  is  passed’  in  drops.  This  does  not 
appear  from  Charaka’s  description.  There  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  in  ‘Hasti-meha’  there 
is  obstruction  at  times,  although  the  flow  may  be  copious  and  continuous  for.  some  time. — T. 

*  Gangadhara  explains  this  aphorism  incorrectly.  In  fact,  it  is  difficult  to  gather  his 
meaning.  I  think,  the  above  correctly  represents  the  sense. 

t  A  disease  is  called  ‘atyayika’  when  it  produces  fatal  results  without  delay.  The  several 
varieties  of  wind-born  Meha  are  greatly  ‘atyayika.’  The  commentators  explain  that  this  is 
so  because  of  the  importance  of  the  ‘dhatus’  or  ingredients  affected  by  these  varieties  of  Meha. 
These  ‘dhatus’  are  ‘vasa,’  ‘majja,’  ‘Lasika,’  and  ‘ojas,’  every  one  of  which  is  essentially 
serviceable  in  keeping  up  the  physical  organism. 

The  treatment  is,  again,  hostile,  for  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  phlegm  must  be 
excited  before  there  can  be  any  variety  of  Meha.  In  the  wind-born  varieties,  therefore,  both 
the  phlegm  and  the  wind  have  to  be  attended  to.  The  administration  of  oils  and  oily  drugs 
is  needed  for  alleviating  the  excited  phlegm  :  again,  dry  drugs  and  operations  are  needed. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


969 


Here  occur  verses  which  explain  the  distinctions  between  the 
several  varieties  of  wind-born  Prameha.  41 

That  person  who,  in  consequence  of  the  provocation  of  the  wind, 
frequently  passes  urine  that  is  mixed  with  fat  and  whose  colour  is 
like  that  of  fat,  is  regarded  as  afflicted  with  ‘Vasa-meha’  which  is 
incurable.*  42 

That  person  who,  in  consequence  of  the  provocation  of  the  wind, 
frequently  passes  urine  that  is  accompanied  by  marrow,  is  regarded 
as  afflicted  with  ‘Majja-meha’  which  is  incurable.^  43 

He  who,  in  consequence  of  the  provocation  of  the  wind,  repeatedly, 
like  an  elephant  in  rut,  passes  urine  in  copious  quantities,  is  regarded 
as  afflicted  with  ‘Hasti-meha’  which  is  incurable.^  44 

That  person  who,  in  consequence  of  the  provocation  of  the  wind, 
passes  urine  that  is  astringent  and  sweet  in  taste,  pale  in  colour,  and 
dry,  should  be  known  as  afflicted  with  ‘Madhu-meha,’  which  is  in¬ 
curable.  45 

Thus  have  been  explained  the  four  varieties  of  Prameha  having 
the  provocation  of  the  wind  for  their  cause.  46 

All  the  twenty  varieties  of  Prameha  born  of  all  the  three  faults 
have  thus  been  explained.  47 

When  the  three  faults,  becoming  provoked,  generate  Prameha, 
they  manifest  the  following  incubatory  symptoms  : 

They  are  as  follow  : 

The  hair  on  the  head  becomes  matted  ; 

The  presence  is  felt  of  a  sweet  taste  in  the  mouth  ; 

A  burning  numbness  and  burning  sensation  in  the  palms  and  soles 
of  the  feet ; 

Dryness  of  the  mouth,  the  palate,  and  the  throat ; 

Thirst  (unslaked  by  even  repeated  draughts  of  water)  ; 

Slothfulness  of  disposition  ; 

Appearance  of  filth  on  the  body  ; 


Hence,  the  means  employed  for  alleviating  the  wind  are  provocative  of  the  phlegm,  and  those 
employed  for  alleviating  the  phlegm  are  provocative  of  the  wind. — T. 

*  Gangadhara  has  ‘mutram  mehati’  in  the  first  line.  This  seems  to  be  vicious.  The  cor¬ 
rect  reading,  as  given  in  some  texts,  is  ‘muhurmehati,’  that  is,  ‘passes  urine  frequently.’ _ T. 

t  The  first  line  of  this  verse  would  convince  every  one  that  ‘muhurmehati’  and  not 

‘mutram  mehati,’  is  the  correct  reading.  ‘Saha-mutrena  mutramehati’  is  un-Rishilike. _ T. 

J  ‘Ajasram’  is  repeatedly,  or  frequently,  or  ceaselessly. 

‘Bhrisam’  implies  ‘copious  quantities.’ — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


9;o 

Closing  of  the  pores  by  a  coating  of  the  filth  ; 

Burning  of  the  body  and  numbness  of  the  limbs  ; 

Pursuit  of  the  body  and  the  urine  by  flies  and  ants  ; 

Presence,  in  the  urine  passed,  of  the  faults  of  the  urine  ; 

The  odor  of  raw  meat  in  the  body  ;  and 

Sleep  and  drowsiness  at  all  hours  of  the  day.  48 

The  supervening  symptoms  of  those  that  are  afflicted  with  Pra- 
meha  are  thirst,  fever  with  diarrhoea,  burning  of  the  body,  weakness, 
disgust  for  food,  and  indigestion. 

Rotting  of  the  flesh,  pimples  and  other  eruptions  of  the  kind  on 
the  body,  inflammation  of  the  eye  at  the  edge  of  the  cornea,  deep- 
seated  abscesses,  and  abscesses  of  other  kinds,  also  manifest  them¬ 
selves  in  connection  with  Prameha.  49 

Amongst  the  several  varieties  of  Prameha  those  that  are  curable 
should  be  treated  by  administering,  as  each  case  may  deserve,  cor¬ 
rectives  and  alleviatives.  5° 

( Here  occur  some  verses ). 

Like  a  bird  which  prefers  a  tree  of  small  stature  (to  a  high  one), 
the  disease  called  Prameha  soon  assails  a  person  who  greedily  takes 
to  food  and  drink  and  who  is  reluctant  to  bathe  and  walk  or 
saunter.*  51 

Death,  approaching  in  the  form  of  Prameha,  speedily  carries  off 
one  who  has  little  activity  or  energy,  who  is  obese  and  oleaginous,  and 
who  takes  large  quantities  of  food.  52 

That  man  who  takes  such  food  as  conduces  to  the  harmony  of  the 
body,  and  who  engages  in  diverse  kinds  of  acts,  enjoys  happiness.!  53 

( Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary). 

The  causes  relating  to  the  distinctions  of  ‘Hetu’  (or  Nidana),  as  also 
of  the  disease  in  general,  and  of  the  different  varieties  of  Prameha, 


*  The  preference  of  birds  for  trees  of  small  stature  seems  to  be  fanciful.  At  any  rate, 
there  is  no  doubt  that  Prameha  assails  those  men  quickly  who  are  greedy  in  respect  of  food 
and  drink,  and  who  lead  sedentary  lives,  bathing  rarely  and  seldom  taking  physical  exercise 
of  any  kind. 

‘Chankramana’  is  sauntering,  that  is,  walking  about  without  purpose,  for  only  the  sake  of 
the  exercise  it  involves.— T. 

f  ‘Engages  in  diverse  kinds  of  acts,’  that  is,  leads  a  life  of  activity.  ‘Enjoys  happiness,’ 
that  is,  the  happiness  of  health.  Such  a  man  is  never  assailed  by  Prameha.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA, 


97  * 

the  connection  between  the  faults  (viz.,  wind,  bile  and  phlegm),  and 
the  particular  ‘dhatus’  or  ingredients  of  the  body, 
the  diverse  symptoms  that  are  manifested, 

that  from  which  are  the  ten  phlegm-born  varieties  of  Prameha, 
and  the  six  bile-born  ones, 

the  manner  in  which  the  wind,  when  it  becomes  endued  with 
might,  generates  the  four  varieties  of  Prameha, 
the  distinctions  about  curability  and  incurability, 
the  incubatory  indications,  and 
the  supervening  symptoms, 

have  all  been  explained  in  this  Lesson  on  the  Nidana  of  Prameha, 
together  with  the  aphorisms  about  treatment.*  I-3 
Thus  ends  Lesson  IV,  called  ‘Prameha-Nidana,’  in  the  treatise  of 
Agnivega  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  V. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Nidana  of  ‘Kushtha’  or  Skin-diseases. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  i 

Of  all  kinds  of  skin-diseases,  seven  things,  whose  nature  becomes 
vitiated,  are  the  causes.  2 

They  are  as  follow  : 

The  three  faults,  viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  vitiated  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  provocation. 

The  four  ingredients  of  the  body,  viz.,  skin,  flesh,  blood,  and 
‘Lasika’  (or  the  watery  substance  between  the  skin  and  the  flesh). 
These  are  the  ‘dushyas’  which  become  vitiated  owing  to  the  assault 
upon  them  of  the  ‘doshas.’ 

These  are  the  seven  elements  which,  when  they  happen  to  be  in 
such  a  state,  become  the  originating  causes  of  all  skin-diseases. 


*  The  causes  relating  to  the  distinctions  of  ‘Hetu’  as  also  of  the  disease  in  general  are  laid 
down  in  aphorisms  3  and  4  ;  the  causes  of  the  different  varieties  of  ‘Prameha’  are  laid  down 
in  aphorisms  5  and  6.  The  connection  between  the  faults  and  the  ‘dhatus’  is  explained  in 
aphorism  7  ;  in  the  latter  part  of  the  same  aphorism  occur  the  diverse  symptoms  that  are 
manifested.  That  from  which  are  the  ten  phlegm-born  varieties  is  explained  in  8  and  the 
following  aphorisms. 

As  regards  the  rest,  it  is  not  necessary  to  say  anything. — T. 


123 


ClIARAKArSAMHITA. 


9f? 


From  jthese  originating  causes  the  diverse  varieties  of  skin-disease 
that  arise  burn  the  whole  body. 

There  is  no  variety  of  skin-di$ease  that  arises  from  the  proypca- 
tion  of  only  one  fault.* * * §  3 

Of  skin-diseases,  though  their  nature  is  the  same,  yet  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  distinctions  with  respect  to  the  measure  of  the  ‘doshas,’ 
intensity,  combination,  and  seat,  there  are  distinctions  in  respect  of 
the  pain  they  inflict,  their  .colour,  form,  name,  effects,  and  treatment-t't 

Leprosy  is  of  seven  varieties,  or  eighteen,  or  of  innumerable 
varieties.!  5 

The  modifications  of  the  measure  in  which  the  faults  are  excited 
determine  all  the  modifications  (or  varieties)  of  the  disease  other  than 
incurability. 

Beholding  the  unlimited  number  that  results  in  counting  the 
varieties  of  the  disease  that  are  determined  by  the  modifications  of 
the  measure  in  which  the  faults  may  be  excited,  we  shall  here  expound 
only  seven  varieties  of  the  disease.  §  6 

In  this  matter,  although  in  all  varieties  of  Leprosy  the  three  faults 
are  excited  and  the  skin  and  three  others  ( vis .,  flesh,  blood,  and 
‘Lasika’)  are  vitiated,  yet  in  consequence  of  the  wind  predominating 
in  it,  a  Special  variety  of  the  disease  arises,  called  ‘Kapala.’  7 


*  What  the  Rishi  intends  to  lay  down  is  this  :  all  the  seven  Moshas.’  and  ‘dushyas1  must 
combine  before  any  variety  of  skin-disease  can  be  generated.  — T. 

t  It  has  been  said  that' all  varieties  of  ‘Kushtha’  or  skin-disease  are  caused  by  the  vitiation 
of  the  seven  ‘doshas’  and  ‘dushyas.’  One  may,  from  this,  argue  that  when  there  is  similarity 
or  uniformity  in  respect  of  cause,  all  the  varieties  of  the  disease  should  be  of  the  same  ‘prakriti’ 
or  nature.  To  guard  against  this  error,  the  Rishi  lays  down  that  the  originating  causes  differ 
in  respect  of  the  particular  measure  of  the  excitement  of  the  ^doshas,’  the  measure  of 
intensity,  &c. 

Thus  in  one  variety,  the  wind  may  be  more  provoked  than  the  bile  and  the  phlegm. 
In  another,  the  bile  may  be  more  provoked  than  the  others.  These  differences  lead  to  differ¬ 
ences  in  the  measure  of  pain  which  the  varieties  of  the  disease  inflict,  the  colour  which  the 
eruptions  assume,  &c. — T. 

t  Taking  into  consideration  the  degrees  in  which  the  faults  are  excited,  the  seats  of  the 
disease,  the  measure  of  intensity  of  the  pain,  &c.,  the  disease  is  regarded  as  either  of  seven, 
or  of  eighteen,  or,  indeed,  of  innumerable  varieties. — T. 

§  I  giye  the  sense  only  of  the  first  portion  of  the  aphorism  without  reproducing  the  pleo¬ 
nasms  occuring  in  it.  The  limitation  involved  in  ‘other  than  incurability’  means  this  :  many 
varieties  of  the  disease  are  incurable.  Incurability,  therefore,  is  a  common  incident  charac¬ 
terising  many  varieties.  If  curability  and  incurability  be  considered,  there  would  then  be 
only  two  varieties  of  the  disease. — T. 


cHAraka-samhit A. 


9>3 


When;  the  bile  predominates,  th’e  variety  is  caffed  ‘Audumvara.’  8 
When  it  is  the  phlegm  that  predominates,  the  variety  Is  called 
‘Mandate.’  9 

When  the  wind  and  the  bile  both  predominate,  the  variety  is 
called  ‘Rishyajihbham.’  10 

When  the  bile  and  the  phlegm  predominate,  the  variety  is  named 
‘Pundarika.’  11 

When  the  phlegm  and  the  wind  predominate,  the  variety  is  known 
by  the  narft'e  of  ‘Sidhma-.’  12 

When  all  the  faults  are  excited  in  an  intense  degree,  the  variety 
is  called  ‘Kakanaka.’  r3 

Thus  does  Leprosy  come  to  be  classed  under  seven  heads.  H 
These  seven  varieties,  again,  become  many  in  consequence  of  the 
diverse  degrees  of  Intensity  of  the  nature  of  the  disease  as  determined 
by  the  measure  in  which  the  faults  are  excited:  is 

We  shall  here  expound,  in  brief,  the  causes  of  all  the  varieties  of 
Leprosy. 

Of  one'  who  indulges  In  cooling  and  heating  operations  in  a  man¬ 
ner  that  is  contrary  to  what  the  faults  require,* 

or  who  indulges  in  practices  in  respect  of  ‘Santarpana’  and  ‘Apa- 
farpana’  in  a  contrary  way,f 

of  one  who  always  takes  In  excessive  measure  such  articles  as 
honey,  thin  treacle,  fish,  radishes,  and  Solanmn  nigrum , 
or  wbo  eats  before  the  food  test  taken  has  been  digested, 
or  who  takes  fish  of  the  variety  called  ‘chilichima’  (a  species  of 
sprat)  along  with  milk, 

or  who  takes  food  in  which  such  rice  predominates  as  is  obtained 
from  the  species  of  paddy  known  as  ‘Hayanaka,’  ‘Yavaka,’ 
‘Chinaka,’  ‘Koddalaka,’  and  ‘Koradushaka,’  mixed  with  milk, 
curds,  whay,  jujubes,  and  such  pulses  as  Dolichos  biflorus  and 


*  ‘Mala’  here  is  used  as  a  substitute  for  ‘dosha’  or  fault.  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  when 
the  bile  is  excited,  cooling  operations  are  necessary.  If,  however,  one,  at  such  a  time, 
indulges'  in  heating  operations  instead  of  cooling  ones,  one  proceeds  in  a  contrary  way. 
So  when  one’s  wind  or  phlegm  is  excited,  one  requires  heating  operations.  If,  however, 
one  at  such  a  time  indulges  in  cooling  operations,  one  acts  in  a  contrary  way.— T. 

+  For  ‘Santarpana’  and  ‘Apatarpana,’  vide  Lesson  XXIII,  ante,  Sutrasthana.  The 
former  means  indulgence  in  oily  and  nourishing  food  and  drink  and  such  practices  as  promote 
corpulence,  &c.  The  latter  means  fasts  and  other  practices  by  which  over-growth  or  the 
evils  of  th'e;  former  may- be  got -rid  of— T. 


974 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Phaseolus  radiatus,  linseeds,  safflower,  the  fruits  of  Grewia  Asia- 
tica ,  and  oils, 

of  one  who,  after  taking  the  above  articles  in  an  excessive  mea¬ 
sure,  indulges  largely  in  sexual  congress,  physical  exercisesj'&nd 
exposure  to  the  heat  of  the  sun  or  of  fire, 

of  one  who  is  afflicted  by  fear,  toil,  and  grief 

of  one  who  suddenly  plunges  into  cold  water, 

of  one  who  takes  food  which  produces  a  burning  sensation  in  the 
stomach,  at  a  time  when  the  food  last  taken  has  not  been 
digested, 

of  one  who  checks  the  urgings  of  vomiting, 

after  the  appearance  of  these  symptoms,  Leprosy  manifests 
itself.  r7 

The  pains,  colour,  sites,  intensity,  and  names  by  which  the  several 
varieties  of  Leprosy  are  distinguished,  are  as  follow  : 

Those  varieties  of  Leprosy  should  be  known  by  the  name  of 
‘Kapala-kushtha’  which  present  these  symptoms,  viz.,  dryness  ;  red¬ 
ness  ;  roughness  ;  inequality  in  the  manner  of  spreading  over  the 
body  ;  ■  sharp  edgedness  ;  thinness  ;*  elevation  in  the  middle  with 
depression  all  around  ;  total  absence  of  sensibility  ;  horripilation  all 
over  the  body,  excessive  pain  of  a  piercing  character ;  absence  of 
intensity  in  respect  of  itching,  burning,  and  the  discharge  of  pus  or 
other  foetid  matter,  and  ‘Lasika’ ;  quickness  in  the  matter  of  appear¬ 
ance  and  spreading  ;  presence  of  worms  that  pierce  the  skin  and  flesh 
quickly  ;f  and  complexion  that  is  dark,  or  red,  or  like  that  of  baked 
earth.  18 

Those  varieties  of  Leprosy  should  be  known  by  the  name  of 
‘Audumvara-kushtha’  which  have  the  following  symptoms  ; 

They  are  of  a  coppery  hue  ; 

The  eruptions  are  many  in  number ; 

They  are  covered  with  hair  of  a  coppery  hue  ; 

There  is  copious  emission  of  blood  and  pus  and  ‘Lasika’  from 
them  ; 

They  are  characterised  by  itching,  filth,  slough,  suppuration,  and 
burning ; 


*  Meaning,  probably,  the  absence  of  confluence  on  the  part  of  the  spots  or  marks,  viz. , 
their  character  of  standing  apart  from  one  another. — T. 

t  The  correct  reading  is  ‘a$ubhedajantumanti,’  and  not  ‘a$ubhedini’  and  ‘jantumanti’. _ T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


975 


They  appear  and  spread  and  burst  quickly. 

They  are  hot  to  the  touch,  and  full  of  worms  ;  and 
Their  complexion  is  like  that  of  the  ripe  fruit  of  Ficus glomerata.  1 9 
Those  varieties  of  Leprosy  should  be  known  by  the  name  of 
‘Mandala-kushtha’  which  present  the  following  symptoms  : 

They  are  oily,  and  heavy,  and  swollen  ; 

Their  edges  are  smooth  and  hard  and  elevated  ; 

Of  one  who  takes  in  excess  medicated  oils  and  ghees,  the  three 
faults  become  simultaneously  excited,  and  the  skin  and  the  three 
other  ingredients  (viz.,  flesh,  blood,  and  ‘Lasika’)  become  loose.* 

When  these  lose  their  compactness,  the  faults,  becoming  provoked, 
seize  particular  parts  of  the  body  and  remaining  there,  vitiate  the 
skin  and  the  rest,  and  cause  the  several  varieties  of  Leprosy.  2° 

The  following  are  the  incubatory  symptoms  of  the  several  varie¬ 
ties  of  Leprosy : 

The  total  absence  of  perspiration  ;  or 
The  appearance  of  copious  perspiration  ; 

Hardness  of  the  skin  ;  or 
Excessive  oiliness  of  the  skin  ; 

Loss  of  (the  usual)  colour  or  complexion  ; 

An  itching  sensation ; 

Pain  like  to  what  is  produced  by  pricking  a  person  with  a  hundred 
needles  ; 

Loss  of  the  sense  of  touch  (meaning  the  inability  of  the  skin  to 
receive  impressions  of  touch)  ; 

Burning  sensation  in  every  part  of  the  body  ; 

Tickling  sensation  in  the  body  ; 

Horripilation  ; 

Roughness  of  the  skin  ; 

Heat  of  the  body  ; 

Sensation  of  the  heaviness  of  the  body  ; 

Appearance  of  swellings  on  the  body  ; 

Constant  appearance  of  erysipelas  ; 

Appearance  of  superincumbent  growths  on  the  pores  of  the 
body 

Excessive  pain  in  any  part  of  the  body  that  ripens  (suppurates), 


*  I.  e.,  lose  their  compactness. — T. 
t  ‘Upadeha,’  and  not  ‘upadaha,’  is  the  correct  reading. 


m 


CHAKAKA -  SAM  HIT  A. 


or  that  is  burnt  or  bitten,  or  that  has  got  &  sore,  and  similar  pain 
when  the  person  falls'  down 

Conversion'  into'  malignancy  of  even  simple  pimples  and  eruptions 
and  the  absence  of  elevation  in  these  eruptions. 

Those  varieties  of  Leprosy  should  be  known  by  the  name  of 
‘Mandala’  which  have  the  following  Symptoms  : 

They  are  oily,  extended,  and  elevated- ; 

They  are  smoothv  hard,,  and  of  edges  more  elevated  than  the 
internal  surface; 

They  are  whiter  with'  a-  sUgfet  reddish-  gloss  ; 

They  are  covered  with  white  hairs 

The1  discharges  from  them  are-  copious;-  continuous,  white;-  bloody, 
and  slimy;- 

They  abound'  with  worms  and  itch-  constantly  ; 

They  spread,  rise,  and  burst  slowly  ; 

They  are  circular  in  shape.  21 

Those  varieties  of  Leprosy  should  be'  known  by  the  name  of 
‘Hrishyajihbha’  which  have  the  following  symptoms'  i 

They  are  rough  and  of  a  red  hue:  as  regard's  their-  edges 
As  regards  the  portion  within  the  exterior  boundary  line;  they  are 
of  a  dark,  or  blue,  or  yellow,  or  coppery  gloss: 

Their' spread  and  rise’ are:  quick'  f 

They  have  not  many  worms  and  do  not  itch  much  ; 

They  are’  characterised  by  excessive  burning;-  and:  piercing'  pain 
also  in  excess,  and  their  bursting’  is  frequent- 
They  are  accompanied  by  pains' that-  resemble  what  is'  caused  by 
the  bristles  of  a  ‘£uka.’ 

Their  interior  surface  is  elevated,  the  edges  being  depressed1 
They  are  covered  with  hard  pimples  ; 

Their  surfaces  being  extended,  their  boundary  lines:  afe:  large; 22 
Those  varieties  of  Leprosy  should  be  known  by  the'  name  of  Thin- 
darika’  which  have  the  following  symptottis  :' 

They  have  a  white  and  red  gloss  ; 

Their  edges1  are  red  ;' 

They  are  overspread  with  numerous  red  nerves  ; 

They  are  elevated1  above  the  sUrface  of  the  skin  ; 

The  discharge  of  blood  and  pus  and-  ‘Lasika’  from  them  is  copious 
.  and  continuous  ; 

They  abound  with  worms ;  and  they  itch  and  burn  ; 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


9  77 


Their  rise,  spread,  and  bursting  are  quick  ; 

Their  colour  is  like  that  of  the  petals  of  the  lotus.  23 

Those  varieties  of  Leprosy  should  be  known  as  ‘Siddhma’  which 
have  the  following  symptoms  : 

Their  edges  are  rough,  of  a  red  hue,  and  shrunk  ; 

Their  surfaces  are  thin  (that  is,  they  are  not  elevated) ; 

Their  inner  surfaces  are  oily  ; 

They  have  a  white  and  red  gloss  ; 

They  appear  densely  on  the  body  ; 

The  pains  they  cause  are  slight ; 

They  do  not  itch  and  burn  much,  and  the  discharge  of  pus  and 
‘Lasika’  from  them  is- not  much  ; 

Their  rise  and  growth  are  rapid  ; 

They  do  not  abound  with  worms,  and  they  do  not  burst  much  ; 

Their  colour  is  like  that  of  the  flowers  of  Cucurbita  lagenaria.  24 

Those  varieties  of  Leprosy  should  be  known  as  ‘Kakanaka’  which 
have  the  following  symptoms  : 

They  are  of  the  colour  of  the  fruit  of  Abrus  precatorius  at  the 
outset ; 

Subsequently  the  symptoms  of  all  other  varieties  of  Leprosy 
manifest  themselves  ; 

In  consequence  of  the  manifestation  of  the  symptoms  of  all  the 
varieties  of  Leprosy,  those  sinful  wretches  that  have  it  discover  vari¬ 
ous  colours  on  their  bodies.  25 

These  (viz.,  the  varieties  known  as  ‘Kakanaka’)  are  incurable.  The 
others  (viz.,  the  preceding  six)  are  curable. 

Those  varieties  that  are  incurable  never  transcend  incurabjity,* 

Those,  again,  that  are  curable,  sometimes  transcend  curability  in 
consequence  of  the  patient’s  indulgence  in  baneful  or  forbidden 
practices, f 

Excepting  the  ‘Kakanaka’  varieties,  the  six  other  varieties  of 
Leprosy  which  are  curable  become  incurable  in  consequence  of  indul¬ 
gence  in  baneful  (or  forbidden)  practices  and  through  complications 
caused  by  excessive  excitement  of  the  faults.  27 

Of  these  varieties,  which  are  curable,  one  feature,  if  they  are 
suffered  to  remain  untreated,  is  that  worms  are  generated  in  the 


=1=  I.  e.,  never  become  curable. — T. 
t  I.  e.  become  incurable. — T. 


978 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


rotting  skin,  flesh,  blood,  ‘Lasika,’  gangrenous  sloughs  ,  foetid  secre¬ 
tions,  and  sweat. 

These  worms  living  upon  the  rotten  matter,  and  the  faults  them¬ 
selves  becoming  more  excited  and  vitiating  the  system,  produce  the 
following  supervening  symptoms  of  separate  classes.*  28 

Amongst  the  several  faults,  the  wind  produces  a  dark  and  red 
colour,  as  also  roughness,  dryness,  excessive  pain  ;  inflammatory  swell¬ 
ing,  piercing  pains,  tremours,  horripilation,  contraction,  distension, 
stupefaction,  numbness,  bursting,  and  breaking. 

The  bile  produces  a  burning  sensation,  copious  perspiration,  foetid 
secretions,  gangrene,  itching,  watery  discharges,  suppuration,  and  red¬ 
ness  of  hue. 

The  phlegm  produces  coolness,  whiteness  of  colour,  itching,  hard¬ 
ness,  extendedness,  elevation,  oiliness,  and  slough. 

As  regards  the  worms,  they  eat  up  the  bone,  beginning  with  skin,f 
the  nerves,  the  sinews,  and  soft  bones.  39 

In  this  condition  the  following  symptoms  assail  the  patient : 

They  are, — 

Discharge  of  secretions ; 

Bursting  of  the  affected  parts  ; 

Falling  off.  of  limbs  ; 

Thirst,  fever,  diarrhoea,  burning,  weakness,  disgust  for  food,  and 
indigestion. 

When  the  disease  presents  such  indications,  it  becomes  incurable.  3° 
( Here  occur  some  verses.) 

That  man  who  neglects  a  disease  at  the  outset,  thinking  it  to  be 
curable,  awakens,  after  the  lapse  of  a  short  time,  to  the  conviction 
that  he  is  already  dead.  31 

He  (on  the  other  hand)  who  has  recourse  to  adequate  medicaments 
before  the  manifestation  of  diseases  as  also  while  diseases  are  new¬ 
born,  enjoys  happiness  for  a  long  while.  32 

Even  a  young  tree  may  be  cut  down  with  little  labour  ;  but  it  re¬ 
quires  great  exertipns  to  cut  it  down  when  it  attains  to  full  growth,  23 
after  the  same  manner,  disease,  when  young,  admits  of  easy  cure, 


*  /.  e.  the  wind,  the  bile,  and  the  phlegm  produce  separate  kinds  of  supervening  symp¬ 
toms,  as  is  explained  in  the  aphorisms  that  follow. — T. 
t  I.  e.  skin,  flesh,  blood,  and  ‘Lasika.’ 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


979 


but  when  it  gains  in  vigour,  it  is  cured  with  difficulty  or  becomes 
incurable.  33 

( Here  is  a  verse  containing  a  summary ). 

Numbers,  articles,  faults,  causes,  incubatory  manifestations,  symp¬ 
toms,  and  supervening  in  dications  of  the  several  varieties  of  Leprosy, 
have  been  set  forth,  under  several  heads,  in  the  Nidana  of  Kushthas.’*i 
Thus  ends  Lesson  V,  called  ‘Kushtha-Nidana’  in  the  Division 
called  Chikitsita,  of  the  treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  VI.  ; 

We  shall  now  expound  the  ‘Nidana’  of  Phthisis. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  i 

It  should  first  be  observed  that  there  are  four  principal  causes  of 
Phthisis. 

They  are  I.  acts  of  rashness,  2.  suppression  (of  the  urgings  of 
stools,  urine,  &c.),  3.  loss  (or  waste)  of  the  ingredients  of  the  body, 
and  4.  food  consisting  of  inharmonious  elements. 

We  shall  now,  in  this  connection,  expound  what  acts  of  rashness 
are  which  have  been  declared  to  be  one  of  the  causes  of  Phthisis. 

When  a  man,  who  has  become  enfeebled,  wrestles  or  fights  with 
one  of  superior  strength,  or  wields  a  large  bow,  or  indulges  in  loud 
talk,  or  bears  heavy  weights,  or  swims  long  distances  in  water,  or 
suffers  his  body  to  be  severely  pressed  with  the  feet,  of  another, f  or 
runs  with  speed  for  a  long  distance,  or  is  violently  struck  (with  sticks, 
brickbats,  &c.),  or  does  any  other  act,  amongst  the  .  numerous  exer¬ 
cises  of  strength,  of  a  like  nature  and  that  is  excessively  opposed  to 
what  is  normal,  one’s  chest  undergoes  a  great  strain  in  consequence 
of  such  disproportionate  exertion,  with  the  result  that  the  chest,  suf- 


*  Sankhya’  means  number.  Hence  it  implies  the  several  varieties  of  the  disease,  or  the 
classes  under  which  it  is  distributed. 

‘Dravya,’  meaning  articles,  implies  such  articles  as  produce  the  disease. — T. 
t  The  correct  reading,  it  seems,  is  ‘Utsadanam  padaghatanena  va  &c.’  Gangadhara 
-explains  it  correctly,  but  the  vernacular  translators  miss  the  sense.  The  fact  is,  there  are  men 
who  cause  their  bodies  to  be  pressed  or  trodden  repeatedly  with  the  feet  of  strong  individuals, 
They  wish  to  make  their  bodies  hard. 

124 


980 


charaka-samhita. 


fering  from  the  injuries  of  the  strain,  becomes  overwhelmed  by  the 
wind. 

The  wind,  stationed  there,  assails  the  phlegm  dwelling  in  the 
chest,  and  vitiates  the  bile  also.  It  then  moves  upwards,  downwards, 
and  in  transverse  directions.  3 

The  portion  of  the  wind  which  enters  the  joints  of  the  body,  begets 
yawns,  relaxation  of  the  body,  and  fever. 

That  portion  which  enters  the  ‘amacaya’  liquefies  the  stools. 

The  portion  which  enters  the  heart,  causes  diverse  diseases  of 
the  chest. 

The  portion  which  enters  the  tongue  causes  disgust  for  food. 

The  portion  which  gets  into  the  throat,  begets  a  tickling  sensation 
accompanied  by  hoarseness,  and  enfeebles  the  voice. 

The  portion  which  reaches  those  ducts  which  bear  the  life-breath 
called  ‘Prana’  causes  asthma  and  catarrh  or  cold  in  the  nose. 

The  portion  which  sits  in  the  head,  assails  the  head.*  4 

Then,  in  consequence  of  the  injury  in  the  chest,  the  abnormal 
movement  of  the  wind,  and  the  tickling  sensation  accompanied  by 
hoarseness,  continued  cough  is  generated. 

The  patient  then,  in  consequence  of  that  cough,  his  chest  being 
already  wounded,  throws  out  matter  mixed  with  blood. 

In  consequence  of  the  discharge  of  blood,  a  foetid  smell  is  gene¬ 
rated  in  the  patient. 

In  this  way  the  diverse  morbid  symptoms  born  of  acts  of  rashness 
assail  the  person  who  does  these  acts.  5 

Then  the  person,  thus  assailed  by  all  these  morbid  Symptoms 
which  have  the  effect  of  drying  and  wasting  the  physical  organism, 
gradually  becomes  dry  and  wasted. 

Hence  a  person  possessed  of  intelligence,  should,  after  carefully 
surveying  his  own  strength,  set  himself  to  achieve  all  acts. 

It  is  strength  that  sustains  the  body,  and  it  is  the  body  that  sus¬ 
tains  the  person.f  6 

( Here  is  a  verse). 

One  desirous  of  protecting  one’s  life  should  avoid  all  acts  of  rash¬ 
ness.  For  the  man  that  lives  enjoys  the  desirable  fruits  of  actions.  7 


*  /.  e.,  causes  headache. 

t  'That  sustains  the  person,’— literally, 'that  is  the  root  of  the  person.’— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


981 

We  shall  now  expound  the  statement  already  made  that  suppres¬ 
sion  (of  the  urgings  of  stools,  urine,  &c.)  is  the  cause  of  Phthisis. 

When  a  man  suppresses  the  urgings,  that  have  become  pronounced, 
of  the  downward  wind,  the  stools,  and  the  urine,  in  consequence  of 
fear,  companionship,  modesty,  or  sense  of  abomination,  in  the  presence 
of  the  king  or  of  the  master,  or  before  the  feet  of  the  preceptor,  or  in 
the  midst  of  any  assembly  of  good  people,  or  of  ladies,  or  while  jour¬ 
neying  on  splendid  vehicles,  the  wind  in  his  system,  in  consequence 
of  such  suppression,  becomes  provoked.*  8 

The  wind  being  provoked,  excites  the  bile  and  the  phlegm,  and 
moves  upwards,  downwards,  and  transverse  directions. 

Then,  as  stated  before,  particular  portions  of  it,  entering  particular 
parts  of  the  body,  begets  ‘£ula’  (or  deep-seated  pains), 
or  liquefies  the  stools,  or  dries  them  up, 
or  produces  excessive  pain  in  the  sides, 
or  assails  the  shoulders, 

or  causes  a  tickling  sensation  in  the  throat  and  excessive  pain  in 
the  chest, 

or  assails  the  head  (/.  e.,  produces  head:aches), 
or  generates  cough,  asthma,  fever,  hoarseness  of  voice,  and  catarrh 
or  cold  in  the  nose.  9 

Then,  the  patient,  thus  assailed  by  these  morbid  symptoms  which 
have  the  effect  of  drying  and  wasting  the  system,  gradually  becomes 
wasted. 

Hence  the  man  that  is  possessed  of  intelligence  should  particularly 
exert  himself  in  the  matter  of  the  protection  and  well-being  of  the 


*  ‘Bhartri’  is  maintainer  or  food-giver.  Hence,  master,  employer,  &c. — T. 

‘Guru’  is  a  preceptor  or  other  senior.  Some  texts  read  ‘dyutasabham  sabhajayan  the 
the  correct  reading,  it  seems,  is  ‘anyatamam  satam  va  samajam,’  meaning  ‘any  other  assem¬ 
bly  of  good  people.’  ‘While  journeying  on  splendid  vehicles’  would  seem  to  mean  while 
riding  in  triumphal  or  other  processions,  and  while  the  man  is  the  cynosure  of  a  thousand  eyes. 
At  such  times-it  is  impossible  to  stop  the  progress  of  the  vehicle  for  answering  calls  of  nature. 

Fear  has  reference  to  the  presence  of  the  king,  the  master,  and  the  preceptor. 

‘Prasangat,’  implying  ‘from  companionship,’  has  particular  reference  to  assemblies  of  good 
or  gentle  people. 

‘Hrimattwat’  implies  ‘from  modesty  ;’  it  has  especial  reference  to  the  presence  of  ladies. 

‘Ghrinitwat,’  meaning  ‘from  sense  of  abomination.’  It  has  reference  to  dirty  or  filthy 
places.  Most  people  do  not  like  to  answer  calls  of  nature  in  filthy  places.  Some  texts  read 
‘agatani  vatamutrapurisham’  for  ‘agatan  vatamutrapurishavegam’  which  seems  to  be 
better. — T. 


0)82 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


body,  for  strength  sustains  the  body,  and  it  is  the  body  that  sustains 
the  man.*  10 

(Here  occurs  a  verse). 

Giving  up  everything  else  one  should  preserve  one’s  own  body, 
since,  in  the  absence  of  the  body,  there  is  absolute  negation  of  all 
things  in  respect  of  beings.f  11 

We  shall  now  expound  the  statement  already  made  that  waste 
(of  the  ingredients)  is  the  cause  of  Phthisis. 

When  a  man’s  heart  becomes  excessively  filled  with  grief  and  care, 

or  when  one  is  penetrated  by  malice,  anxiety,  fear,  wrath,  and 
other  similar  emotions, 

or  when  one  that  is  emaciated  betakes  oneself  to  food  and  drink 
that  are  dry, 

or  when  one  that  is  of  a  weak  constitution  totally  abstains  from 
food  or  takes  food  that  is  insufficient, 

then  the  juice  residing  in  his  heart  becomes  exhausted. 

The  person  then,  through  loss  of  that  juice,  begins  to  waste. 

If  this  state  of  the  constitution  be  not  mended  by  medicaments, 
the  man  is  assailed,  as  the  Consequence  of  such  neglect,  by  phthisis 
whose  symptoms  we  lay  down.  12 

When  also  a  man,  from  excess  of  joy  or  excessive  attachment, 
betakes  himself  to  sexual  congress  with  women  in  an  excessive  mea¬ 
sure,  his  semen,  in  consequence  of  such  excessive  indulgence  in  sexual 
pleasure,  becomes  wasted. 

If,  while  his  semen  is  being  thus  wasted,  his  mind  is  not  with¬ 
drawn  from  women  but,  on  the  contrary,  is  attracted  towards  them, 
then,  of  that  man  whose  mind  is  thus  firmly  set,  no  discharge  of 
semen  takes  place  when  he  unites  in  congress  with  woman,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  his  excessive  weakness. 

Of  a  person  who  thus  exerts  himself  in  sexual  intercourse,  the 
wind,  entering  the  blood-bearing  ducts  forces  out  the  blood  from 
them. 


*  ‘Yogakshema,’  literally,  means  ‘acquisition  of  things  unacquired  or  needed,  and  the 
preservation  of  things  acquired  hence,  the  sense  is  that  of  protection  or  preservation,  and 
well-being.— T. 

t  The  sense,  of  course,  of  this  is  that  embodied  beings  have  no  need  for  anything  when 
they  have  not  the  body.  All  articles  of  enjoyment  must  necessarily  cease  to  have  any  value 
to  one  whose  body  is  lost. — T. 


CHAR  AKA -SAM HIT  A. 


983 


The  forced  out  blood  possessed  of  attributes  which  agree  with 
those  of  the  wind,  enters  the  semen-bearing  ducts  (emptied)  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  the  exhaustion  of  the  semen.*  13 

Of  such  a  person,  in  consequence  of  the  waste  of  his  semen  and 
the  flow  of  blood  (into  the  semen-bearing  ducts),  the  joints  of  the 
body  become  slack. 

Dryness  also  comes  over  his  system. 

Further,  weakness  overtakes  his  body. 

The  wind  becomes  provoked. 

The  wind,  thus  provoked,  courses  through  the  dry  body  and  dries 
up  the  blood  and  flesh,  expels  the  phlegm  and  the  bile,  causes  pain 
in  the  sides,  seizes  the  shoulders,  produces  a  tickling  sensation  in  the 
throat,  and  afflicting  the  phlegm,  fills  the  head  with  it. 

Further,  the  provoked  wind,  afflicting  the  joints  of  the  body,  causes 
a  relaxation  of  the  limbs,  disgust  for  food,  and  indigestion. 

In  consequence,  again,  of  the  expulsion  of  the  phlegm  and  the 
bile,  as  also  of  its  own  abnormal  course,  the  wind  generates  fever, 
cough,  asthma,  hoarseness  of  voice,  and  catarrh  in  the  mouth  and  the 
nose.  14 

Owing  to  the  attack  of  cough,  ulceration  of  the  chest  follows  and 
the  patient  spits  blood. 

In  consequence  of  this  discharge  of  blood,  weakness  comes  over 
the  patient.  i,5 

The  patient,  thus  afflicted  by  these  morbid  afflictions  which  have 
the  effect  of  wasting  the  system,  becomes  gradually  wasted. 

Hence  the  man  endued  with  intelligence,  desiring  to  preserve  his 
body,  should  preserve  his  semen,  since  this  (viz.,  the  semen),  is  the 
highest  fructification  of  food.  16 

( Here  occurs  a  verse ). 

The  semen  is  the  highest  goal  of  food.  One  should  preserve  one’s 
semen  by  all  means.  If  the  semen  undergoes  waste,  innumerable 
diseases  result,  including  even  death. 


*  ‘Atiharsha,’  meaning  excessive  joy,  is  one  of  the  causes  that  leads  to  indulgence  in 
sexual  pleasure.  It  was  argued  by  the  advocates  of  Negro  slavery  in  America  that  when  the 
slaves  multiplied  in  every  State  at  a  rate  not  inferior  to  that  of  the  white  inhabitants,  their 
condition  c6uld  not  be  one  of  misery.  The  Abolitionists  found  great  difficulty  in  answering 
this  argument.  Burke  had,  a  generation  before,  observed  that  an  increase  of  population 
takes  place  when  the  cup  of  a  nation’s  misery  is  full.  This  =eems  o  derive  strength  from 
the  fact  that  beggar  women  have  very  generally  a  large  number  of  children.— T. 


984 


CHAR  AKA -SAM HIT  A. 


We  shall  now  expound  the  statement  made  before,  (viz.,  that  food 
consisting  of  inharmonious  ingredients  is  the  cause  of  phthisis.  *8 

When  a  man  takes  such  articles  of  food  and  drink  as  do  not  har¬ 
monise  with  ‘prakriti,’  ‘karma,’  ‘samyoga,’  ‘ragi,’  ‘dega,’  ‘kala,’  ‘upayoga- 
samstha,’  and  ‘upagaya,’  then  the  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  in  his  system 
become  vitiated.* 

When  these,  falling  off  from  their  normal  condition,  spread  over 
the  whole  body  and  remain  obstructing  the  mouths  of  the  ducts,  then 
whatever  food  the  person  takes  results  in  stools  and  urine  in  a  large 
measure. 

The  food  is  not  turned  into  any  other  ‘dhatu’  or  ingredient  of  the 
body. 

The  man  lives  on  in  consequence  only  of  that  copious  measure  of 
stools  and  urine  accumulated  in  his  system.f  »9 

Hence,  ©f  one  who  is  wasting  (i.  e.  afflicted  with  phthisis),  the  stools 
should  be  particularly  retained  in  the  system. 

The  same  should  be  done  with  respect  to  persons  that  are  emaci¬ 
ated  and  weak. 

Of  a  person  whose  growth  is  thus  prevented,  the  faults  (viz.,  wind., 
bile,  and  phlegm),  accumulated  through  inharmonious  food  and  drink 
further  waste  the  body,  bringing  in  their  train  various  morbid  afflic¬ 
tions  according  to  their  respective  natures.  20 


*  The  words  ‘prakriti,’  ‘karma,’  &c.,  are  technical  terms  in  Hindu  materia  medica.  They 
have  all  been  fully  explained  in  the  first  Lesson  of  ‘Vimanasthanam.’  ( Vide  pp.  454-457  ante). 
‘Praktiti’  is  nature ;  ‘karma,’  transmutation  ;  ‘samyoga,’  combination  ;  ragi,’  measure ;  ‘dega,’ 
place  of  origin  ;  ‘kala,’  season  and  age  ;  ‘upayogasamstha,’  conditions  of  use  }  and  ‘upagaya,’ 
otherwise  called  ‘satmya,’  is  agreement  with  the  constitution.  (For  fuller  explanation  of 
‘upagaya,’  i/fofc.Lesson  I,  ‘Vimanasthanam,’  p.  453  ante). 

‘Prakriti’  or  nature  of  food,  &c.,  has  reference,  principally,  to  heaviness  or  lightness. 
Thus  pork  is,  by  nature,  heavy,  while  the  meat  of  deer  is  light.  Venison  not  harmonising 
with  its  ‘prakriti,’  would  mean  its  condition  of  ‘vikriti’  or  vitiation. 

‘Karma,’  implies  transmutation,  i.  e.,  improvement  of  the  products  of  Nature  by  super¬ 
induction  of  other  attributes  through  the  application  of  fire  and  water,  &c.  Hence,  ‘karma’ 
would  become  ‘vishama’  or  adverse  when  sufficient  fire  or  water  is  not  used.  Inadequacy  of 
boiling,  or  over-boiling  is  hostile  to  proper  ‘karana.’  Similar  considerations  constitute 
adverseness  of  ‘samyoga’  and  the  rest. — T. 

t  It  has  been  explained  in  the  Lessons  on  food  and  drink  that  it  is  these  which  are  con¬ 
verted  into  those  ingredients  which  sustain  the  body,  viz.,  blood,  flesh,  &c.  It  should  be 
noted  that  stools  and  urine  are  also  counted  among  the  sustaining  ingredients  of  the  body.  In 
the  case  noticed,  the  food  and  drink  the  man  takes  become  converted  into  only  stools  and 
urine,  wi  hout  conversion  into  any  other  sustaining  ingredient  of  the  body.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


985 


Amongst  these,  the  wind  generates  head-aches,  relaxation  of  the 
body,  tickling  sensation  in  the  throat,  pains  in  the  sides,  grinding 
pains  in  the  shoulders,  hoarseness  of  voice,  and  catarrh  in  the  nose 
and  the  mouth. 

The  bile,  in  its  turn,  begets  fever,  diarrhoea,  and  a  burning  sensa¬ 
tion  within  the  body. 

The  phlegm  begets  catarrh  in  the  nose  and  the  mouth,  heaviness 
of  the  head,  cough,  and  disgust  for  food.  21 

In  consequence  of  the  attack  of  cough,  ulceration  of  the  chest  fol¬ 
lows  and  the  patient  spits  blood. 

In  consequence  of  this  discharge  of  blood,  weakness  comes  over 
the  patient. 

Thus  the  three  faults,  accumulated  by  inharmonious  food  and 
drink,  generate  phthisis.  22 

The  patient,  thus  afflicted  by  these  morbid  afflictions  which  have 
the  effect  of  wasting  the  system,  becomes  gradually  wasted. 

Hence  the  man  endued  with  intelligence  should  take  only  such 
food  as  is  not  inharmonious  with  ‘prakriti’  (nature),  ‘karma’  (transmu¬ 
tation),  ‘samyoga’  (combination),  ‘ra^i,’  (measure),  ‘deca’  (place  of 
origin),  ‘kala’  (season  and  age),  ‘upayoga-samstha  (conditions  of  use, 
and  ‘upafaya’  (agreement  with  the  constitution).*  20 

( Here  occurs  a  verse ). 

One,  endued  with  intelligence  should  take  food  that  is  beneficial, 
and  that  corresponds  with  the  measure  which  he  is  actually  in  need 
of ;  and,  further, 

eat  at  the  proper  time,  and  keep  one’s  senses  under  control,  seeing 
that  numerous  painful  diseases  arise  from  food  that  is  inharmonious 
(with  ‘prakriti,’  &c.).  24 

The  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  indulged  by  these  four  causes  of 
phthisis,  become  provoked.f 

Being  provoked,  these  waste  the  body  by  the  help  of  diverse  mor¬ 
bid  afflictions.  Regarding  this  disease  as  the  severest  of  all  diseases, 
it  is  named  ‘Raja-yakshmaa.’J 


*  Vide  ‘Vimansthanam,’  Lesson  I,  pp.  454  -457,  ante,  as  also  p.  453  ante. — T. 

+  The  four  causes  are  x.  acts  of  rashness,  2.  suppression  of  urgings  of  stools  and  urine, 
3.  waste  of  semen,  &c.,  and  4.  inharmonious  food  and  drink — T. 

X  ‘Yakshma’  means  ‘disease  f  ‘raja’  means  ‘king.’  Hence,  ‘Rajayakshma’  means  ‘king 
of  diseases.’— T. 


686 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Or,  perhaps,  it  is  called  ‘Raja-yaksma’  because  of  the  fact  of  the 
Shoma,  the  king  of  the  constellations,  having  got  it  in  days  of 
yore.*  25 

These  are  the  incubatory  symptoms  of  the  disease  : 

They  are, — 

Catarrh  in  the  nose  and  the  mouth  ; 

Sneezing,  and  constant  emission  of  phlegmonous  matter  ; 

The  presence  of  a  sweet  taste  in  the  mouth  ; 

The  absence  of  any  desire  for  food  ; 

A  sense  of  fatigue  or  exertion  at  the  time  of  eating  ; 

The  finding  of  fault,  when  fault  there  is  none  or  very  slight,  in 
such  matters  as  the  plates  and  cups,  &c.,  used  in  meals,  the 
water  that  is  given  for  drink,  the  food  that  is  placed  before,  the 
soups  of  pulses  and  other  articles,  curries  and  sauces,  and  the 
people  employed  in  serving  the  food  ; 

A  tendency  to  vomit  after  meals  ; 

Actual  vomiting  on  certain  days,  after  meals  ; 

•Dryness  of  the  mouth  and  the  waste  of  the  legs  ; 

Frequent  examination  of  the  palms  ;f 

Excessive  whiteness  of  the  eyes  (i.  e.,  bloodlessness)  ; 

Frequent  inquiries  of  waxing  or  waning  of  the  arms  ; 

Desire  for  sexual  indulgence  ; 


*  In  days  of  yore,  the  god  Shoma  (the  deity  of  the  moon),  having  married  the  seven  and 
twenty  daughters  of  the  celestial  Rishi,  Daksha,  one  of  the  lords  of  Creation,  showed  particular 
attachment  to  only  one  of  them,  viz.,  Rohini.  The  neglected  six  and  twenty  complained  of 
the  conduct  of  their  husband  to  their  puissant  progenitor.  The  latter  admonished  and 
warned  Shoma,  telling  him  that  he  would  incur  his  displeasure  by  continuing  that  conduct. 
Shoma,  however,  paid  little  heed  to  his  father-in-law’s  warning.  Incensed  at  this,  Daksha 
cursed  Shoma,  saying  ‘Be  thou  afflicted  with  that  wasting  disease  called  phthisis  !’  The 
Rishi’s  curse  began  to  take  effect.  Shoma  began  to  waste  away.  Seeing  this,  all  the  deities 
with  Shoma  himself  sought  to  propitiate  Daksha.  The  Rishi,  unable  to  falsify  his  words, 
mitigated  the  curse,  saying  that  after  wasting  himself  into  invisibility,  Shoma  would  wax 
again  into  vigour  and  life.  The  waning  and  the  waxing  of  the  moon  is  thus  explained  in 
Hindu  mythology.  Shoma  is  the  king  or  lord  of  the  constellations.  Hence  ‘Raja-yakshma’ 
may  be  explained  as  the  ‘yakshman’  or  disease  that  the  king  or  the  lord  of  the  constellations 
had.  It  should  be  added  that  Shoma  is  not  only  the  lord  of  the  constellations  but  is  the  lord 
as  well  of  the  regenerate  class  of  men,  i.  e.  of  the  Brahmanas.  He  is  commonly  called 
‘Dwijapati.’ — Ts 

f  This  examination  is  made  for  ascertaining  whether  good  or  evil  is  in  store  for  him.  The 
actis,  palmistry  is  regarded  as  a  science  in  India.  Everybody  dabbles  in  it.  The  lines  on  the 
palms  are  supposed  to  indicate  the  period  of  life,  the  near  or  distant  advent  of  disease,  &c.—T. 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland,  U.  S.  A.: — You  have  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California: —  .  As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent . 

There  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  .—You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin,  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Ohio,  U.  S,  A.  : — The  work  interests  me.very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge : — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccless,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York: — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 

E.  P.  Davis,  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia: — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance..  .  I.  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  J 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  off  Cashmere : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg',  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-Western 
University,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition : — I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A. : — Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  ip,  East  38th  Street,  New  York  .—Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Traise,  Dramstadt : — The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.-  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A., 
Editor  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist :— I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere,  174,  Boulevatse,  Saint  Germain  : — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  I  always 
arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  -if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop 
from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients 
according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and 
fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of 
the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street ,  Calcutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  ICabiratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
[about  drawing  their  attention  to]  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after.— 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  Medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector ,  Mymensing: — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector Your  patriotic 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  H.  Skrine,  Esq.,  Magistrate  and  Collector  : — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  ' 
interest.  It  is  marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonder¬ 
ful  to  note  the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how 
completely  they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to 
the  enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Gierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gya It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynall,  Bangor,  North  Wales: — The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as  pos¬ 
sibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning  to 
find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every  system 
of  education.  They  could  look  foe  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is  a  work 
that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji,— The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


*<357 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


(TRAN SLA  TED  INTO  ENGLISH) 


AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 


A  (in  original)  WITH  COMMENT-  | 


:ES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 

journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  the  Hindu 

SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C.,  &C. 


200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N.  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRAT 


(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved. ) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters') 

•  Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka;  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you  < 

in  any  way  you  may  wish.  —Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — .  I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention. 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office — . Your 

excellent  translation . .  ...  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West  . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

.  Many  important  additions  to.  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your,  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  Nets  York,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka-Sahihita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your-valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A. — I 
I  must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing.  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons  A.  Birth.,  Paris: — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  tho'se  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris: — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking* and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and-  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany  : — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 

I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the.  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka.. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsbnrgh,  Germany  : — English  translation  of 
Charaka-Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal: — I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life 
cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS 


OF 

PART  XXXII. 

The  contents  of  this  Part  are  as  interesting  as  those  of  the  pre¬ 
vious  ones.  •  Lesson  VI,  called  the  “Nidana  of  Phthisis”,  is  concluded 
in  this  Part. 

The  characteristics  of  those  patients  who  should  be  avoided  by- 
physicians  are  fully  set  forth. 

Lesson  VII,  on  Insanity,  begins  at  page  988. 

The  five  varieties  of  this  disease  are  set  forth,  viz.,  those  born  of 
each  of  the  three  faults  and  of  all  the  three  faults,  and  that  which  is 
Accidental. 

The  characteristics  are  given  of  those  persons  who  are  liable  ,to 
this  disease. 

Definition  of  Insanity,  its  incubatory  indications,  the  distinctive 
symptoms  of  the  four  fault-born  varieties, '  the  incubatory  indications 
of  the  Accidental  variety,  its  distinctive  symptoms,  the  occasions  on 
which  persons  are  liable  to  the  assaults  of  superhuman  beings  which 
bring  about  Insanity,  what  cases  of  Insanity  are  incurable,  and  what 
the  remedies  are  of  cure,  have  been  laid  down  in  this  Lesson. 

Distributed  according  to  the  considerations  of  Constitutional  and 
Accidental,  or  of  Curability  and  Incurability,  there  are  only  two 
varieties  of  this  disease.  These  sometimes  are  blended  together. 

The  four  varieties  of  this  disease,  the  persons  that  are  liable  to  it, 
definition  of  the  disease,  its  incubatory  symptoms,  the  distinctive 
symptoms  of  each  variety,  and  that  variety  which  should  not  be 
taken  up  for  treatment,  are  laid  down. 

Lesson  VIII,  on  Epilepsy,  begins  in  this  Part! 

Some  general  observations,  particularly  interesting,  occur  in 
pp.  1008 — 1013,  on  diseases  and  their  symptoms.  These  are  exceed¬ 
ingly  important,  and  every'  physician  should  understand  them 
thoroughly  if  he  seeks  success  in  his  profession.  These  observations 
show  how  thoroughly  the  Rishis  understand  not  only  the  features 
of  diseases  but  also  the  principles  of  treatment.  They  would  do 
credit  to  any  modern  writer  on  Pathology  and  Therapeutics. 

The  Division  called  “Nidana”  is  concluded  in  this  Part. 


NOTICE. 


Those  subscribers  who  have  lost  any  of  their  fasciculi  are 
requested  to  write  to  us'  promptly. 

We  have  hitherto  done  our  best  to  supply  the  missing 
fasciculi  to  every  one  who  has  written  to  us;  We  beg  to  in¬ 
form  them  that  if  missing  fasciculi  are  not  called  for  within, 
say,  2  months  from  this  date,  it  will  be  absolutely  impossible 
for  us  to  supply  them  later  on.  Subscribers,  therefore,  are 
particularly  requested  to  collect  together  the  fasciculi  they 
have  received  and  write  to  us  without,  delay  if  they  have  lost 
any  through  either  their  own  fault  or  that  of  the  Post  Office. 


CHARAKA-SAMHIT A. 


9  87 


Loss  of  the  sense  of  abomination  ; 

The  sight  of  hateful  incidents  in  the  body  ; 

The  sight,  in  dreams,  of  rivers  and  lakes,  and  tanks,  &c.,  that 
have  become  dry  ;  as  also  of  villages,  towns,  cities,  and  provinces 
that  have  become  depopulated  4 

The  sight,  in  dreams,  of  forests  that  have  become  dry,  or  burnt, 
or  broken  down  ; 

The  touch,  in  dreams,  of  lizards,  peacocks,  apes,  parrots,  snakes, 
crows,  owls,  &c. 

Riding,  in  dreams,  on  horses  and  camels  and  mules  and  boars,  or 
in  vehicles  drawn  by  them  ; 

Ascent,  in  dreams,  on  heaps  of  hair,  bones,  or  ashes,  or  chaff,  or 
charcoals. 

These  are  the  premonitory  symptoms  of  phthisis.  26 

After  this,  the  disease  itself  appears,  manifesting  the  following 
symptoms,  eleven  in  number. 

They  are, — 

A  sensation  of  the  head  being  full  (?'.  e.,  heavy)  ; 

Cough  or  bronchites,  and  asthma  or  shortness  of  breath  ; 

Hoarseness  of  voice  ; 

The  emission  of  phlegmbnous  matter  (from  the  mouth  and  the 
nose)  ; 

The  spitting  of  blood  ; 

Pains  in  the  sides  ; 

Grinding  pains  in  the  shoulders  ; 

Fever,  diarrhoea,  and  disgust  for  food.  27 

In  this  connection  it  should  be  said  that  if  the  patient  does  not 
lose  his  flesh  and  blood,  if  he  retains  his  strength,  if ‘arishtas’  or  indi¬ 
cations  of  the  near  approach  of  death  do  not  appear,  then  he  should  be 
regarded  as  capable  of  cure  even  if  he  be  afflicted  by  all  the  (eleven) 
symptoms  of  phthisis.  28 

Since,  if  endued  with  strength  and  complexion  and  growth,  the 
patient,  in  consequence  of  his  capacity  to  bear  the  strength  of  both 
the  disease  and  the  medicaments,  should  be  regarded  as  presenting 
only  a  few  symptoms  even  when  many  of  the  symptoms  are  present.  29 

If,  however,  the  patient  be  weak,  if  he  has  lost  flesh  and  blood, 
then,  in  consequence  of  his  inability  to  bear  the  strength  of  both  the 
disease  and  the  medicaments,  he  should  be  regarded  as  presenting 


125 


988 


CHAR  AKA  -  SAM  HIT  A. 


many  of  the  symptoms  even  if  ‘arishtas’  or  indications  of  the  near 
approach  of  death  have  not  manifested  themselves  and  even  if  the 
number  of  symptoms  be  small.*  3° 

The  physician  should  avoid  such  patients,  since  ‘arishtas’  present 
themselves  in  such  persons  quickly  Their  manifestation,  as  regards 
such  patients,  arises  from  no  cause  that  is  noticeable,  31 

( Here  occurs  a  verse ). 

That  physician  who  truly  knows  the  causes,  symptoms,  and  incu¬ 
batory  indications  of  phthisis  deserves  to  treat  the  diseases  of  the 
king  himself,  j-  32 

Thus  ends  the  Lesson  VI,  called  ‘Nidana’  of  Phthisis,  in  that 
Division,  called  ‘Nidana’,  of  the  treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised  by 
Charaka. 


LESSON  VII. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  ‘Nidana’  of  Insanity. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  1 
Verily,  there  are  five  varieties  of  Insanity. 

They  are  1.  wind-born,  2.  bile-born,  3.  phlegm-born,  4.  that  bom 
of  all  the  three  faults,  and  5.  that  which  is  accidental.  2 

Of  these,  the  four  that  are  born  of  the  faults  quickly  afflict  men 
that  are  of  the  following  descriptions. 

They  are, — 

Those  who  are  timid  or  subject  to  fear  ; 

Those,  in  whom  the  attribute  of  ‘Sattwa’  is  afflicted  by  ‘Rajas’  and 
‘Tamas  ;’ 

Those  in  whom  the  faults  have  been  attenuated  to  proportions 
below  what  are  regarded  as  normal ; 

Those  who  eat  food  that  is  mixed  with  impurities,  or  with  such 
articles  as  have  become  vitiated,  or  food  that  is  not  assimilable. 


*  Gangadhara  reads  ‘atikshinavalamansagonitam.’  The  repetition  of  ‘vala’  here  afte 
‘durvalam’  as  the  opening  word  preceding  this  compound,  is  evidently  an  error. — T. 

In  other  words,  he  deserves  to  be  a  royal  physician, — T. 


CHAR  AKA  -  SAM  HIT  A. 


989 


as  also  those  who  eat  food  prepared  without  regard  to  harmony 
of  combination  and  without  attending  to  the  considerations 
of  ‘prakriti,’  ‘karma,’  ‘samyoga,’  &c. ; 

Those  who  practise,  in  ways  other  than  normal,  the  ordinances 
laid  down  in  the  Tantras  ;* 

Those  who  undertake  other  practices  that  are  abnormal,!  or. 

Those  who  have  exceedingly  emaciated  bodies,  or. 

Those  who  have  been  exceedingly  agitated  by  the  strength  or 
intensity  of  disease, J  or, 

Those  whose  minds  have  been  affected  by  lust,  wrath,  cupidity, 
joy,  fear,  grief,  cares,  and  anxieties,  or, 

Those  who  have  been  afflicted  with  wounds, 

The  wind  being  afflicted,  and  the  understanding  being  disturbed, 
the  faults  become  aggravated  and  provoked  ;  then  reaching  the 
heart,  and  obstructing  the  ducts  through  which  the  mind 
operates,  they  beget  Insanity. 

Insanity,  it  should  be  known,  is  the  derangement  of  the  mind, 
understanding,  knowledge,  memory,  devotion,  behaviour,  acts,  and 
practices.  3 

The  following  are  the  incubatory  symptoms  of  the  disease : 

A  sensation  of  the  head  being  empty  ; 

Turbidness  of  the  eyes  ; 

Diverse  sounds  in  the  years  ; 

Thickness  and  shortness  of  the  breath  ; 

Discharge  of  watery  secretions  from  the  mouth ; 

Loss  of  appetite,  and  disgust  for  food  ; 

Indigestion ; 


*  The  Tantras  contain  instructions  about  ‘Hatha-yoga’  and  other  practices  which  lead  to 
the  acquisition  of  extraordinary  or  superhuman  powers.  By  observing  those  practices  in 
ways  other  than  normal,  insanity  and  other  diseases  are  frequently  generated.  Neophytes, 
by  practising  ‘Pranayama’  or  the  regulation  of  the  breath  without  attending  to  the  consider¬ 
ation  of  time,  catch  diseases  of  diverse  hinds.  Breath  may  be  held  too  long,  to  the  imme¬ 
diate  detriment  of  the  neophyte. — T. 

+  ‘Anyam  vishamam  cheshtam,’  literally,  ‘other  practices  that  are  abnormal’— imply  such 
acts  as  reciting  particular  mantras  or  shastric  texts  at  midnight  in  a  crematorium,  or  remain¬ 
ing  with  head  downwards'for  several  hours,  reciting  mantras  the  while,  &c.— T. 

t  Certain  diseases  agitate  the  mind  greatly  ;  certain  constitutions,  again,  are  greatly 
agitated  by  even  simple  diseases.  In  such  cases,  Insanity  appears.— T, 


99  o 


CHAR  AKA  -  SAM  HIT  A. 


Pressure  on  the  chest  (as  if  some  heavy  object  is  placed  on  it) ; 
Thoughtfulness  with  regard  to  matters  that  do  not  deserve  to  be 
thought  of ; 

Toiling  for  objects  that  no  way  deserve  toil  ; 

Wondering  at  things  that  should  not  excite  wonder ; 

Anxiety  about  objects  that  are  of  no  interest ; 

Frequent  horripilation  ; 

Continued  fever  or  excitement  of  pulse  ; 

Constant  excitement  of  the  mind  ; 

Facial  contortions  ; 

Appearance  of  eruptions  on  the  body  like  urticaria  evanida  ; 
Frequently  beholding  in  dreams  objects  that  are  whirling  round 
or  running,  or  moving,  or  those  that  are  disgusting  ; 

Mounting,  in  dreams,  on  oil-machines  that  are  circling  round  ; 
Experiencing,  in  dreams,  the  sensation  of  being  whirled  round  by 
eddies  of  strong  winds  ; 

Feeling,  in  dreams,  that  he  is  sinking  in  strong  eddies  of  dirty 
water ;  and 

Restlessness  of  the  eyes  so  that  the  gaze  is  now  directed  towards 
one  object  and  now  towards  another. 

Even  these  are  the  incubatory  symptoms  of  those  varieties  of  In¬ 
sanity  which  are  due  to  excited  faults.  4 

After  the  appearance  of  these  incubatory  indications,  the  disease, 
viz.,  Insanity,  manifests  itself. 

The  following  are  the  distinctive  symptoms  of  the  disease  ; 

They  are, — 

Moving  of  the  eyes  and  the  eyebrows  ; 

■  Stretching  of  the  lips,  the  shoulders,  the  cheeks,  the  arms,  and  the 
legs,  without  any  cause  ;* 

Frequent  utterance  of  irrelevant  words  ;f 


*  It  is  difficult  to  ascertain  the  correct  reading  here.  Gangadhara  reads  ‘parisharanama- 
jagram  akshibhrubaushthamsa  &c.  vikshepagchakasmat. ’  Gangadhara  explains  ‘parisharanam’ 
as  standing  by  itself  and  meaning  ‘roving  he  then  connects  ‘vikshepah’  with  all  the  words 
beginning  With  ‘akshi.’  This  can  hardly  be  correct.  The  reading  I  prefer  is  that  given  in 

some  printed  texts  of  Bengal.  It  is  ‘parisharnamakshibhrubam  ;  oshthamsa  &c . 

vikshepanamakasmat.  ’ — T. 

t  Here  also  the  texts  differ.  The  reading  I  adopt  is  ‘satatamaniyalanancha  gira- 
mutsargah.’ — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA . 


991 


The  emission  of  froth  from  the  mouth  ; 

Indulgence  in  smile,  laughter,  dancing,  singing,  and  playing  on 
instruments,  on  unsuitable  occasions  ;* 

Imitating  the  sounds  of  ‘vina,’  flutes,  conch-shells,  and  ‘gamya,’  and 
striking  of  palms  against  each  other,  unmelodiously  ;f 
Proceeding  on  vehicles  that  are  never  used  as  such  by  others  : 
Bedecking  the  person  with  such  things  as  are  never  used  for  orna¬ 
mentation  by  others  ; 

Desire  for  such  food  and  drinks  as  are  absent,  or  not"  within  reach  ; 
Disregard  for  such  food  and  drink  as 'are  present  or  within  reach  ; 
Fierceness  or  fury  of  disposition  ; 

Malice  or  incapacity  to  bear  the  sight  of  other  people’s  happiness  ; 
Emaciation  of  the  body  ; 

Roughness  of  the  body  : 

Redness  of  the  eyes  which  seem,  again,  to  come  out ; 

Increase  of  the  violence  of  the  disease  by  such  articles  as  are  con¬ 
trary  to  what  alleviate  the  wind.J 
These  are  the  symptoms  of  Insanity  born  of  the  wind.  5 
The  following  are  the  symptoms  of  Insanity  bom  of  the  bile  : 
Incapacity  to  bear  the  least  annoyance  ; 

Exhibition  of  wrath  ; 

Indulgence  in  boastfulness ; 


*  Gangadhara  adds  ‘abhikshnam’  before  ‘smita’  &c.  Others  drop  it  correctly,  for  a  mad 
man  does  not  really  indulge  in  smiles,  &c.,  always. — T. 

f  ‘Vina’  is  a  musical  instrument  consisting  of  two  gourds  connected  together  by  a  hollow 
bamboo  measuring  about  3  feet,  along  which  are  laid  a  number  of  wires  of  iron  and  brass. 
There  are  frets  laid  across  the  bamboo,  and  only  one  of  the  wires  is  struck  with  the  plectrum. 

Gangadhara  reads  ‘gaspa’  for  ‘gamya.’  ‘fjaspa’  would  hardly  yield  any  meaning  in  this 
connection.  It  ordinarily  implies  grass.  It  may  be  taken  here  as  implying  pipes  made  of  reeds 
or  long  grass.  But  this  would  be  farfetched.  ‘(Jamya’  is  also  a  doubtful  word.  Here  it 
probably  means  a  hollow  pipe  made  of  wood,  yielding  a  kind  of  shrill  sound.  The  word  has 
sometimes  been  used  to  signify  dishes  of  white  brass  which  are  used  by  Vaishnavas  for  making 
the  sounds  of  drums  lower  and  less  monotonous.  These  dishes  are  otherwise  called 
‘karatala. — T. 

+  This  is  a  periphrastic  way  of  saying  that  the  disease  gains  in  intensity  through  use  of 
such  articles  as  provoke  the  wind.  Thus  oils  and  ghees  alleviate  the  wind.  Things  that  are 
dry  provoke  the  wind.  The  use  of  articles  of  the  latter  kind  add  to  the  vigour  or  intensity 
of  the  wind. — T. 


992 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Rushing  at  relatives  or  strangers,  with  weapons,  brick-bats,  whips, 
clubs,  or  closed  fists,  or  striking  them  therewith  ;  * 

Desire  for  shady  places,  cold  water,  and  food  ; 

Excessive  heat  of  the  body  (accompanied  by  burning  sensation) ; 
A  coppery,  or  green,  or  yellow  colour  of  the  eyes  which,  besides, 
become  steadfast ;  and 

Increase  of  the  violence  of  the  disease,  by  such  objects  as  are  con¬ 
trary  to  what  alleviates  the  bile.  6 
The  following  are  the  symptoms  of  Insanity  born  of  the  phlegm  : 
Sitting  in  one  place  (for  long  hours  and  from  day  to  day) ; 

Rigid  observance  of  taciturnity  ; 

Taking  short  walks  ; 

Discharge  of  salivary  and  phlegmonous  secretions  from  the  mouth 
and  the  nose  ; 

Absence  of  desire  for  food  ; 

Desire  for  solitude  and  privacy  ; 

An  aspect  that  excites  abomination  ; 

Aversion  for'  purity  ; 

Excess  of  sleep  ; 

Dropsical  swellings  on  the  face  ; 

Paleness  and  fixedness  of  the  eyes  which,  besides,  become  covered 
with  filthy  secretions  ; 

Increase  of  the  violence  of  the  disease  by  such  objects  as  are  con¬ 
trary  to  what  alleviates  the  phlegm.  1 
Insanity  should  be  known  as  born  of  all  the  three  faults  when  the 
symptoms  presented  are  those,  in  a  combined  state,  of  each  of  the 
faults  (as  enumerated  above). 

Such  Insanity  is  regarded  incurable  by  those  who  are  well  versed 
in  the  science  of  medicine.  8 

Of  the  three  varieties  of  Insanity  {viz.,  wind-born,  bile-born,  and 
phlegm-born), f  the  remedies  are — 

Administration  of  medicated  oils  and  ghees  ;  . 


*  Abhidravanam’  is  pursuing  or  rushing  at.  ‘Swesham’  (genetive)  implies  ‘of  men  who 
are  the  patient’ s  own,’  that  is,  kinsmen  and  friends.  -  Some  of  the  Bengali  translators  take 
the  word  as  implying  the  patient,  that  is,  the  Insane  person  himself.  This  is  a  downright 
error— T. 

+  The  incurable  being  that  which  is  born  of  all  the  three  faults. — T, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA, 


993 


Application  of  ‘sweda’  ;* 

Administration  of  emetics,  and  purgatives  including  enemata  of 
both  the  oily  and  the  dry  kinds  ; 

Administration  of  errhines  or  cerebral  purgatives  ; 

Fumigation  (by  means  of  proper  medicaments  and  articles  endued 
with  extraordinary  virtues) ; 

Causing  the  patient  to  drink  the  smoke  of  medicated  compounds 
and  articles  of  keen  potency  ; 

Application  of  collyria  to  the  eyes  ; 

Administration  of  inhalations  (for  inducing  sneezing)  ; 

Blowing  drugs  into  the  nose,  by  means  of  tubes,  for  inducing 
sneezing  ;f 

Rubbing  of  oils  on  the  body  ; 

Use  of  odoriferous  unguents  ; 

Sprinkling  of  simple  or  medicated  waters  on  the  body  ; 

Smearing  or  plastering  the  body  with  fragrant  and  medicated 
pastes  ; 

Striking,  tying,  confining,  frightening,  inspiring  wonder,  and  caus¬ 
ing  forgetfulness  ; 

Adoption  of  measures  that  lead  to  leanness  ;  and 
Letting  out  blood  by  opening  the  veins.  9 

As  regards  diet,  it  should  be  prescribed  with  discretion,  agreeably 
to  the  patient’s  constitution.! 

Every  other  remedy  that  is  hostile  to  the  causes  which  produce 
the  disease  should  also  be  applied.  10 

( Here  occurs  a  verse ). 

Those  varieties  of  Insanity  which  are  born  of  the  (excited)  faults 
are  curable. 

A  good  physician  should  take  up  their  treatment  agreeably  to 
those  due  methods  which  have  been  laid  down  above.  11 


*/.«.,  fomentation  or  applying  heat  for  inducing  perspiration. — T. 
t  Both  ‘Avapidana’  and  ‘Pradhamana’  are  processes  for  inducing  sneezing.  The  first  implies 
inhalation  by  the  patient  himself ;  the  second,  blowing  into  his  nose  particular  substances  by 
means  of  pipes  or  tubes.  Both  differ  from  ‘Nastahkarman’  in  this  ;  in  ‘Nastahkarman’  drugs 
are  given  for  inhalation  in  order  to  produce  certain  effects  on  the'system  with  or  without  the 
aid  of  sneezing. — T. 

I  ‘Yathaswam’  implies  ‘agreeably  to  the  patient’s  own  body  ;’  that  is,  as  suited  to  his 
consttiution.  The  physician,  in  prescribing  the  patient’s  diet,  should  be  guided  by  consider¬ 
ations  connected  with  the  particular  fault  or  faults  that  may  be  predominant, — T. 


994 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


That  variety  of  Insanity  is  called  Accidental  which  is  character¬ 
ised  by  causes,  incubatory  indications,  and  pronounced  symptoms, 
differing  from  those  of  the  fault-born  varieties.*  12 

Some  say  that  the  evil  acts  of  previous  lives  are  the  cause  of  this 
variety  of  Insanity  {viz.,  that  which  is  called  Accidental). 

But  the  illustrious  Punarvasu  of  Atri’s  race  declared  that  fault  of 
judgment  is  the  cause. f  r3 

The  truth  is,  this  one  (i.  e.,  the  person  afflicted  by  Accidental  Insa¬ 
nity)  does  evil  by  disregarding  the  deities  ,  the  Rishis,  the  Pitris,  the 
Gandharvas,  this  Yakshas,  the  Rakshasas,  the  Pigashas,  seniors,  men 
of  advanced  years,  the  Siddhas,  preceptors,  and  others  deserving  of 
worship  ;  or  commits  some  other  sinful  acts  of  this  kind. 

The  afflicting  deities  and  others  make  such  a  person,  already 
afflicted  himself,  Insane.J  *4 

Of  one  who  is  about  to  be  afflicted  with  Accidental  Insanity 
having  for  its  cause  the  wrath  of  deities  and  others,  the  incubatory 
symptoms  are  these  : 

A  disposition  to  injure  the  deities,  kine,  Brahmanas,  and  ascetics  ; 


*  Some  texts  add  ‘vedana  and  ‘upagaya’  after  ‘linga’  and  before  ‘vigesha.’  ‘Vedana’ 
means  ‘pains,’  and  ‘upagaya’  has  been  fully  explained  in  the  first  Lesson  of  this  Division. — T. 

t  ‘Prajnaparadha,’  as  explained  previously,  is  fault  of  judgment,  i.  e.,  errors  of  the 
■understanding.  Almost  all  diseases  are  born  of  such  errors. — T. 

t  ‘Rishis  are  men  of  extraordinary  puissance  acquired  by  rigid  penances.  ‘Pitris’  are  the 
names  of  the  deceased.  They,  too,  are  endued  with  great  puissance.  ‘Gandharvas’  are 
celestial  beings  fond  of  music  and  dancing,  and  superior  to  human  beings  in  power.  ‘Yakshas’ 
are  an  order  of  superhuman  beings,  under  the  rule  of  Kuvera,  the  Lord  of  every  kind  of 
treasure.  They  dwell  on  the  heights  of  Himavat  and  Kailasa.  They  are  followers  of 
M  ahadeva.  It  is  curious  to  see  how  Sanskrit  names  are  Anglicised  through  ignorance. 
The  highest  peak  on  the  Simla  hills  is  called  ‘Jakko.’  This  word  is  a  corruption  of  ‘Yaksha.’ 
Formerly  it  was  believed  that  this  peak  was  the  abode  of  ‘Yakshas. 

‘Pigachas’  are  an  order  of  beings  that  are  of  ghostly  and  abominable  practices.  They  feed 
on  carrion,  but  are  regarded  as  followers  of  Mahadeva. 

‘Rakshasas’  are  fierce  and  powerful  beings  capable  of  going  everywhere  at  will  and  hold¬ 
ing  every  good  thing  in  abomination.  They  can  assume  any  form  they  please.  They  are 
haters  of  the  deities  and  oppressors  of  human  beings.  They  destroy  human  sacrifices  which 
men  perform  in  honour  of  the  deities. 

‘Siddhas’  are  beings  who  are  crowned  with  success  of  penances.  They  possess  super¬ 
human  powers. 

The  fact  is,  as  the  following  aphorisms  will  explain.  Insane  persons  are  regarded  as  under 
the  sway  of  the  deities,  &c.,  according  to  to  the  disposition  they  manifest.  They  who  are 
fierce.,  &c.,  are  supposed  to  be  under  the  sway  of  ‘Rakshasas.’  They  whose  acts  are  abomi¬ 
nable,  are  supposed'to  be  under  the  sway  of  ‘Pigachas.’  They  who  are  fond  of  music  and 
dancing,  are  regarded  as  under  the  sway  of  ‘Gandharvas,’  &c. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


995 


A  wrathful  temperament ; 

Cherishing  cruel  purposes  and  intentions  ;* 

Absence  of  contentment ; 

Morbidness  of  ‘ojas,’  complexion,  lustre,  strength,  and  flesh  ;f 

Admonitions  and  rebukes  administered,  in  dreams,  by  the  deities 
and  others  ; 

Instigations,  by  those  beings,  to  particular  acts  (in  dreams). 

After  the  appearance  of  these  incubatory  indications,  the  disease 
sets  in. 

It  should  be  stated  here  that  the  following  are  the  several  acts, 
with  regard  to  persons  who  are  about  to  be  afflicted  with  Insanity, 
of  the  several  orders  of  superhuman  beings  who  bring  about  Insanity. 
They  are  these : 

The  deities  generate  Insanity  by  directing  their  gaze  (to  the 
persons  with  whom  they  are  offended). 

Seniors,  and  persons  of  advanced  age,  and  ‘Siddhas,’  and  'Rishis1 
cause  it  by  denouncing  curses. 

The  Pitris  bring  it  about  by  forcible  assaults. 

The  Gandharvas  do  it  by  touch. 

The  Yakshas  do  it  by  entering  into  the  bodies  of  the  persons. 

The  Rakshas  bring  about  insanity  by  causing  the  persons  to 
inhale  their  scent. 

The  Pigachas,  again,  bring  about  this  disease  by-  riding  on  the 
necks  or  heads  of  the  persons  and  using  them  as  convenient  beasts.!  16 


*  Gangadhara  explains  ‘nrigangsabhiprayata’  as  implying  a  disposition  to  speak  ill  of  the 
good  and  righteous.  This  is  far-fetched, — T. 

t  ‘Upatapa,’  or,  as  some  texts  read  ‘upatapti,’  does  not  mean,  as  some  vernacular  tran¬ 
slators  have  rendered  it,  heat.  It  means  morbidness  or  sickliness.  As  regards  ‘cchaya,’ 
vide  Lesson  VII,  Indriyasthana.  ‘Vapush,’  meaning  body,  here  stands  for  flesh. — T. 

+  The  manner  in  which  the  different  orders  of  superhuman  beings  exert  their. influence  on 
■men  for  depriving  them  of  reason  and  causing  Insanity,  is  characteristic.  iThe  deities  have 
only  to  cast  a  wrathful  glance.  The  fact  is,  the  deities  are  called  ‘drishtibhogah,’  i.  e. 
‘enjoyers  by  vision  or  glances.’  When  offerings  are  made  to  them,  they  simply  look  at  them 
to  signify  acceptance. 

Seniors  and  old  men  and  Rishis  and  those  who  have  attained  to  success,  when  enraged 
with  a  man,  denounce  a  curse  on  him.  Their  words  always  become  true. 

The  Pitris  exert  their  influence  by  acts  Of  violence.  Thus  when  a  man  climbs  a  tree 
vwhich  has  become  the  home  of  a  Pitri  or  the  spirit  of  a  dead  man,  he.is  thrown  down.  He 
126 


996 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  following  are  the  symptoms  of  Insanity  that  is  Accidental 
(i.  e.,  caused  by  the  influence  of  deities  and  others) : 

Superhuman  strength,  energy,  capacity  for  exertion,  prowess, 
apprehension,  conservation,  reproduction,  speech,  knowledge,  and 
science. 

The  time,  again,  is  not  fixed  for  the  exhibition  of  the  fits  of 
Insanity.* 

Verily,  of  deities  and  Rishis  and  Pitris  and  Gandharvas  and 
Yakshas  and  Rakshasas  and  Pijachas,  as  also  of  seniors,  and  persons 
of  advanced  age,  and  those  who  have  attained  t©  success  of  penances, 
who  bring  about  Insanity,  the  following  are  the  occasions  when  per¬ 
sons  become  objects  of  assault  :f 

At  the  commencement  of  sinful  acts  ; 

At  the  time  when  the  fruits  are  about  to  manifest  themselves 
of  the  (sinful)  acts  of  former  lives  ; 

At  the  time  when  one  remains  alone  in  a  deserted  house  ; 

At  those  places  where  four  roads  meet,  during  the  morning  and 
the  evening  twilight ; 

At  those  times  when  one  remains  in  an  unguarded  (i.  e.,  unclean 
or  impure)  state  ; 


loses  consciousness.  His  mouth  foams.  He  utters  indistinct  groans.  Every  grandmother 
knows  these  symptoms. 

The  Gandharvas  exert  their  influence  by  touch.  They  raise  a  wind  which  touches  a  man 
or  woman  and  brings  him  or  her  under  their  sway. 

The  Yakshas  actually  enter  into  the  body  of  the  man  or  woman  whom  they  wish  to 
possess.  Their  presence  is  necessary  to  keep  up  their  influence. 

The  Rakshasas  cause  a  man  or  woman  to  inhale  the  scent  of  their  bodies.  The  belief 
is  that  Rakshasas  emit  a  powerful  odour-  Unless  and  until  that  odour  is  inhaled,  one  cannot 
be  subject  to  their  sway. 

The  Pigachas  have  to  press  down  a  person  with  their  weight.  In  order  to  possess  a 
person,  a  Pigacha  has  to  act  like  the  old  man  of  the  sea  who  brought  Sinbad,  the  sailor,  under 
his  sway. — T. 

*  Some  texts  omit  ‘grahana,’  ‘dharana,’  and  ‘smarana’  after  ‘parakrama.’  The  three 
words-imply  the  acquisitive,  the  conservative,  and  the  reproductive  faculties  of  the  Kantian 
distribution  of  mental  phenomena  adopted  by  Sir  W.  Hamilton. — T. 

t  In  other  words,  ‘the  following  are  the  occasions  when  deities  and  others  assail  people 
for  afflicting  them  with  Insanity.’  ‘Antara,’  rendered  ‘occasions,’  may  mean  ‘cchidra’  or 
holes,  i.  e.,  fit  opportunities. — T. 


CH ARAKA-SAMHIT A. 


99  7 


At  times  of  sexual  congress  if  such  act  is  indulged  on  the  joining 
hours  of  ‘Parva’  days  ;* 

At  the  time  when  one  has  sexual  contact  with  a  woman  in  her 
menses ;  „  . 

On  occasions  when  improprieties  creep  into  the  performance  of 
such  acts  as  the  study  (or  recitation)  of  the  Vedas,  the  dedica¬ 
tion  of  offerings  to  the  deities,  rites  of  propitiation,  and  the 
pouring  of  libations  on  the  sacrificial  fire  ;f 

At  those  times  when  one  swerves  from  religious  observances  and 
vows  and  ‘Brahmacharyya 

On  occasions  of  fierce  battles 

At  such  times  when  destruction  overtakes  a  province,  a  race  or 
family,  and  towns  and  cities  ; 

At  such  times  when  the  great  planets  course  from  one  sign  to 
another ; 

As  regards  women,  when- they  are  about  to  bring  forth  children  ; 

At  such  times  when  one  touches  different  kinds  of  inauspicious 
creatures  (as  dogs,  jackals,  vultures,  &c.,)  and  impure  things  (as 
hair,  ashes,  bones,  &c.) ; 

At  such  times  when  one  vomits  or  purges  or  has  discharges  of 
blood  from  one’s  body  ; 

At  such  times  when  one  goes  in  a  state  of  impurity  or  condition 


*  The '8th,  the  nth',  and  the  15th  days  of  the  lunar  fortnight,  dark  or  lighted,  are  called 
‘Parva’ days,  as  also  the  last  day  of  the  solar- month,  called ‘Sankranti,’  the  day,  viz.,  on 
which  sun  passes  from  one  zodiacal  sign  to  another.  These  days  are  regarded  sacred. 
Generally,  ‘ijraddhas’  (worship  of  the  ‘Pitris’)  are  performed  on  these  days. 

The  ‘Sandhi’-or  joint  is  that  hour  which  connects  two  days.  Thus  the.  ‘sandhi’  of  the 
8th  lunar  day  would  mean  the  last  half  hour  of  that  day  and  the  first  half  hour  of  the  next 
or  the  9th  day. — T. 

+  ‘Adhyayana’  ordinarily  means  reading  or  reciting.  It  is,  however,  limited  to  the  Vedas, 
though  etymologically  it  admits  of  a  wider  import.  Whether  the  word  be  taken  as  implying 
the  recitation  of  the  Vedas  or  the  study  of  any  branch  of  secular  knowledge,  there  are  certain 
rules  which  require  to  be  observed.  Thus  if  the  roar  of  the  clouds  be  heard,  or  an  elephant 
be  seen  to  pass  by,  the  recitation  of  the  Vedas  should  immediately  be  discontinued.  Even 
grammar  cannot  be  studied  for  days  together  if  an  elephant  is  seen  to  pass  by  the  school.— T. 

+  ‘Brahmacharyya’  means  the  observance  of  sexual  continence  by  young  men  during  the 
period  of  pupillage  or  residence  with  their  preceptors.  Similar  observance  by  others  also  is 
called  by  the  same  name.  Those  who  never  indulge  in  sexual  congress  save  with  their 
wedded  wives  in  the  proper  season,  are  regarded  as  observing  ‘Brabmath’aryya.’---T. 


99S 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


of  negligence  in  respect  of  dress,  speech,  &c.,  to  the  vicinage  of 
a  sacred  tree  or  the  temple  of  a  deity  ;* 

At  such  times  when  one  remains  impure  after  having  eaten  flesh, 
honey,  sesame,  treacle,  and  wine  ;f 

At  such  times  when  one  remains  in  a  state  of  nudity  ; 

When  one  goes,  during  the  hours  of  night,  to  such  spots  in  towns 
and  cities  where  four  roads  meet ; 

When  one  goes,  during  such  hours,  to  gardens  and  pleasure-groves 
and  crematoria ; 

At  such  times  when  one  insults  and  humiliates  Brahmanas  and 
seniors  and  deities,  and  “yatiV  and  Others  that  are  deserving  of 
reverence ; 

At  such  times  when  defects  occur  in  the  recitation  of  religious 
treatises  ;{  or 

At  the  commencement  of  unrighteous  acts  . 

Thus  has  been  explained  the  times  or  occasions  when  the  deities 
and  others  afflict  human  beings.  18 

There  are  three  objects  for  the  attainment  of  which  the  super¬ 
human  beings  spoken  of  cause  Insanity. 

These  are  i.  the  desire  to  kill  or  wound,  2.  the  desire  for  pleasure, 
and  3.  the  desire  for  obtaining  respectful  worship. 

These  objects  of  those  Insanity-causing  beings  may  be  ascertained 
from  the  particular  indications  of  the  conduct  of  the  Insane. 


*  By  ‘chaitya’  is  meant  a  large  tree  of  either  the  Ficus  religiosa  or  the  Ficus  Indica  variety 
standing  in  a  conspicuous  part  of  a  village,  generally  at  a  point  where  four  roads  meet.  These 
trees  are  regarded  sacred.  Under  them  are  generally  placed  stones  representing  the 
tutelary  deities  of  the  village.  These  trees,  again,  are  looked  upon  as  the  abodes  of  Yakskas 
and  Pitris,  &c.  Hence,  one  should,  while  approaching  them,  be  clean,  properly  dressed, 
&c.  He  should  restrain  his  speech,  that  is,  abstain  from  uttering  impure  or  disgusting 
language — T. 

t  One  should,  after  eating  and  drinking  these  things,  wash  one’s  mouth  and  face  and 
hands.  If  one  does  not  wash  oneself  after  taking  these,  one  remains  impure.  It  is  at  such 
times  that  one  becomes  liable  to  be  possessed  by  Pitris,  &c. — T. 

t  The  Mahabharata,  the  Kamayana,  the  Bhagavata,  and  other  sacred  works  are  caused 
to  be  recited  in  the  houses  of  well-to-do  persons.  The  reciters  are  learned  Brahmans.  Gener¬ 
ally,  for  preventing  mistakes,  two  Brahmanas  sit  on  both  sides  of  the  reciter.  They  are  called 
•dharaka’  or  checkers.  Rules  are  laid  down,  governing  these  recitations.  The  reciters  and 
the  ‘dharakas’  should  be  clean,  properly  dressed,  &c.  They  should  have  the  symbols  of 
Vishnu  before  them.  They  should  sit  on  separate  seats,  &c.  When  any  of  the  numerous 
rules  is  violated  or  disregarded,  ‘vyatikrama’  or  defect  is  supposed  to  take  place.  Those 
defects  detract  from  the  merits  which  the  recitation  produces. — T, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


999 


Amongst  these  three  objects,  the  desire  to  kill  or  wound  becomes 
manifest  when  the  person  who  becomes  insane  enters  a  blazing  fire, 
or  drowns  himself  in  water,  or  leaps  down  into  holes  and  pits,  or 
strikes  himself  with  weapons  and  clubs  and  brick-bats  and  his  own 
closed  fists,  or  does  other  acts  for  destroying  himself. 

Those  cases  of  insanity  in  which  the  insane  person  seeks  to  de¬ 
stroy  his  own  life  should  be  known  as  incurable.  l9 
The  other  two  varieties  are  curable. 

The  methods  for  curing  them  are  the  following  : 

Mantras  (sacred  texts)  ; 

Medicines  ; 

Gems  (of  particular  kinds  which  are  believed  to  have,  great 
potency) ; 

Auspicious  acts  (such  as  feeding  Brahmanas),  giving  alms  to  the 
poor,  &c.)  ; 

Offerings  to  the  deities  in  sacrifices  ; 

Ordinary  offerings  to  the  deities  (such  as  grain  and  sweets  and 
flowers) ; 

Performance  of  the  Roma  (by  pouring  libations  of  clarified  butter,. 
&c.,  on  the  sacred  fire)  ; 

Observance  of  vows  (relating  to  fasts,  abstention  from  particular 
kinds  of  food,  wearing  beards,  &c..)  ; 

Expiatory  rites  and  ceremonies  ; 

Observance  of  fasts  (in  honour  of  particular  deities) ; 

Performance  of  propitiatory  rites  (for  warding  off  evil  influences 
of  every  kind  by  worshipping  the  deities,  &c.)  ; 

Bows  and  prostrations  (to  the  deities  and  seniors  and  Brahmanas) ; 
Journeys  to  (sacred  waters  and  shrines).* 


*  ‘Mantras  or  sacred  texts  are  to  be  recited  by  priests  and  other  learned  Brahmanas.  The 
belief  is  very  general  in  this  country  in  their  efficacy.  Sometimes  ‘mantras’  are  written  on 
barks  or  leaves  and  then  inserted  within  small  drums  of  gold  or  silver  or  copper  or  Iron. 
These  drums  are  tied  to  the  arms  oraround  the  neck  of  the  patient.  Gems  of  certain  kinds 
are  believed  to  have  efficacy  in  warding  off  misfortunes  and  evil  spirits  and  bringing  good 
fortune. 

‘Vali’  means  such  offerings  to  the  deities  as  are  made  in  sacrifices.  They  consist  of  goats, 
sheep,  &c.,  though  grain  and  sweets  are  also  included. 

‘Upahara’ implies  ordinary  offerings  of  flowers,  &c,,  made  in  ‘pujahs’  or  worship.  /Of 


IOOO 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Thus  have  the  five  varieties  of  Insanity  beeii  expounded.20 

Distributed  according  to  the  consideration  of  Constitutional  and 
Accidental,  or  of  Curable  and  Incurable,  the  varieties  of  Insanity, 
though  numbered  five,  really  become  two.  21 

These  two  varieties  sometimes  run  into  of  become  blended  with 
each  other  in  consequence  of  the  union  of  the  causes,  as  already 
stated,  of  each. 

In  such  cases,  the  incubatory  symptoms  of  each  become  blended, 
as  also  their  developed  symptoms. 

In  this  connection  it  should  be  said  that  if  an  incurable  case  of 
constitutional  Insanity  blends  with  an  incurable  case  of  Accidental 
Insanity,  or  if  a  curable  case  of  one  variety  blends  with  an  -incurable 
case  of  another  variety,  it  should  be  regarded  as  Incurable. 

If  a  curable  case  of  one  variety  blends  with  a  curable  case  of 
another  variety,  it  becomes  curable.  The  method  of  cure,  it  should 
be  known,  consists  of  a  blending  of  the  methods  which  cure  both.*  22 

( Here  occur  some  verses ). 

Neither  the  deities,  nor  Gandharvas,  nor  Picachas,  nor  Rakshasas, 
nor  the  others,  afflict  a  man.  The  truth  is,  man  afflicts  himself.f  23 

This  affliction  is  not  on  account  of  those  deities  and  others  who 
pursue  the  man,  for  the  latter  (in  reality)  is  afflicted  by  his  own  acts. 

Indeed,  in  the  matter  of  this  affliction,  the  deities  and  others  have 
no  direct  agency.^  24 


course, ‘valis  and ‘upaharas’ are  to  be  given -away  by  priests  and  learned  Brahmanas  on 
behalf  of  the  afflicted  person. 

So  also  ‘Homa’  and  vows  and  expiatory  rites  and  ceremonies  of  propitiation,  &c.,  are  per- 
formable  by  others  in  behalf  of  the  afflicted.  The  insane  person  himself  cannot  possibly 
perform  them. — T. 

*  What  is  stated  in  this  aphorism  is  this  :  the  two  varieties  of  Insanity,  viz. ,  Constitu¬ 
tional  and  Accidental,  may  be  sometimes  seen  to  blend  together  ;  i.  e.,  there  are  cases  which 
are  partly  Constitutional  and  partly  Accidental.  Similarly,  the  two  varieties,  viz.,  the 
Curable  and  the  incurable,  may  also  be  seen  to  blend  together.  The  results  are  then  set  forth 
of  the  blending  of  Curable  and  Incurable  cases. — T. 

+  It  is  not  the  deities  that  affect  a  man  with  Insanity.  The  truth  is,  a  man,  owing  to  his 
own  sinful  acts  of  this  or  the  previous  lives,  becomes  liable  to  the  affliction.  Insanity  is  a 
punishment.  Man  brings  down  the  punishment  on  himself  by  his  own  acts. — T. 

+  The  real  cause  of.  the  affliction  being  the  man  himself,  7  e.‘,  his  own  sinful  acts,  the 


CHA  R4  KA.-SA  MHJTA. 


1001 


When  the  disease  is  generated  by  error  of  judgment,  an  intelli¬ 
gent  person  should  regard  it  as  born  of  the  diseased  man’s  own  acts. 
He  should  never  name  the  deities,  or  the  Pitris,  or  the  Rakshasas  as 
the  cause.  25  ,  . 

One  should  regard  one’s  own  self  as  the  agent  of  one’s  own  plea¬ 
sure  and  pain.  Hence,  one  should  betake  oneself  to  the  path  which 
leads  to  what  is  good,  and  never  swerve  from  it.*  26 

Contributing  to  the  gratification  of  the  deities  and  others,  practice 
of  all  that  is  good,  and  avoidance  of  everything  that  leads  to  a  dis¬ 
agreement  with  them, — all  these  are  within  one’s  own  competence.-!  27 
( Here  occurs  a  verse  containing  a  summary ). 

Here,  in  this  Lesson  on  the  Nidana  of  different  kinds  of  Insanity, 
the  varieties  of  the  disease,  its  causes,  the  two  kinds  of  symptoms, 
viz.,  Incubatory  and  those  which  belong  to  the  disease  when  it  has 
been  developed,  curability  and  otherwise,  as  also  the  aphorisms  rela¬ 
ting  to  treatment,  have  all  been  expounded  (by  the  Rishi).J  1 

Thus  ends  Lesson  VII  called  ‘Unmada-Nidana’  (causes  of  In¬ 
sanity)  in  the  Division  called  ‘Nidana,  in  the  treatise  of  Agnive^a  as 
revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  VIII. 

We  shall,  after  this,  expound  the  ‘Nidana’  of  ‘Apasmara’  or 
Epilepsy.§ 


deities,  &c.,  are  only  ‘nimittas’  or  subsidiary  agents  and  not  direct  agents.  It  will  be  remem¬ 
bered  that  in'the  ‘Gita,’  Krishna,  when  asking  Arjuna  to  slay  the  warriors  assembled  on  the 
field  of  Kurukshetra,  explains  to  him  that  he,  Arjuna,  would  only  be  the  ‘nimitta’  of  the 
slaughter,  for  Krishna  himself  had  already  slain  them.  Krishna  was  the  direct  agent  of  the 
act.  Arjuna  was  to  be  only  a  subsidiary  agent. — T. 

*  Gangadhara  reads  ‘nottraset’  for  ‘na  bhraset.’  The  latter  is  undoubtedly  the  correct 
reading.— T. 

t  Gangadhara  reads  the  second  line  as  ‘te  cha  tebhyah  &c.’  This  seems  to  be  wrong. 
‘Na  cha  tebhyah  &c.’  is  much  better — T 

t  ‘Nimitta’  implies  ‘causes.’  Taken  in  a  restricted  sense,  it  may  mean  the  indirect 
agencies  such  as  the  wrath  of  the  deities,  &c.,  which  produce  the  disease. 

‘Kriya’  implies  treatment.  ‘Sutras’  are  aphorisms.  Only  the  ‘Sutras’  relating  to  treat¬ 
ment  have  been  laid  down.  Elaborate  instructions  will  be  laid  down  in  the  Division  called 
‘Chikitsa.’ — T. 

§  ‘ApasmSra’  is  derived  from  the  prefix  ‘Apa’  and  the  root  ‘Smri.’  ‘Smri’  means  to 


1002 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


’  Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  1 

Verily,  there  are  four  varieties  of  ‘Apasmara’  viz.,  i.  wind-born, 
2.  bile-born,  3.  phlegm-born,  and  4.  that  born  of  all  the  three  faults.  ? 

These  appear  quickly  in  persons  that  are  of  the  following 
descriptions  : 

Persons  whose  minds  have  been  afflicted  by  ‘Rajas’  (Passion)  and 
‘Tamas’  (Darkness)  ; 

Persons  in  whom  the  faults,  excessively  accumulated  and  become 
inharmonious,  have  begun  to  course  upwards  ;* 

Persons,  who  take,  in  combinations  opposed  to  rules  of  harmony, 
such  food  and  drink  as  are  filthy,  or  mixed  with  what  is  vitiated 
or  impure  ;f 

Persons  who  practise  the  injunctions  of  the  ‘Tantras’  in  a  manner 
that  is  opposed  to  ordained  methods 


iremember  or  recollect.  ‘Apa’  signifies  absence  or  loss.  Thus  ‘Apasmara,’  literally,  implies 
■that  disease  in  which  the  memory  or  recollection  is  lost  or  confused.  The  characteristic 
■feature  of  Epilepsy  is,  of  course,  fits  of  total  unconsciousness. — T. 

*  ‘Udbhranta’  is  explained  by  the  commentators  as  ‘having  an  upward  course.’  It  is  the 
ibrain  that  is  particularly  affected.  This  result  is,  according  to  Hindu  physicians,  due  to  the 
1  upward  course  of  the  excited  faults. 

‘Vishama’  is  iuharmonious.  As  long  as  the  faults  are  in  a  state  of  harmony,  there  is  no 

■  disease.  The  inharmoniousness  of  the  faults,  occasioned  by  the  increase  or  predominance  of 
*one  over  the  other,  is  the  cause  of  disease. 

‘Vahu’  does  not  imply  strength  of  number  but  of  measure  or  degree.  Hence,  it  signifies 
.excess  of  excitement  or  accumulation. — T. 

+  ‘Samala’  is  ‘with  filth.’  ‘Vikritopahita’  is  combined  with  what  is  vitiated.’  An  article 
■of  food  may  be  itself  pure  and  good  ;  yet  it  may  be  combined  with  some  other  thing  that  is 
■vitiated.  As  an  example  :  potatoes,  radishes,  cauliflowers,  etc.,  are  frequently  cooked  with 
‘Bhetki’  fish  that  is  slightly  rotten.  No  doubt,  this  adds  to  the  flavour,  but  then  it  certainly 
■becomes  injurious. 

‘Aguchi’  is  impure,  that  is,  mixed  with  hair,  bones,  etc. 

‘Vaishamyayuktena  upayogavidhina’  implies  dressed  or  cooked  according  to  methods  that 
■make  the  cooked  product  consist  of  inharmonious  ingredients.  Food  that  is  ‘samala,’  ‘vikri- 
-topahita,’  and  ‘aguchi,’  is  made  more  deleterious  by  ‘vaishamyayukta  upayogavidhi.’— T. 

4  In  the  ‘Tantras’  instructions  are  laid  down  about,  for  example,  ‘Hatha-yoga,’  Those 
■instructions  should  be  rigidly  obeyed  by  neophytes.  By  attempting  to  reach  the  goal  by  a 

■  different  path,  one  becomes  liable  to  various  diseases,  particularly  Insanity  and:fits  of  Epil¬ 
epsy.  The  translator  knows  two  or  three  men  who  having  set  themselves  to  the  practice 
‘Pranayama’  or  the. regulation  of  breath,  became  afflicted  with  severe  diseases  by  simply  dis¬ 
obeying  the  idj unctions  of  their  pceceptors,  that  is,  by  proceeding  beyond  the  limits  set  by 
the  latter.  In  every  case,,  having  held  the  breath  too  long,  they  were  unable  .to  exhale  .it 

.easily. — T. 


CHAR  AKA -SAM HIT  A. 


1003 


Persons  who  practise  abnormal  attitudes  and  movements  of  the 
body  ;  and 

Persons  whose  bodies  are  exceedingly  lean. 

The  faults,  becoming  excited,  of  the  persons  described  above,  viz., 
those  whose  minds  are  assailed  by  ‘Rajas’  (Passion)  and  ‘Tamas’ 
(Darkness),  and  the  rest,  seize  the  heart,  whic  h  is  the  foremost  seat 
of  the  inner  self,  as  also  the  seats  of  the  senses,  a  nd  locate  themselves 
there. 

While  located  there  and  stirred  by  the  impulses  of  lust,  wrath, 
fear,  cupidity,  heedlessness,  joy,  grief,  and  anxiety,  they  overwhelm 
the  heart  and  the  seats  of  the  senses. 

The  result  of  this  is  that  the  person  becomes  subject  to  a  fit  of 
Epilepsy.*  3 

‘Apasmara’  (Epilepsy),  again,  it  is  said,  is  a  temporary  introgres- 
sion  into  darkness,  accompanied  by  hideous  contortions,  owing  to 
the  drowning  of  memory,  understanding,  and  mind.j-  4 

These  are  the  incubatory  symptoms  of  Epilepsy,  viz., 

Contraction  of  the  eye-brows  ; 

Constant  crookedness  of  the  eyes  ; 

Hearing  imaginary  voices  ; 

Discharge  of  saliva  and  nasal  mucus  ; 

Absence  of  all  desire  for  food  t 

Disgust  for  food  ; 

Inability  to  digest  the  food  taken  ; 

A  sensation  of  pressure  on  the  chest  (like  to  what  happens  in 
nightmare) ; 

A  rumbling  noise  in  the  abdomen  ; 

Weakness  of  the  body  ; 

Relaxation  of  the  limbs  ; 

Heedlessness  and  stupefaction  ; 

The  vision  of  Darkness  ; 


*  This  explanation  is  certainly  fanciful.  It  has  no  basis  in  Science.  The  faults,  becom¬ 
ing  excited,  locate  themselves  in  the  heart  and  the  nerves  which  are  the  seats  of  the  senses. 
They,  of  course,  lie  in  a  quiescent  state  there,  till  stirred  by  the  impulses  of  lust  and 
wrath,  &c.  When  stirred,  they  overwhelm  or  powerfully  afflict  the  heart  and  those  nerves. 
The  result  of  this  is  a  fit  of  Epilepsy.  All  this  is  purely  imaginary. — T. 

t  ‘Avasthikam’  implies  ‘for  the  time  being,’  that  is,  temporary.  ‘Sattwa’  here  "means 
mind  and  not  the  quality  of  goodness. — T. 

I26a 


1004 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Swoons  or  fits  of  unconsciousness  ; 

Frequent  vertigo  or  giddiness  of  the  head  ; 

A  sense  of  inebriation,  dancing,  a  sensation  of  being  pierced,  or  of 
pain,  or  of  trembling,  or  of  falling  down  from  high  places,  in 
dreams. 

After  the  manifestation  of  these  incubatory  indications,  the  disease 

manifests  itself.* * * §  5 

Here  are  laid  down  indications  that  lead  to  a  particular  know¬ 
ledge  of  Epilepsy. 

These  are, — 

Frequent  swoons,  and  frequent  accessions  of  consciousness  ; 

Jutting  out  of  the  eyes  into  prominent  relief ; 

Discordant  bewailings  ;  f 

Copious  discharge  of  froth  from  the  mouth  ; 

Bending  of  the  neck  ;j 

Piercing  pains  in  the  head  (at  such  times  when  the  patient  regains 
consciousness)  ;§ 

Bending  and  swerving  of  the  fingers  from  their  straight  or  normal 
position  ;TT 


*  Amongst  the  incubatory  symptoms  occur  certain  sensations  in  dreams.  The  person  feels, 
in  dreams,  that  he  is  inebriated  with  wine  ;  that  he  is  dancing ;  that  he  is  pierced  with 
weapons  ;  that  he  is  suffering  great  pain  ;  that  he  is  shivering  ;  that  he  is  falling  down  from 
a  high  place  ;  &c. 

‘Bhrama’  is  a  technical  word,  implying  vertigo  or  giddiness  of  the  head.  Gangadhara 
takes  it  as  implying  a  sensation  of  the  entire  body  being  whirled  round  and  round,  with  the 
surrounding  objects  also  whirled  in  the  same  manner. — T. 

t  ‘Asamna  vilapantam’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  ‘apritya  rudantam  that  is, 
crying  from  discontentedness  or  cheerlessness.  This  can  scarcely  be  correct.  The  patient 
himself  does  not  remember  that  he  was  crying.  The  expression  really  means  discordant 
cries.— T. 

+  ‘Akhata  gribam’  I  render  as  ‘bending  of  the  neck.’  The  root  ‘kha’  generally  implies 
‘khanana’  or  digging.  Here  it  is  used  in  a  different  sense,  viz.,  that  of  bending.  As  a  matter 
of  fact,  when  an  epileptic  fit  occurs,  the  patient’s  neck,  is  seen  to  bend  or  incline  either  to 
the  right  or  the  left,  or  sometimes  forwards  or. backwards. — T. 

§  ‘Abiddha  giraskam’  implies  piercing  pains  in  the  head.  Of  course,  it  is  only  at  intervals 
of  consciousness  that  the  patient  feels  such  pains  in  the  head.— T. 

IT  ‘VishamavinatSngulim’  implies  that  the  fingers  are  both  ‘vishama’  and  ‘vinata.’  The 
first  implies  that  they  are  stretcheed  out  in  attitudes  that  are  not  normal  or  straight.  The 
second  means  bent.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1005 


Tossing  of  the  thighs,  the  arms,  and  the  legs  ; 

Roughness,  as  also  redness  or  darkness  of  hue  of  the  nails,  the 
eyes,  the  face,  and  the  skin  generally  ; 

Delirious  speeches  ;* 

Sight  of  forms  that  move  as  quickly  as  flashes  of  lightning,  and 
that  are  rough  and  dry  ; 

Aggravation  of  the  disease  by  indulgence  in  food  and  practices 
that  are  provocative  of  the  wind  ;  and 

Relief  of  the  malady  by  indulgence  in  food  and  practices  of  an 
opposite  kind,  (that  is,  food  and  practices  which  allay  the  wind). 

The  above  symptoms  manifest  themselves  in  Epilepsy  caused  by 
excited  wind.  6 

Frequent  swoons  and  frequent  accessions  of  consciousness  ; 

Indistinct  mutterings  ; 

Rolling  and  tossing  on  the  ground  ; 

Greenness,  or  yellowness,  or  a  coppery  hue  of  the  nails,  the  eyes, 
the  face,  and  of  the  skin  generally  : 

The  sight  of  forms  that  are  blood-stained,  fierce,  terrible,  blazing, 
and  angry  ; 

Aggravation  of  the  malady  by  indulgence  in  food  and  practices 
that  are  provocative  of  the  bile  ;  and 

Relief  of  the  malady  by  indulgence  in  food  and  practices  that 
allay  the  bile. 

The  above  symptoms  manifest  themselves  in  Epilepsy  caused  by 
excited  bile.  7 

Long-extending  swoons,  with  long  intervals  of  consciousness  ; 

Falling  down  upon  the  ground  ; 

The  exhibition,  in  a  slight  degree,  of  abnormal  movements  and 
attitudes  ; 

Discharge  of  saliva  from  the  mouth  ; 

Whiteness  (or  paleness)  of  the  nails,  the  eyes,  the  face,  and  of  the 
whole  skin  generally  ; 

Sight  of  forms  that  are  white,  heavy,  and  oily  ;f 


*  The  correct  reading  is  ‘anabasthita  vachanam’  after  which  comes  ‘chapala  parusha- 
ruksharupadarginam.’  ‘Vachanam’  is  omitted  by  Gangadhara.  The  compound  simply  be¬ 
comes  ungrammatical  and  senseless. — T. 

1'  The  adjective  ‘snigdha,’  applied  to  forms,  may  imply  amiability.  Probably,  this  is  the 


ioo  6 


CH ARAKA-S  AM  HIT A\ 


Aggravation  of  the  malady  by  indulgence  in  food  and  practices 
that  are  provocative  of  the  phlegm  ; 

Relief  of  the  malady  by  indulgence  in  food  and  practices  that 
allay  the  phlegm. 

That  Epilepsy  should  be  regarded  as  born  of  all  the  three  faults 
in  which  the  symptoms  of  the  three  aforesaid  varieties  are  manifested 
in  a  combined  form. 

This  variety  of  Epilepsy  is  said  to  be  incurable. 

Thus  have  the  four  varieties  of  Epilepsy  been  explained.  8 

Sometimes  Epilepsy  of  the  variety  called  Accidental  supervenes 
upon  these  four  (Constitutional)  varieties. 

Instructions  regarding  this  Accidental  variety  of  Epilepsy  are  to 
be  laid  down  hereafter. 

The  special  indications  of  Accidental  Epilepsy  are  the  appearance 
of  symptoms  in  addition  to  those  which  have  been  already  stated. 
These  additional  symptoms  slightly  differ  from  those  which  belong 
to  the  Constitutional  varieties  of  the  diseases.*  9 

Unto  persons  suffering  from  Epilepsy,  correctives  (purgatives, 
emetics,  &c.)  of  keen  virtues,  as  also  alleviatives  of  similar  virtues, 
are  beneficial.  These  correctives  and  alleviatives,  however,  should  be 
selected  agreeably  to  the  particular  variety  that  confronts  the 
physician. 

When,  however,  the  Accidental  variety  supervenes  on  any  of  the 
constitutional  varieties,  Mantras  are  beneficial. 

On  the  well-known  occasion  of  the  destruction  of  Daksha’s 
Sarifice  in  days  of  old,  ‘Gulma’  (or  abdominal  tumours)  arose  in  em¬ 
bodied  beings  who  fled  in  various  directions,  in  consequence  of  the 
convulsions  to  which  their  bodies  were  subjected  owing  to  the  speed 
with  which  they  ran,  and  swam  across  rivers  and  lakes  and  large 
tanks  and  jumped  upwards  and  leapt  forwards. 

In  consequence,  on  the  same  occasion,  of  their  eating  (in  copious 


meaning  here,  as  opposed  to  ‘ugra’  or  fierce,  and  ‘bhairava’  or  horrible,  which  are  the 
characteristics  of  the  forms  seen  in  Epilepsy  caused  by  excited  bile. — T. 

*  The  Constitutional  varieties  are  four,  viz.,  the  three  born  of  each  of  the  three  faults 
separately,  and  one  born  of  all  the  three  faults  in  a  combined  state.  Besides  these  four,  there 
is  the  Accidental  variety.  In  this  certain  additional  symptoms  appear  which  are  slightly 
different  from  those  of  the  Constitutional  varieties. — T, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1007 


measure)  the  sacrificial  butter,  ‘Prameha’  and  Leprosy  of  various 
kinds  were  generated. 

In  consequence  of  the  fear,  anxiety,  and  grief  that  stirred  them, 
arose  the  diverse  varieties  of  Insanity. 

In  ’consequence,  again,  of  their  contact  with  various  kinds  of 
noxious  creatures  and  impure  objects  arose  the  different  varieties  of 
Epilepsy.  10 

As  regards  Fever,  it  sprung  from  the  head  of  Mahegwara.  From 
the  heat,  again,  of  Fever,  arose  ‘blood-bile.’  (that  is,  haemorrhage). 

From  excessive  indulgence  in  sexual  congress,  arose  phthisis 
which  afflicted  the  lord  of  the  constellations  viz.,  the  deity  of  the 
moon).*  n 

( Here  occur  some  verses ). 

Verily,  Epilepsy  springs  from  (excited)  wind,  (excited)  bile,  and 
(excited)  phlegm. 

A  fourth  variety  springs  from  all  the  three  excited  together. 

This  last  should  not  be  taken  up  for  treatment.  12 


*  It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  aphorisms  9  and  10  are  either  of  Agnivega  or  of  Charaka, 
both  of  whom  are  very  sensible  writers.  They  who  did  not  believe  in  ‘ayus’  or  an  allotted 
period  of  existence  for  each  person,  they  who  have  made  so  many  sensible  observations  on 
the  nature  of  disease,  could  not  believe  in  the  Pauranic  tale  of  fever  springing  from  the 
forehead  of  Mahadeva  whose  wrath  was  excited  against  Daksha  for  the  latter’s  endeavour  to 
perform  a  great  sacrifice  without  giving  due  honours  to  him.  It  is  impossible  for  them  to 
believe  in  such  fanciful  origin  of  abdominal  tumours,  of  ‘Prameha,’  of  Leprosy,  and  Phthisis. 
The  origin  of  phthisis,  again,  as  explained  here,  differs  from  what  has  been  said  before. 
(Vide  Lesson  VI.  ante).  There  it  has  been  said  that  phthisis  afflicted  the  deity  of  the  Moon 
through  the  curse  of  Daksha,  the  father  of  the  seven  and  twenty  daughters,  viz. ,  the  seven 
and  twenty  constellations,  who  were  wedded  to  Chandramas  or  the  deity  of  the  moon.  The 
immediate  cause  of  the  curse  was  Chandramas’s  preference  for  only  one  of  his  seven  and 
twenty  wives  against  the  repeated  warnings  of  Daksha,  his  father-in-law. 

This  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the  several  maladies  is  as  sane  as  the  Biblical  explana¬ 
tion  of  the  confusion  of  tongues  as  due  to  the  endeavour  to  raise  a  high  tower  in  Babylon  as 
a  safety  against  future  deluges. 

The  Pauranic  incident  of  Daksha’s  great  sacrifice  has  been  explained  in  a  previous  note. 
Daksha  is  one  of  the  sons  of  Brahman,  the  Grandsire  of  the  universe.  He  was  created  by  a 
fiat  of  Brahman’s  will.  He  made  preparations  to  perform  a  grand  sacrifice  without  giving 
to  Mahadeva  any  share  of  the  sacrificial  offerings.  His  youngest  daughter,  Sati  (Durga) 
was  wedded  to  Mahadeva.  Neither  she,  nor  Mahadeva,  was  invited,  although  the  whole 
universe  was  invited.  Moved  by  Daksha’s  censures  on  Mahadeva,  Sati  cast  off  her  body. 
Mahadeva’s  ire  was  roused.  He  came  with  his  ghostly  army  and  destroyed  the  sacrifice. 
Everbody  fled  away  in  fear.— T. 


ioo8 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Wise  physicians,  with  rapt  attention,  cure  the  curable  varieties  of 
this  disease  by  treating  them  with  correctives  of  keen  virtues,  as  also 
alleviatives,  agreeably  to  the  requirements  of  each  case.  J3 

When  the  Accidental  variety  of  the  disease  supervenes  upon  any 
of  the  Constitutional  varieties,  the  treatment  should  then,  according 
to  physicians  of  wisdom,  consist  of  the  union  of  remedies  for  both  the 
Accidental  and  the  Constitutional  forms.*  H 

A  physician  who  understands  the  particular  features  of  all  dis¬ 
eases,  and  who  is  conversant  also  with  the  particulars  of  all  medicines, 
succeeds  in  killing  all  diseases.  Such  a  person  is  never  confounded, 
nor  does  he  commit  errors  when  called  to  the  patient’s  side.  :S 

This  ^excellent  Division  of  Nidana,  has  thus  been  treated 
elaborately. 

It  is  (sometimes)  seen  that  a  particular  disease  operates  as  the 
‘Nidana’  or  cause  of  another  disease.  16 

Thus,  from  the  excessive  heat  of  Fever  arises  blood-bile 
(haemorrhage). 

From  blood-bile  (or  haemorrhage)  springs  fever. 

From,  again,  these  two,  (viz.,  blood-bile  and  fever)  springs  con¬ 
sumption.  17 

From  enlargement  of  Spleen  arises  abdominal  Dropsy. 

From  abdominal  Dropsy  arises  dropsical  swellings  in  other  parts 
of  the  body. 

From  Piles  arises  painful  dropsy  of  the  abdomen,  as  also  Internal 
tumours.  18 

Then,  again,  from  Catarrh  or  cold  in  the  nose  springs  Cough  or 
Bronchitis.  From  Bronchitis  springs  Consumption. 

From  Consumption  and  ulceration  of  the  lungs  operating  as 
causes  springs  Phthisis.f  19 


*  ‘Sadharanam  karma’  implies  the  anion  of  remedies  laid  down  for  the  Constitutional 
varieties  as  also  the  Accidental  one.  Thus  the  use  of  correctives  of  keen  virtues  and  alle¬ 
viatives  should  go  hand  in  hand  with  the  recitation  of  mantras,  &c. ,  the  last  being  laid 
down' for  treating  the  Accidental  variety  only. — T. 

t  ‘Kshaya’  is,  literally,  waste,  Thus  loss  of  juices,  of  blood,  of  flesh,  of  semen,  &c. , 
is  known  by  the  name  of  ‘Kshaya’  which  is  generally  rendered  Consumption. 

‘Uraga’  is,  as  explained  by  Gangadhara  ‘urahkshata,  or  ulceration  of  the  lungs. 

‘Kshaya’  and  ‘uraga’  (in  the  last  line)  form  a  ‘dwandwa’  compound  hence  the  genetive 
singular  inflection. 

‘(Josha,’  in  the  last  line,  stands  for  phthisis.. — T. 


charaka-samhita: 


1009 


These  diseases  at  first  remain  as  principal  ones.  They  then  be¬ 
come  causes  of  other  diseases. 

It  is  seen  that  when  they  become  causes  of  othes  diseases,  they 
retain  their  individuality  while  bringing  about  others.  Sometimes, 
however,  they  merge  into  the  maladies  they  bring  about  so  completely 
as  to  lose  their  individuality.  20 

Sometimes,  a  particular  disease,  becoming  the  cause  of  another 
disease,  disappears  completely. 

A  disease,  again,  is  seen  that  does  pot  disappear  after  bringing 
about  another  whose  cause  it  becomes.*  21 

Thus  diverse  complicated  diseases,  that  are  very  painful,  are  seen 
to  afflict  human  beings,  in  consequence  of  impropriety  of  treatment 
as  also  of  particular  diseases  being  the  causes  of  others.  22 

That  treatment  is  improper  (or  incorrect)  which  relieves  a  parti¬ 
cular  disease  but  excites  others. 

That  treatment,  again,  is  proper  (or  correct)  which  relieves  all  the 
co-exciting  diseases  without  exciting  any  of  them.j-  2 3 

One  disease  may  be  the  cause  of  many,  or  one  may  be  the  cause  of 
one,  or  many  may  be  the  cause  of  one,  or  many  the  cause  many.  24 
Thus,  from  one  cause,  viz.,  dryness,  may  spring  fever,  vertigo, 
delirium,  and  other  diseases  :  also  from  one  cause,  viz.,  dryness,  may 
spring  only  one  disease,  viz.,  fever.  25 

From  also  many  causes  may  spring  one  disease,  as  fever  from 
dryness  and  other  causes  ;  so  from  many  causes,  viz.,  dryness  and  the 
rest,  may  spring  many  diseases  such  as  fever  and  others.  26 

Sometimes  one  symptom  belongs  to  many  diseases  ;  also  one 
symptom  belongs  to  one  disease. 

Many  symtoms,  again,  are  manifested  by  one  disease  ;  also  many 
symptoms  are  manifested  by  many  diseases.  27 

Thus  of  many  diseases  that  spring  from  abnormal  practices,  fever 
is  regarded  as  one  (common)  symptom. 

Further,  of  one  disease,  viz.,  fever,  only  heat  is  said  to  be  the  one 
symptom.  28 


*  It  seems  that  21  is  a  repetition  of  20.  The  statements  made  in  20,  are  only  repeated 
in  a  clearer  form  in  21. — T. 

f  The  last  clause  of  the  last  line  is  exceedingly  terse.  I  expand  it  slightly  in  the  trans¬ 
lation,  for  bringing  out  its  sense  clearly. — T. 


IOIO 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Thus,  again,  one  disease,  viz.,  fever,  is  distinguished  by  many 
symptoms  which  belong  to  many  (that  is,  all  those)  diseases  that 
spring  from  abnormal  practices. 

Lastly,  many  (that  is,  all  the  above-mentioned)  symptoms  charac¬ 
terise  many  diseases  such  as  fever,  asthma,  hiccup,  and  others.*  29 
Of  many  diseases  the  method  of  alleviation  is  one ;  so  one  method 
of  alleviation  is  applicable  to  one  disease. 

Of  one  disease  there  are  many  methods  of  alleviation  ;  also  of 
many  diseases  many  are  the  methods  of  alleviation.  3° 

The  (one)  alleviative  of  all  those  diseases  which  spring  from  (de¬ 
rangements  of)  the  ‘amagaya,’  is  (the  observance  of)  fast.  3* 

Then,  of  one  disease,  such  as  fever,  there  is  one  alleviative,  viz., 
fast.  32 

Also,  of  one  disease,  such  as  fever,  there  are  many  alleviatives, 
viz.,  light  food  and  such,  others. 

The  same  are  the  alleviatives  of  (many  diseases,  such  as)  fever, 
cough,  hiccup,  and  similar  other  diseases.  33 

That  disease  is  (called)  easily  curable  which  is  cured  within  a  brief 
space  of  time  and  with  easy  means. 

That  disease  is  (called)  curable  with  difficulty  which  needs  for  its 
cure  much  effort  and  a  long  time.  34 

That  disease  is  (called)  suppressible,  which  is  never  completely 
eradicated.  It  falls  under  the  class  Incurable. 

That,  again,  is  termed  exceedingly  incurable  which  baffles  all 
sorts  of  treatment.  Such  a  disease  should  not  be  treated  by  the 
physician.-)-  35 

*  These  3  verses,  viz.,  27,  28,  and  29,  are  very  important.  They  are,  as  it  were,  the 
keystone  of  ‘Nidana,’  that  is,  considerations  about  the  originating  causes  of  dis  g  se.  Their 
sense  has  been  elaborated  in  the  verses  that  follow.  Hence(  it  is  not  necessary  to  point  out 
here  their  bearing  upon  both  diagnosis  and  treatment.  In  verse  28  occurs  the  compound, 
‘vishamarambhamulan5m’  in  the  genetive  form.  Here  it  stands  for  ‘vishamarambhamu- 
lanam  vyadhinam’,  that  is,  ‘of  those  diseases  whi  ch  have  for  their  root  or  origin  abnormal 
practices,  in  respect,  of  course,  of  eating,  drinking,  dressing,  moving,  &c.’  In  a  more  limited 
sense,  the  word  implies  such  diseases  as  arise  from  the  improper  administration  of  correctives 
and  alleviatives,  &c. 

The  same  compound,  in,  however,  the  instrumental  form,  occurs  in  the  first  line  of  verse 
29.  Here  it  is  used  as  an  adjectival  substantive,  the  sense  being  that  of  ‘vishamarambha- 
mulaih  lingaih’,  that  is,  symptoms  belonging  to  diseases  caused  by  abnormal  practices  (if, 
of  course,  the  instrumental  form  be  disregarded). — T. 

t  In  these  two  verses  the  Rishi  classifies  the  diseases  according  to  their  curability  and 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


ion 


A  disease  which  is  incurable  can  never  be  cured. 

On  the  other  hand,  a  curable  disease  may  become  incurable. 
Diseases  change  their  nature  in  consequence  of  a  defect  in  the 
four-fold  means  of  cure  as  also  through  superhuman  agency.*  35 

A  well-versed  physician  should  mark  with  attention  the  aggrava¬ 
tion,  the  equipoise,  and  the  depression  of  the  faults  {viz.,  wind,  bile, 
and  phlegm)  as  also  the  condition  of  the  patient’s  body,  his  digestive 
power,  his  strength,  and  his  mind,  though  these  conditions  may  be 
exceedingly  subtle  and  difficult  to  mark.  36 

Indeed,  a  skilful  physician  adopts  a  particular  means  of  cure,  in  a 
particular  condition  by  observing  attentively  that  particular  condition 
of  the  disease.  37 

It  is  generally  seen  that  the  faults,  when  they  take  a  transverse 
course,  afflict  the  patient  for  a  long  time. 

The  physician  who  has  observed  with  attention  the  (condition) 
of  the  (patient’s)  body,  digestive  power,  and  strength,  should  not,  in 
haste,  betake  himself  to  the  treatment  of  such  faults.  3s 

A  wise  physician  should  either  allay  them  by  administering  alle- 
viatives  or  have  them  brought  into  the  region  of  ‘kostha’  (stomach). 
Ascertaining  that  the  faults  have  been  brought  there,  he  should  expel 
them  (by  using  drugs)  according  to  their  nature. f  39 

The  symptoms  of  several  diseases  that  have  been  mentioned  in 
brief  (in  this  Lesson)  for  a  right  ascertainment  of  the  (particular)  dis¬ 
ease,  are  themselves  so  many  diseases.  But  when  the  main  diseases 


incurability.  The  curable  are  of  two  sorts,  ‘sukhasadhya’  (easily  curable)  and  ‘krichcchra- 
sadhya’  (curable  with  difficulty).  The  incurable  diseases  are  also  classed  under  two  heads  : 
Some  are  ‘Yapya’  or  suppressible  ;  some  are  ‘Praty&kheya’  or  should  not  be  taken  up  for 
treatment.  The  suppressible  diseases  cannot  be  cured  totally.  They  can  only  be  suppressed 
by  the  aid  of  proper  treatment.  But  they  are  sure  to  manifest  themselves  at  intervals.  A 
slight  cause  is  sufficient  to  provoke  them  into  manifestation. — T. 

*  Padavacliara’  is  made  up  of  the  two  words,  ‘pada’  and  ‘avachara.’  ‘Pada’  literally 
means  a  foot.  Here  it  is  used  metaphorically  for  a  means  of  cure.  The  four-fold,  means .  of 
cure  ate  laid  down  in  Lesson  IX  of  the  Division  called  ‘Sutrasthana.’  They  are — I.  the 
physician,  2.  drug,  3.  nurse,  and  4.  patient.  In  that  Lesson  the;  Rishi  mentions  what 
virtues  each  of  these  should  be  possessed  of  to  become  causes  for  the  cure  of  disease.  A 
deficiency  of  any  of  these  means  of  cure  is  meant  by  ‘padavacliara.’ — T. 

t  The  drugs  should  accord  with  the  nature  of  the  fault.  The  sense  is  that  if  the  fault 
excited  be  phlegm,  such  drug  should  he  used  as  alleviates  phlegm.  The  drug  may  be  an 
emetic  or  a  purgative  as  the  case  requires. 

128 


1012 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


are  to  be  considered  they  should  be  taken  as  symptoms  only  and 
not  as  (separate)  diseases.*  4° 

The  abnormal  condition  and  the  normal  one  are  under  the 
influence  of  their  respective  causes.  They  cannot  stand  without  their 
determinants.  These  two  sorts  of  conditions  are  the  sole  subjects  in 
brief  (of  medical  science).!  41 

( Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary). 

The  causes,  incubatory  indications,  symptoms,  ‘upagaya’  or  diag¬ 
nosis  by  experimental  treatment,  ‘samprapti’,  the  first  origin  of 
disease,  the  aphorisms  in  brief  relating  to  treatment,  the  consider¬ 
ations  of  curability  and  incurability,  of  the  eight  diseases  having  fever 
for  their  first,  as  also  the  causes,  symptoms,  and  methods  of  allevia¬ 
tion,  explained  separately,  of  each  particular  disease,  and  causes  and 
nomenclature  of  diseases  and  symptoms, — all  these  fall  within  the 
Division  called  Nidana  which  has  been  expounded  here  in  brief.!  13 


*  The  necessity  of  this  is  to  guide  a  physician  in  the  diagnosis,  and,  hence,  the  treatment 
of  a  disease.  A  physician  is  called.  He  finds  a  patient  suffering  not  from  a  particular  ail¬ 
ment  but  from  a  complexity  of  ailments.  He  sees,  for  instance,  a  patient  suffering  not  simply 
from  fever  but  from  thirst,  headache,  gonorrhsea  and  a  hundred  other  ailments.  Which  is 
the  real  disease — should  be  the  first  thing  for  him  to  ascertain.  For  if  the  real  disease  be 
detected,  treatment  of  that  disease  will  assuage  all  the  ailments.  That  ailment  which 
when  treated  alleviates  all  others  is  the  real  disease  ;  the  others  are  only  supervening  symp¬ 
toms.  It  should  not,  however,  be  thought  that  those  which  are  called  symptoms,  are  mere 
indications  of  disease.  Thjy,  in  their  turn,  become  separate  diseases.  So  there  is  no  hard  and 
fast  division  between  symptoms  and  diseases.  In  other  words,  we  cannot  say  that  certain 
ailments  are  always  symptoms  and  certain  others  are  always  diseases.  What  ailment  is 
the  symptom  and  what  the  disease  entirely  depends  upon  the  nature  of  the  case.  A 
general  rule  on  the  point  can  be  laid  down  so  far  that  those  ailments  are  symptoms  which 
are  accessories  and  those  constitute  the  disease  which  are  principal.  Physicians  should,  no 
doubt,  detect  and  treat  the  chief  ailment,  i.  e.  the  disease.  But  sometimes  they  should  pay 
heed  to  a  symptom  as  well.  A  symptom  that  is  aggressive  should  be  first  attended  to,  such 
as  thirst  in  cholera.— T. 

t  When  there  is  harmony  in  the  constituents  of  the  body,  the  body  is  said  to  be  in  a 
normal  or  healthy  condition.  Any  break  in  the  harmony  is  the  abnormal  or  the  diseased 
condition.  The  aim  of  medical  science  is  nothing  more  than  a  restoration  of  the  original 
harmony. — T. 

X  The  word  rendered  ‘causes’  or  ‘cause’  occurs  twice  within  this  summary,  first  as  ‘Hetavah 
-in  the  first  line  of  the  first  verse,  and  then  as  ‘Hetu’  in  the  second  line  of  the  second  verse. 
*Rupa’,  ‘linga’,  and  ‘lakshmana’,  again,  convey  the  same  sense.  The  fact  is,  ‘Hetavah’  as 
used  in  the  first  line  means  causes  different  from  the  kind  of  causes  which  is  implied  by 
.‘Hetu’,  in. the.  second  line,  .pf;  the  sepond  verse..  So  also  the  words  ‘Rupa’,  ‘linga’,  and 
lakshmana’  indicate  different  classes  of  symptoms.  Beginning  with  the  first,  verse.;  ‘Hetavah’ 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1013 


Thus  ends  Lesson  eight,  in  the  Division  called  Nidana,  of  Agni- 
vega’s  treatise  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


refers  to  the  definition  and  synonyms  of  the  word  as  given  in  aphorism  2  of  the  first  Lesson 
of  this  Division.  Similarly,  ‘Purvarupa’  refers  to  what  has  been  said  in  the  latter  part  of 
aphorism  3  of  the  same  Lesson.  The  definition  only  of  the  term  is  implied.  The  same 
should  be  said  of  the  words  ‘Rupani’,  and  ‘Upagaya’,  and  ‘Samprapti.’  Only  the  definitions 
are  referred  to.  ( Vide  aphorisms  3,  4,  and  5  of  Lesson  I).  ‘Purvamutpattih’  has  reference 
to  the  first  origin  of  disease.  ( Vide  Lesson  VIII,  aphorisms  10  and  II. 

The  aphorisms,  in  brief,  about  treatment  occur  after  every  disease  noticed  in  this  Division  ; 
only  the  general  methods  of  treatment  have  been  referred  to. 

The  considerations  of  Curability  and  Incurability  occur  after  the  mention  of  each  disease. 
‘Hetu’,  ‘linga’  and  ‘upaganti’,  meaning  ‘causes’,  ‘symptoms’,  and  ‘methods  of  alleviation’, 
have  reference  to  what  has  been  said  separately  of  each  disease. 

As  regards  ‘causes  and  nomenclature  of  diseases  and  symptoms’,  vide  aphorisms  begin¬ 
ning  with  24  of  Lesson  VIII. 


END  OF  NIDANA-STHANA. 


SPECIAL  NOTICE. 

Our  subscribers  will  see  that  the  Division  called  ‘Nidana’ 
is  concluded  in  this  fasciculus.  The  Division  called  ‘Chikitsa 
will  begin  in  the  next.  Of  all  the  Divisions  of  this  great 
work,  the  most  important  and  useful  is  ‘Chikitsa.’  There  is  a 
saying,  the  authorship  of  which  is  unknown,  which  funs — 

viRtt  ^ n 

“In  ‘Nidana’  (or  the  causes  of  disease),  Madhava  is  the 
foremost  (authority)  ;  in  Sutra  (aphoristic  enunciation  of  the 
general  principles  of  pathology,  &c.,)  Vagbhata  is  the  fore¬ 
most  ;  in  £arira’  (Anatomy)  Sugruta  is  the  foremost ;  but 
Charaka  is  the  foremost  in  ‘Chikitsa’  or  Treatment.”  This 
estimate  fairly  accords  with  the  received  opinion. 

The  Division,  therefore,  that  will,  commence  with  the 
next  fasciculus,  is  the  most  important  of  all  the  Divisions  of 
Charaka’s  great  treatise. 

The  majority  of  our  subscribers  have  not  sent  us  any 
portion  of  their  dues  for  a  long  time.  We  beg  to  invite  their 
attention  to  this  fact.  If  they  kindly  remit  their  dues  to  us 
without  delay,  we  may  then  be  able  to  complete  the  work 
within  a  short  time  and  redeem  our  pledges.  The  fact  is, 
the  completion  of  our  task  depends  entirely  on  the  regularity 
with  which  we  are  paid.  We  hope  our  subscribers  will  clear 
off  their  balances  without  the  necessity  of  our  addressing  each 
of  them  separately. 

NOTICE. 

Those  subscribers  who  have  lost  any  of  their  fasciculi  are 
requested  to  write  to  us  promptly. 

1  We  have  hitherto  done  our  best  to  supply  the  missing 
fasciculi  to  every  one  who  has  written  to  us.  We  beg  to  in¬ 
form  them  that  if  missing  fasciculi  are  not  called  for  within, 
say,  2  months  from  this  date,  it  will  be  absolutely  impossible 
for  us  to  supply  them  later  on.  'Subscribers,  therefore,  are 
particularly  requested  to  collect  together  the  fasciculi  they 
have  received  and  write  to  us  without  delay  if  they  have  lost 
any  through  either  their  own  fault  or  that  of  the  Post  Office. 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland,  U.  S.  A. : — You  have  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of:  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California: —  ... . As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value. of  the  work  is  apparent,  ...  . . 

There  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
■  science,  theraputic,  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn .  ... 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia ,  U.  S.  A.  .'-rYou  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Ohio,  U.  S.  A. : — The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge : — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in.  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccless,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York: — Matter  is  certainly, of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis,  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia: — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq.,— Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  Ne  w  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one- of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  oj  Cashmere : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy,  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-Western 
University,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition: — I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  4. : — Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  ig,  East  38th  Street,  New- York  : — Wish  you  a  success  in 
yqur  praiseworthy  undertaking, 

Mons.  T.  Gabbard,  Derselho/ber  Traisfi,  Drams.ta.dt  :— The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with,  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  Q.  M.  D-,  F.  R.  M.  S„  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A., 
Editor  Meyer  Brother s’  Druggist : — I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor ^Librarie  Etrangere,  174,  Boulevatse,  Saint  Germain  : — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  -New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  : — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  I  always 
arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  ; — if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop 
from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients 
according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and 
fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of 
the  work;  for  1  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street ,  Calcutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
|  about  drawing  their  attention  to]  your  excellent  work.'  Writing  again,  sometime  after, — 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note  .  considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
l>efore  in  Medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.-,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing : — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector : — Your  patriotic 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  H.  Skrine,  Esq.,  Magistrate  and  Collector I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with 
interest.  It  is  marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonder¬ 
ful  to  note  the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how 
completely  they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  We  modems  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  : 
the  enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Gierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gy  a  It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 

obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  Wales  '. — The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  Of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  andYlso  illustrates  someancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  it  has  goi^riias  placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers. ,  NotwithstajJ«g  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  tfc '£^\rit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as  pos-  - 
sibly  the  best  that  could'  be  expecfc-utjjrter  the  circun^tances.  People  are  beginning  to 
find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  oWIealth  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every  system  'i 
of  education.  They  could  look  for  n»  better  guije  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is  a  work 
that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  *‘jjyoung. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji,— The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


PART  XXXIII. 

- - rnrr 

CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


( TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH). 

PUBLISHED  BY 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSROTA-SAMHITA  (in  original)  WITH  COMMENT¬ 
ARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 
journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  THE  HINDU 
SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C.,  &C. 


CALCUTTA: 

200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N.  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRATNA  PRESS, 
12,  SIMLA  STREET,  BYE-LANE. 

1904.  ‘ 

(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved \ ) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 


( Extracts  from  their  Letters.) 

Professqr  Max  Muller  : — I  haye  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  he  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish.— Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — .  I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention. 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office — . Your 

excellent  translation  .  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West  . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

.  Many  important  addition  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York ,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq..  Golhenburffi.  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  V.  S.  A.— 
I  must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing.  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris : — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany : — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsbunh,  Gertnany  : — English  translation  of 
.  Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.-,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal:— I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
1  which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to 
life  cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS 


PART  XXXIII. 


The  Division  called ‘Chikitsa,’ or,  Treatment,  begins  in  this  Part. 
Of  all  works,  on  Hindu  Medicine,  Charaka’s  is  famous  for  the  man¬ 
ner  in  which  the  subject  of  Treatment  has  been  dealt  with. 

The  first  Lesson  is  very  important.  It  treats  of  those  medicines 
that  are  called  ‘Rasayanas.’  These  may  be  taken  by  both  healthy 
and  ailing  persons. 

‘Rasayanas’  are  medicines  that  promote  nourishment  or  growth. 

It  may  not  be  unfair  to  observe  that  no  system  of  medicine 
except  the  Hindu  gives  such  impdrtance  to  the  treatment  of  the 
healthy.  The  ‘Rasayanas’  ensure  the  preservation  of  health,  and 
promote  longevity. 

It  is  a  peculiar  feature  of  Hindu  Medicine  that  it  is  as  much 
concerned  with  the  Healthy  as  with  the  Ailing.  Longevity  is  the 
object  sought. 

There  are  two  methods  for  administering  ‘Rasayanas,’  first, 
‘Kutipravegika’,  and  second,  ‘Vatatapika.’ 

The  incidents  in  respect  of  ‘Kutpravejika’  have  been  explained 
in  aphorisms  17  to  23. 

In  the  first  Section,  called  ‘Abhayamalakiya’,  are  laid  down  six 
combinations  of  drugs  each  of  which  is  a  most  efficacious  ‘Rasayana.’ 
These  are 

1.  First  Brahmya  Rasayana, 

2.  Second  ditto, 

3.  Chyavanapraca, 

4.  Amalaka  Rasayana, 

.5.  Haritaki  Rasayana,  and 

6.  Another  Rasayana. 

Into  the  composition  of  all  these,  the  three  myrobalans  enter 
more  or  less,  with  diverse  other  strength-giving  and  digestion-aid¬ 
ing  drugs. 

In  the  second  Section,  called ‘Prankamiya’,  are  laid  down  the 
tallowing  Rasayanas,’  viz., 


1.  Amalaka  Rasayana, 

2.  Amalaka  Avaleha, 

3.  Amalaka  Churna, 

4.  Vidanga  Avaleha, 

5.  Another  extract  of  Amalaka, 

6.  Nagabala  Rasayana, 

7.  Bhallataka  Kshira, 

8.  Bhallataka  Kshaudra,  and 

9.  Oil  of  Bhallataka. 


Some  general  ordinances  occur  about  the  administration  of 
Bhallataka  or  the  fruits,  &c.,  of  Semecarpus  Anacardium. 

In  the  third  Section,  called  ‘Karaprachitiya’,  some  other  .Rasa¬ 
yanas’  have  been  laid  down.  As  the  Section  is  not  concluded  in 
this  Part,  no  abstract  is  given  of  these. 


ESPECIAL  NOTICE. 


With  this  Part,  we  send  to  our  subscribers  a 
small  pamphlet  about  the  use  of  ‘Makaradhwaja.’ 
It  is,  we  believe,  a  highly  useful  publication.  Many 
books  have  been  consulted  before  the  rules  about 
the  use  of  this  invaluable  medicine  could  be 
compiled. 


AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA. 


THE  PLACE  OF  CHIKITSITA. 

LESSON  I. 

RASAYAN^'  g 

\0. 

§  i.  ABHAYAMALAKIYAc.  Jr/ 


We  shall  now  expound  the  first  Section,  <faSj 
of  the  Lesson  on  ‘Rasayana.’ 


f  ‘Abhayamalakiya’, 


Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  i 

‘Chikitsitam’,  ‘Vyadhiharam’,  ‘Pathyam’,  ‘Sadhanam’,  ‘Aushadham’, 
‘Prayagchittam’,  ‘Pragamanam’,  ‘Prakritisthapanam’,  and  ‘Hitam’, — 
these,  it  should  be  known,  are  the  different  names  of  ‘Bheshajam’ 
(or  medicine).* 

The  medicine  is  of  two  kinds. 

Some  medicine  has  for  its  purpose  the  increase  of  the  ojos  of  a 
healthy  person.  Some,  again,  has  for  its  purpose  the  alleviation  of 
disease  by  which  one  is  affected.  2-3 

As  regards  those  which  are  banes,  they  also  are  of  two  kinds,  viz., 
‘Vadhana’  (immediately  destructive  of  life),  and  ‘Sanuvadhana’  (des¬ 
tructive  of  life  after  a  time).  4 

That  which  increases  the  ojos  of  a  healthy  person  is  of  two  kind  s 
viz.,  ‘Vrishya’  (aphrodisiacs),  and  ‘Rasayana  (tonics).  S 


*  ‘Chikitsitam’,  literally,  implies  treatment.  Because  treatment  is  made  by  means  of 
medicines,  therefore,  medicine  may  be  called  treatment.  It  may  be  regarded  to  be  a  kind 
of  Metonymy. 

‘Vyadhihara’  is  ‘destructive  or  alleviative  of  disease.’ 

‘Pathyam’  is  proper  regimen. 

‘Sadhanam’  is  means  by  which  the  purpose  in  view,  {viz. ,  cure  of  disease)  is  accomplished. 

‘Aushadham’  is,  literally,  preparation  from  herbs  and  plants.  It  stands  as  a  general 
name  for  medicine,  because  medicine,  for  the  most  part,  is  made  of  herbs  and  plants. 

‘Prayagchittam’  is  expiation.  Disease  being  looked  upon  as  the  result  of  sin,  medicine 
or  treatment  is  necessarily  the  expiation  through  which  one  has  to  pass  before  one  can  hope 
for  a  cure. 

‘PraQamanam’  is  alleviation  or  the  means  of  alleviation. 

‘Prakritisthapanam’  is  that  by. which  one  is  restored  to  one’s  normal  condition. 

‘Hitam’  is  good,  or,  rather,  the  means  by  which  good  is  effected. — T 


129 


ioi  6 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Generally,  of  almost  all  diseases,  the  second  of  these,  (Wk,  Rasa- 
yana’)  is  regarded  as  alleviative. 

Both  {viz.,  ‘Vrishya’  and  ‘Rasayana’)  are  capable  of  alleviating 
disease  besides  imparting  vigour  to  the  body.  Between  the  two, 
however,  ‘Rasayana  is  specially  an  alleviative  of  disease.  6 

From  the  administration  of  ‘Rasayana’  one  obtains  longevity  of 
life,  memory,  apprehension,  health,  youth,  brightness,  complexion, 
excellence  of  voice,  great  strength  of  body  and  the  senses,  power  of 
making  speech  true,*  bows  (from  others),  and  comeliness  of  features. 

These  drugs  (or  preparations)  are  called  ‘Rasayana’  because  of 
their  capacity  to  impart  superior  ‘Rasa’  and  other  ‘dhatus’  (or  ingre¬ 
dients  of  the  body).  7-8 

That,  again,  which  leads  to  the  birth  of  children  and  children’s 
children, f  that  which  causes  immediate  pleasure,  that  by  which  one 
is  enabled  to  approach  women,  unimpededly  and  with  the  strength  ... 
of  a  stallion,  that  by  which  one  becomes  the  favourite  of  women,  that 
by  which  one  grows  (in  strength  and  energy),  that  by  which  the  vital 
seed  of  a  person  who  is  even  decrepit  is  seen  to  become  inexhaustible 
and  fruitful,  that  by  which  one  becomes  like  a  tree  of  multitudinous 
branches  resembling  a  gigantic  ‘Chaitya’,j  that  by  which  one,  obtain¬ 
ing  a  large  progeny,  becomes  respected  and  worshipped  by  all  men, 
that  by  which  one  becomes  the  source  of  a  mumerous  progeny  here 
and  by  which  one  enjoys  everlasting  bliss  hereafter,  and  that  by 
which  one  wins  fame  and  prosperity  and  strength  and  growth,  is 
called  ‘Vajikarana’  (or  aphrodisiac).  9-iz 

Thus  have  been  mentioned  the  two  kinds  of  medicines  {viz., 
Rasayana’  and  Vajikarana)  for  increasing  the  ojos  of  a  healthy  man. 

Those  medicines  also  which  destroy  (or  cure)  diseases  will  be 
spoken  of  in-  this  Division  called  ‘Chikitsita.’  r3 

These  are  for  treatment, — these,  that  is,  which  are  remedies  for 
diseases. 


*  This  is  one  of  the  many  instances  of  the  exhuberant  copiousness  of  Sanskrit. — T. 
t  ‘Apatya’  is  children  of  one’s  own  loins.  ‘Santana  is  applied  to  children’s  children  who- 
extend  one’s  race  or  line. — T. 

t  ‘Chaitya’  implies  a  large  tree  of  either  the  Ficus  Indicus  or  the  Ficus  religiosa  variety. 
Planted  in  the  centre  of  a  village,  with  an  open  space  all  around,  jit  grows  to  a  towering 
height.  At  its  foot  are  kept  stones  symbolising  various  deities.  Such  a  tree  is  regarded 
sacred.  The  villagers  gather  under  its  shade  for  performing  various  religious  rites.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


\o\j 

We  shall  first  lay  down  the  ordinances  in  respect  of  ‘Rasayana.’ 
Then  we  shall  speak  of  ‘Vajikarana.’  H 

That  which  possesses  virtues  contrary  to  those  of  medicines  should 
be  known  as  ‘abheshaja’  or  banes.  These  are  not  for  use. 

Those,  however,  which  are  medicines  and  which  should  be  used, 
we  shall  lay  down.  rS 

The  Rishis  understood  that  there  are  two  methods  for  the  admi¬ 
nistration  of  Rasayanas.’  These  are  ‘Kutipravegika’  and  ‘VatS- 
tapica.’*  16 

A  chamber  should  be  caused  to  be  constructed  on  a  piece  of  good 
ground  in  a  place  that  is  inhabited  by  the  king,  by  physicians,  and  by 
regenerate  persons  who  are  righteous  and  engaged  in  the  .practice  of 
deeds  of  piety. 

The  place  should  be  one  which  is  free  from  the  usual  causes  of 
fear. 

It  should  also  be  fit  (for  the  purpose  in  view),  and  it  should  be 
within  a  city  or  town  that  is  equipt  with  all  necessaries. 

The  spot  selected  should  be  either  on  the  East  or  the  North  of 
the  place.  *7-i8 

The  chamber  should  be  wide  and  spacious,  as  also  high. 

It  should  be  enclosed  by  two  outer  sets  of  apartments, 

Its  eyes  (i.  e.,  doors  and  windows)  should  be  small. 

Its  walls  should  be  thick  ;  it  should  further  be  adapted  to  the 
season  ;  it  should  not  be  gloomy  ;  it  should  be  pleasing  to  the  mind.  19 

It  should  be  impenetrable  to  all  inauspicious  sounds.  It  should 
be  entirely  barred  against  the  access  of  women.  It  should  be 
accoutred  with  all  desirable  ingredients,  and  equipt  with  physicians, 
medicines,  and  Brahmans.  20 

Then,  during  the  period  of  the  sun’s  northern  course,  in  the  lighted 
fortnight,  when  the  lunation  and  the  constellation  are  propitious, 
when  the  ‘muhurta’  and  the  ‘karana’  are  favourable.*  on  an  aus- 


*  Both  these  are  explained  below.  ‘ICuti’  is  a  chamber.  ‘Pravega’  is  entrance.  Hence, 
‘Kutipravegika’  has  reference  to  the  administration  of  ‘Rasayana’  after  causing  a  man  to 
enter  a  hut  or  closed  chamber.  V5tatapika’  i  the  reverse  of  this.  ‘Vata’  is  wind,  and 
‘atapa’  is  the  heat  of  the  sun. — T. 

t  A  ‘muhurta’  is  a  division  of  time  comprising  48  minutes. 

A  ‘karana’  also  is  a  division  of  time,  two  ‘karanas’  being  comprised  in  a  lunar  day.  There 
are  altogether  11  ‘karanas’,  some  of  which  are  auspicious,  and  .some  inauspicious. — T. 


ioi8 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


picious  day,  one  .should,  after  a  shave,  enter  the  chamber,  with ' 
strength  of  understanding  and  memory,  with  faith  and  concentrated 
attention,  having  dispelled  all  mental  faults,  with  mind  dwelling  upon 
love  of  all  creatures,  and  having  at  the  outset  worshipped  the  deities 
and  Brahmans,  and  circumambulated  (images  of)  gods,  and  regenerate 
persons,  and  kine.  21  -23 

Then  (in  that  chamber),  cleansed  by  correctives,  becoming  cheerful, 
and  having  gained  strength,  one  should  again  have  ‘Rasayana’  admi¬ 
nistered  unto  oneself.  The  correctives  one  will  use  I  shall  now 
lay  down.  24 

The  pulv  of  chebulic  myrobalans,  of  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  of  the  fruits 
Phyllanthus  Emblica,  mixed  with  raw  sugar,  the  pulv  of  (vacha) 
Acorus  calamus ,  of  (Vidanga)  Embellia  Ribes,  (Rasani)  Curcuma  longa 
the  fruits  of  Piper  lougum,  and  (Vigwabhashaja)  ginger,  mixed  with 
hot  water  should  be  drunk,  after  one  has  been  treated  with  ‘sneha’ 
and  ‘sweda.’*  25 

Unto  him  whose  body  has  been  thus  cleansed,  and  to  whom 
‘samsarjjana’  also  has  been  administered,  ‘yavaka’  of  old  grains  of 
barley  should  be  given,  mixed  with  ghee,  for  three,  or  five,  or  seven 
nights,  till  (that  is)  his  bowels  become  clear  and  stools  become 
regular.f  26 

When  the  physicians  conversant  with  considerations  of  age,  nature 
of  constitutions,  and  power  of  assimilation,  having  ascertained  that 
the  bowels  of  the  person  have  been  properly  cleansed,  should  admi¬ 
nister  to  him  ‘Rasayana’  consisting  of  (proper)  combinations.  That 
should  be  administered  to  the  individual  which  is  suitable  to  him  .27 

Chebulic  myrobalans  have  five  (of  the  six)  tastes,  for  they  have 
not  the  saline  taste.  They  have  healing  virtues  and  are  auspicious; 
They  restore  the  faults  to  their  normal  course.  They  are  light  (as 
food).  They  enkindle  the  digestive  fire,  and  are  good  ‘pachanas.’J  28 


*  ‘Sneha’  is  oil,  and  ‘sweda’  is  fomentation  for  inducing  perspiration.  What  is  said  here 
is  this  :  the  person  should,  in  the  first  instance,  be  rubbed  with  oils  and  made  to  perspire 
copiously  by  the  application  of  fomentation.  After  this,  he  should  drink  hot  water  mixed 
with  the  pulvs  mentioned. — T. 

t  ‘Samsarjjana’  means  the  administration  of  light  diet  such  as  ‘pey§.’,  &c. 

‘Yavaka’  means  gruel  of  barley. 

‘Varchasah  Quddhi’  implies  the  cleansing  of  the  bowels  and  regularity  of  stools. — T. 

+  The  six  tastes  are  1.  sweet,  2.  sour,  3.  astringent,  4.  pungent,  5.  bitter,  6.  saline. 
Chebulic  myrobalans  have  five  of  these  six  tastes. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1019 


They  promote  longevity  and  induce  nourishment.  They  deserve 
every  praise  (for  the  virtues  they  possess).  They  prevent  the  effects 
of  age  more  than  any  other  drug.  They  alleviate  all  varieties  of  ail¬ 
ments,  and  impart  strength  to  the  intellect  and  the  senses.  29 

They  quickly  conquer  leucoderma,  abdominal  tumours,  flatulence 
dropsical  swellings,  chlorosis,  alcoholism,  piles,  the  ailments  of  the 
‘Grahani’,  chronic  intermittent  fever,  diseases  of  the  chest,  diseases 
of  the  head,  diarrhoea,  disgust  for  food,  cough,  gonorrhoea,  epistasis, 
enlargement  of  the  spleen,  abdominal  dropsy  when  new,  discharge 
of  phlegmonous  matter,  hoarseness  of  voice,  discolouration  (or  loss  of 
complexion),  anaemia,  intestinal  worms,  waste  of  ‘dhatus’,  that  variety 
of  asthma  which  is  called  ‘Tamaka’,  vomiting,  loss  of  virile  power, 
langour  of  the  limbs,  constipation  of  the  ducts  of  various  kinds,  the 
sensation  of  a  wet  blanket  covering  the  chest,  a  similar  sensation 
in  the  heart,  and  stupefaction  (dullness)  of  the  memory  and  the 
understanding.  30-33 

Those  who  are  suffering  from  indigestion,  those  who  habitually 
take  dry  food  and  drink,  those  who  have  been  weakened  by  sexual 
indulgence  and  wine  and  poisons,  and  those  who  are  afflicted  by 
hunger  and  thirst  and  heat,  should  eat  chebulic  myrobalans.  34 

Those  virtues  and  those  effects,  that  have  been  spoken  of  as 
belonging  to  chebulic  myrobalans,  to  emblic  myrobalans  as  well. 
There  is,  however,  difference  in  energy  (or  potence).*  35 

The  kernel  of  both  chebulic  and  emblic  myrobalan,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  their  effects  being  such,  should  be  regarded  by  the  physi¬ 
cian  to  be  equal  to  nectar  (or  ambrosia)  itself,  f  36 

The  foremost  of  mountains,  viz.,  Himavat,  is  the  best  of  places 
whence  vegetable  drugs  are  to  be  obtained.  Hence,  fruits  that  grow 
on  trees  standing  on  those  mountains,  and  that  appear  in  the  proper 
season,  should  be  brought  (for  medical  administration  or  purposes).  37 
The  fruits  which  I  direct  to  be  used,  for  their  action  is  superior, 
should  be  of  the  following  description  : 


They  are  ‘auspicious,  i.  they  are  used  oh  various  sacred  and  ceremonial  occasions. 

They  are  ‘pachanas’,  i.  e.,  they  help  digestion. — T. 

*  ‘Viryya’  is  different  from  ‘guna’  quality  or  virtue),  and  ‘karma’  (effect).  It  is  difficult 
to  render  it  by  any  English  word.  I  use  ‘energy’  or  ‘potence’  as  the  nearest  approach  to 
to  express  the  sense.  The  exact  sense  of  the  word  will  appear  from  what  has  been  said 
below.— T. 

t  ‘Qasyiim’,  i.  e.,  the  kernel  or  substance  of  the  fruit  divested  of  seed. — T. 


1020 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


They  should  be  fully  developed  in  respect  of  both  juice  and 
energy. 

They  should  appear  in  the  . proper  season. 

They  should  be  such  as  have  been  exposed  to  the  proper  measure 
of  heat  of  the  sun,  water  from  the  clouds,  shade,  and  wind. 

They  should  be  unbaked  and  unrotten. 

They  should  not  have  scratches  or  cuts  on  their  surface. 

They  should  be  free  from  disease.  38-39 

[BRAHMYA-RASAYANA.] 

Ten  palas  of  each  of  the  five  groups  of  five  roots,  a  thousand  fruits 
of  chebulic  myrobalans,  and  thrice  that  number  of  fresh  fruits  of 
Phyllanthus  Emblica  ; 

the  five  groups  of  five  roots  being  as  follow,  viz., 

1.  (Vidarigandha)  Hedysarum  Gangeticum,  (Vrihati)  Solatium 
lndicum,  (Prisniparni)  Doodia  logopodioides,  (Nidigdhika)  Sola¬ 
rium  Xanthocarpum,  and  £wadangshtra  Tribulus  lanceginosus, 

These  should  be  known  as  the  group  of  five  roots  beginning  with 
(Vidarigandha)  Hedysarum  Gangeticum. 

2.  (Vilwa)  iEgle  Marmelos,  (Agnimantha)  Premna  Sonatifolia, 
(£yonaka)  Bignomia  Indica,  (Kasmaryya)  Genelina  arborea, 
and  (Patala)  Bignomia  suave-olens. 

These  should  be  known  as  the  group  of  five  roots  beginning  with 
(Vilwa)  ALgle  marmelos. 

3.  Punarnava)  Boerhavia  diffusa,  (the  two  ‘Surpaparnos’  viz., 
Mudgaparni  and  Mashaparni)  Phaseolos  trilobus,  Glycine  debilis, 
(Bala)  Sida  cordifolia,  and  (Eranda)  Ricinus  communis. 

These  should  be  called  the  group  of  five  roots  beginning  with 
Punarnava  or  Boerhavia  diffusa. 

4.  (Jivaka)  which  being  unobtainable,  Guduchi  or  T inospora  cordi¬ 
folia  is  used  as  a  substitute,  (Rishavaka),  which  being  unobtain¬ 
able,  Vangsolochana  or  Bambu  manna  is  used  as  a  substitute, 
(Meda)  which  being  unobtainable,  Agwagandha  or  Physalis 
flexuosa  is  used  as  a  substitute,  (Jivanti)  Ccelogyne  ovalis,  and 
(£atavari)  Asparagus  racemosus. 

These  should  be  called  the  group  of  five  roots  beginning  with 
Jivaka),  and 

5.  (Sara)  Saccharum  Sara,  (Ikshu  Saccharum  officinarum,  (Darbha) 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1021 


Saccharum  cylindricum,  (Kasa)  Saccharum  spontaneum,  and 
(£ali)  Oryza  sativa  of  the  red  variety. 

(These  should  be  called  the  group  of  five  roots  beginning  with 
Trina). 

Taking  the  measure  indicated  above  of  each  of  the  above  five 
groups  of  five  roots,  it  should  be  boiled  in  water  of  ten  times  the 
aggregate  (viz.,  500  palas  or  sixty-two  and  half  seers). 

When  the  water  has  been  boiled  down  to  a  tenth  of  its  quantity 
(i.  e.  50  palas  or  six  and  a  quarter  seers),  it  should  be  strained  through 
a  piece  of  clean  cloth  and  kept  in  a  vessel. 

Into  it  should  then  be  thrown  all  the  chebulic  myrobalans  and  all 
the  emblic  myrobalans  also,  divested  of  their  seeds  and  pounded  into 
a  paste. 

The  pulv,  after  this,  of  the  following  should  be  thrown  into  the 
vessel,  the  measure  of  each  being  4  palas,  viz., 

(Mandukaparni)  Hydercotile  Asiatica,*  Piper  longum,  (£ankha- 
pushpi)  Pladua  decussata,  (Plava)  the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundUs  of 
the  large  variety,  (Musta)  the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus,  (Vidanga) 
Embellia  Ribes,  (Chandana)  Pterocurpus  Santalinus,  (Aguru)  Aqui- 
laria  Agallocha,  (Madhuka)  Liquorice,  (Haridra)  Curcuma  longa,. 
Vacha  Acorus  calamus,  (Kanaka)  Mesua  ferrea,  and  (Sukshma  Ela) 
the  seeds  of  cardamums  of  the  small  variety.  40-48 

The  pulv  of  sugarcandy,  measuring  a  thousand  and  a  hundred 
palas,  two  ‘Adhakos’  (equal  to  16  seers)  of  oil,  and  three  ‘Adhakos’ 
(equal  to  24  seers)  of  ghee,  should  be  added.f  49 

All  these  are  then  boiled  in  a  vessel  of  copper,  on  a  mild  fire. 
When  the  boiled  substance  becomes  consistent  enough  to  be  licked, 
the  vessel  should  be  taken  down.  When  cooled,  honey  should  be 
added.  Its  measure  should  be  half  that  of  oil  and  ghee.  5° 

The  product  should  be  kept  in  an  earthen  jar  which  has  sucked 
a  sufficient  quantity  of  ghee.  It  should  be  kept  in  this  state  for  some 
time.  After  this,  the  physician  should  administer,  at  the  proper  time, 
a  measure  that  he  thinks  to  be  judicious.J  51 

*  Some  texts  read  ‘Dantimula’,  that  is,  the  roots  of  Danti  or  Baliosperenum  uren- 
tanum. — T. 

t  In  practice,  the  measure  of  liquids  is  doubled.  Hence  32  seers  of  oil,  and  48  seers  of 
gJiee  are  added. — T. 

t  As  the  measure  of  oil  and  ghee  is  32  and  48=80  seers,  that  of  honey  should  be 
40  seers. — X. 


1022 


CHARAKA -SAMHFTA. 


The  measure  of  the  dose  should  be  such  as  may  not  prevent  one 
from  taking  one’s  ordinary  meals. 

When  the  medicine  taken  has  been  digested,  boiled  ‘shashthika’ 
rice,  mixed  with  (cow’s)  milk,  should,  it  is  desirable,  be  given.  52 

The  Vaikhanasas,  the  Valkhillas,  as  also  others  endued  with 
wealth  of  asceticism,  having  obtained  this  ‘Rasayana’,  obtained  im¬ 
measurable  longevity.*  53 

Freed  from  decayed  bodies,  they  obtained  (through  this  Rasayana) 
bodies  that  were  foremost  of  their  kind,  as  also  youthfulness  of  years. 
Freed  from  langour  and  fatigue  and  shortness  of  breath,  without 
disease  of  any  kind,  with  minds  concentrated,  and  endued  with 
strength  of  understanding  and  memory,  those  ascetics,  with  great 
devotion,  practised  for  unending  years,  penances  agreeable  to  the 
Vedas,  observing  the  vow  of  celebacy.  54-55 

One  desirous  of  longevity  should  use  this  ‘Rasayana’  which  is 
called  ‘Brahmya.’  By  so  doing,  one  is  sure  to  attain  to  long  life, 
and  great  strength  and  the  fruition  of  all  desires.  5<* 

[SECOND  BRAHMYA-RASAYANA.] 

Take  a  thousand  fruits  of  P hyllanthus  Emblica,  possessed  of 
qualities  already  mentioned.!  Reduce  them  to  paste.  Soften  them 
properly  by  means  of  the  heat  of  boiling  milk,  agreeably  to  the  usual 
process  of  ‘swedana.’J 

The  fruits  are  then  dried  in  the  shade.  Divested  of  seeds,  they 
are  then  (i.  e.  their  kernel)  reduced  to  pulv. 

This  pulv  is  macerated  (for  seven  days)  in  the  expressed  juice  of 
a  thousand  fresh  fruits  of  the  same  kind. 

The  following  then  are  added,  of  measure  equal  to  an  eighth  part 
of  the  pulv  of  the  emblic  myrobalans,  viz.,  (Sthira)  Hedysarum  Gan- 
geticum,  (Punarnava)  Boerhavia  diffusa,  (Jivanti)  Cselogyne  ovalis, 
(Nagbala)  Sida  spinosa,  (Brahma-Suvarchala)  the  acquatic  plant  so 


*  The  ‘Vaikhanasas’  were  an  order  of  ascetics.  The  ‘Valkhillas’  were  a  very  diminutive 
order  of  ascetics,  about  the  size  of  the  Lilliputans-  Both  orders  are  mentioned  in  the  Maha- 
bharata  and  the  Purans — T. 

t  Vide  verses  38  and  39  above. — T. 

t  That  is,  the  fruits  are  kept  on  a  piece  of  cloth  covering  the  mouth  of  a  large  vessel. 
The  vessel  is  half-filled  with  milk.  Heat  is  applied  to  the  vessel  containing  milk.  The 
vapours  arising  from  the  boiling  milk  soften  the  fruits  on  the  cloth. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1023 


Called,*  (Mandukapafni)  Hydrocotile  Asiatica,  (£atavari)  Asparagus 
racemosus,  ((^ankhapushpi)  Pladera  decussata,  Piper  longum,  Acorus 
calamus,  (Vidanga)  Embelia  Ribes,  (Swayamgupta  Macunna  pruriens, 
(Amrita)  Tinospora  cordifolia,  (Chandana)  Pterocarpus  santalinus, 
(Aguru)  Aquilaria  Agallocha,  (Madhuka)  Liquorice,  the  flowers  of 
(Madhuka)  Bassia  latifolia,  (Utpala)  Nymphoe  stellata,  (Padma)  lotus, 
(M&lati)  Echites  caryophyllata,  (Yuvati)  Aglaia  Roxburghiana  and 
(Yuthika)  Jasminum  auriculatum. 

The  compound  should  then  be  macerated  (for  7  days)  in  the  ex¬ 
pressed  juice  of  a  thousand  palas  of  (Nagbala  Sida  spinosa. 

It  should  then  be  dried  in  the  shade. 

Ghee  of  twice  the  measure,  or  ghee  and  honey  of  twice  the  measure 
should  then  be  mixed  with  it. 

A  ball  should  then  be  made  of  the  mass.  This  should  be  kept  in 
a  clear  and  strong  earthen  jar  that  has  sucked  a  sufficient  measure  of 
ghee . 

The  jar  should  be  placed  underneath  the  ground,  covered  with  a 
heap  of  ashes,  for  a  fortnight. 

Having  kept  the  jar  thus,  it  should  be  taken  up,  after  a  fortnight, 
by  the  physician  conversant  with  Atharvans. 

The  pulv  should  then  be  mixed,  with  the  globular  mass,  of  gold, 
silver,  copper,  corals,  and  black  iron,  the  measure  of  which  should 
be  one-eighth  of  that  of  the  boluses. 

Keeping  an  eye  over  the  strength  of  the  digestive  fire,  the  physi¬ 
cian  should  then  duly  administer  this  medicine  every  morning, 
increasing  the  dose  by  half  a  ‘karsha’  every  day.j- 

When  the  medicine  has  been  digested,  one  should  take  ‘sashitaka 
rice  (properly  boiled),  with  ghee  and  milk. 

Taking  the  medicine  in  this  way,  one  reaps  all  the  benefits  already 
mentioned.  57 

( There  are  some  verses  here.) 

This  ‘Rasayana’,  called  ‘Brahmya’,  is  used  by  the  great  Rishis. 


*  It  is  an  aquatic  plant  whose  leaves  resemble  those  of  the  lotus. — T. 
f  A  'karsha’  is  equal  to  2  tolas.  Half  a  ‘karsha’,  therefore,  is  equal  to  one  tola.  Some 
of  the  Bengali  translators  take  ‘Gudakriti’  to  mean  boluses.  This  is  wrong.  It  means  a 
globular  mass.— T. 


1024 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


One  using  it  becomes  freed  from  disease,  attains  to  longevity,  acquires 
great  strength,  and  obtains  the  love  and  affection  of  all  creatures,  as 
also  the  fruition  of  all  his  desires. 

The  splendour  of  his  complexion  resembles  that  of  the  moon  or 
the  sun.  His  memory  becomes  so  improved  that  he  becomes  able  to 
retain  all  he  hears. 

His  mind  becomes  like  that  of  the  Rishis. 

The  compactness  of  his  body  becomes  like  that  of  a  mountain, 
and  his  powers  (energy)  like  that  of  the  wind. 

If  poison  comes  in  contact  with  his  system,  it  loses  its  force.  58-60 

[CHYAVANA  PRA£A.] 

(Vilwa)  Mg\e  marmelos,  (Agnimantha)  Premna  suratifolia,  (£yo- 
n5ka)  Bignomia  Indica,  (Kasmaryya)  Genelina  arborea,  (Patali)  Big- 
nomia  suave-olens,  (Bala)  Sida  cordifolia,  the  four  ‘Parnis’,  viz., 
(^alparni)  Hedysarum  Gangeticum,  (Prisniparni)  Doodia  lagopodi- 
oides,  (Mudgaparni)  Phaseolus  trilobus,  (Mashaparni)  Glyenic  debilis, 
(Pippali)  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum,  (^wadangstra)  Tribulus  lanugi- 
nosus,  the  two  ‘Vrihatis’,  viz.,  (Vrihati)  Solanum  Indica,  and  (Kanta- 
kari)  Solanum  Xanthocarpum,  61  (£ringi)  Rhus  succedaneum, 
(Tamalaki)  Phylanthus  Nirusi,  (Draksha)  Uvae  passae,  (Jivanti)  Caelo- 
gyne  ovalis,  (Pushkara)  not  being  obtainable  (Kushtha)  Aplotaxis 
auriculata,  is  used  instead,  (Aguru)  Aquilaria  Agallocha,  (Abhaya) 
Chebulic  myrobalans,  (Amrita)  Tinospora  cordifolia,  (Riddhi)  not 
being  obtainable  (Bala)  Sida  cordifolia  is  used  as  a  substitute,  (Jivaka) 
not  being  obtainable  (Guduchi)  Tinospora  cordifolia  is  used  as  a 
substitute,  (Rishavaka)  not  being  obtainable  (Vansalochana)  Bambu 
manna  is  used  instead,  (£ati)  Curcuma  zerumbet,  62  (Musta)  the 
tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus,  (Punarnava)  Boerhavia  diffusa  (of  the 
white  variety),  (Meda)  not  being  obtainable  (Agwagandha)  Physalis 
flexuosa,  is  used  as  a  substitute,  (Ela)j  Elettaria  cardamomum, 
(Chandana)  Pterocarpus  santalina,  (Utpala)  Nymphcea  stellata,  Vidari) 
Convolvulus  paniculata,  (Vrishamula)  the  root-bark  of  Justicia  Adha- 
toda,  (Kakoli)  the  well-known  root  going  by  that  name,  and  (Kaka- 
nasika)  Leea  hirta.  63 

Take  one  pala  of  each  of  the  above,  and  five  hundred  fruits  of 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


102$ 

Phyllanthus  Emblica.  Boil  these  in  one  drona  (equal  to  32  seers) 
of  water.*  64 

When  it  has  been  ascertained  that  the  juices  of  the  drugs  (men¬ 
tioned)  have  come  out  and  mixed  with  the  water,  the  vessel  should  be 
taken  down.  Taking  up  the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica  (loosely 
bound  together  in  a  piece  of  cloth),  their  seeds  should  be  thrown  out. 

The  kernel  of  the  fruits  should  be  fried  in  two  and  ten  palas  of 
ghee, ,  and  oil.  The  physician  should  then  boil  the  fried  substance  in 
.the  decoction  already  obtained,  mixing  it  with  pure  raw  sugar  of  the 
measure  of  half  a  ‘tola’^(equal  to  twelve  and  a  half  seers).  65-66 

When  the  boiling  is  over,  and  the  boiled  product  has  become  cool, 
6  palas  of  honey  should  be  mixed  with  it,  as  also  4  palas  of  (Tuga- 
kshiiii)  Bambu  manna,  2  palas  of  the  pulv  of  Piper  longum,  one  pala 
of  the  bark  (reduced  to  pulv)  of  Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum,  one  pala  of 
(ElS).  Elettaria  Cardamomum ,  one  pala  of  (Patra)  leaves  of  Cinnamo¬ 
mum  Tamala ,  and  one  pala  of  (Kegara)  Mesua  ferrea. 

Even  this  is  Chyavanapraga.  It  is  said  to  be  the  foremost  of  all 
‘Rasayanas.  It  is  said  to  be  especially  alleviative  of  cough  and 
asthma.  It  nourishes  the  weak,  the  wounded,  the  old,  and  those  that 
are  of  tender  years.  67-69 

It  cures  loss  of  voice,  diseases  of  the  chest,  diseases  of  the  heart, 
leprosy,  thirst,  and  all  diseases  of  the  urine  and  the  vital  seed.  7° 

It  should  be  administered  in  such~a  measure  that  one  may  not 
feel  disinclined  in  taking,  one’s  usual  meals.  Through  administration 
of  this  medicine,  Chyavana  who  had  become  very  old,  once  more 
became  youthful. f  7i 

Through  the  use  of  this  ‘Rasayana,  a  person  acquires  intelligence, 
memory,  comeliness  of  body,  freedom  from  disease,  longevity,  strength 
of  the  senses,  great  pleasure  in  companionship  with  women,  great 

*  In  practice,  double  the  measure,  or  64  seers,  are  taken. — T. 

t  Chyavana  was  the  son  of  Bhrigu.who  was  one  of  the  mind-begotten  sons  of  the  Grand- 
sire,  Brahma.  Chyavana  had  become  very  old  but  he  had  a  young  wife,  viz. ,  the  princess 
Sukanya.  The  celestial  physicians, viz.,  the  twin  Agwins,  having  been  excluded  by  Indra 
from  sharing  in  the  ‘Soma’  ottered  in  sacrifices,  came  to  Chyavana  and  undertook  to  make 
a  young  man  of  him  if  he  would  only  compel  Indra  to  re-admit  them  as  sharers  of  ‘Soma.’ 
It  was  the  celestial  physicians,  the  Agwins,  that^prepared  this  medicine  for  the  benefit  of 
Chyavana. — T. 


1026 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


increase  in  the  strength  of  the  digestive  fire,  improvement  of  com¬ 
plexion,  and  the  restoration  of  the  wind  to  its  normal  course. 

If  one  that  is  even  decrepit,  enters  the  kind  of  chamber  which  has 
been  spoken  of  above  (and  takes  this  ‘Rasayana1),  he  soon  casts  off 
his  decripit  form  and  acquires  that  of  prime  of  youth.  72-73 

[THE  FOURTH  AMLAKA-RASAYANA.] 

Take  a  number  of  Emblic  and  Chebulic  myrobalans.  or  of  Emblic 
and  Belleric  myrobalans,  or  Emblic,  Chebulic,  and  Belleric  myro¬ 
balans.* * * § 

Wrap  the  fruits  round  with  the  bark  of  (Palaga)  Butea  frandosa, 
and  plaster  the  wrapping  barks  with  soft  clay. 

Thus  wrapped  and  plastered,  the  fruits  are  boiled  by  being  kept 
in  a  vessel  with  many  holes,  which  is  placed  over  an  earthen  vessel 
containing  water. f 

When  properly  softened,  the  seeds  should  be  thrown  out.  Taking 
a  thousand  palas  of  the  kernel  of  the  fruits,  pound  them  in  a  large 
mortar. 

Mix  then  with  the  pounded  mass  a  measure  of  curds,  ghee ,  honey, 
the  pulv  .of  sesame  seeds,  oil,  and  sugar.  (Some  are  of  opinion  that 
the  measure  of  those  should  be  a  thousand  palas.)j 

Thus  prepared,  one  should  take  this  ‘Rasayana’  in  proper  measure 
having  entered  the  chamber  described  above.  It  should  be  taken 
while  the  stomach  is  empty  (that  is,  before  one  has  eaten  any  food). 

After  taking  the  ‘Rasayana’,  one  should  drink  gruel  of  barley  and 
other  gruels  of  the  kind,  and  continue  to  do  so  till  his  constitution 
is  restored  to  its  normal  condition.  § 

One  should  have  one’s  body  then  rubbed  with  ghee,  as  also  with 
the  pulv  of  barley.H 


*  Equal  numbers  are  directed  to  be  taken. — T. 

t  The  fruits  are  boiled  or  softened  by  the  vapour  arising  from  the  lower  vessel. — T. 

+  In  the  text  there  is  no  indication  of  measure. — T. 

§  The  fact  is,  before  beginning  to  take  ‘Rasayana’,  one  requires  one’s  body  to  be  cor¬ 
rected  or  purified  by  ‘sucha’  and  ‘swedana’  or  other  processes.  (  Vide  verses  25  and  26  above 
of  this  Lesson.)  Hence,  after  commencing  to  take  ‘Rasayana’,  one  should  not  at  once  take 
one’s  usual  food,  but  must  drink  gruels  and  very  light  food  before  one  does. — T. 

II  The  rubbing  with  oil  or  ghee  is  called  ‘abhyanga’,  and  with  pulv  of  barley  or  of  tur¬ 
meric,  &c.,  is  called  ‘utsadana.’ — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


1027 


The  administration  of  ‘Rasayana’  in  this  method  is  regarded  as 
the  best. 

Keeping  an  eye  over  the  strength  of  the  digestive  fire,  one  may 
take  food  twice,  with  soups  of  the  pulses  or  of  meat,  and  milk, 
and  ghee.  The  food  should  be  boiled  ‘sashtika’  rice. 

After  this,  one  may  bear  oneself,  as  regards  food  and  drink  and 
movements  as  one  pleases. 

Through  the  use  of  this  ‘Rasayana’  the  Rishis  got  back  their 
youth,  and  succeeded  in  living  for  many  centuries,  freed  from  disease, 
and  endued  with  great  strength  of  body,  of  understanding,  and  of  the 
senses.  It  was  through  it  that  they  were  able  to  practise  severe 
penances  with  exceeding  devotion.  74 

[THE  FIFTH  HARITAKI  RASAYANA.] 

Take  the  decoction  of  Chebulic,  Emblic,  and  Belleric  myrobalans 
and  the  five  groups  of  five  roots.* 

Take  also  the  paste  of  Piper  longum,  liquorice,  the  flowers  of 
Bassia  lutifolia,  ‘Kakoli’,  ‘Kshirakakoli’,  (Atmagupta)  Macuna  pruri- 
ens,  ‘Jivaka’,  ‘Rishabhaka’,  and  (Kshiragukta)  convolvulus  paniculatus  ; 

Take  also  the  expressed  juice  of  (Vidari)  Convolvulus  panicutatus. 

Take  also  (cow’s)  milk  equal  to  eight  times  the  measure  of  the 
expressed  juice  of  the  above. 

Boil  with  these  a  ‘Kumbha’  (equal  to  64  seers)  of  ghee. 

The  ghee  thus  prepared  should  be  administered,  keeping  an  eye 
over  the  strength  of  the  digestive  fife. 

When  the  dose  taken  has  been  digested,  food  should  be  given 
consisting  of  (boiled  ‘£ali’  and  ‘Shastika’  rice,  with  milk  and  ghee. 

Hot  water  should  form  the  drink  after  such  food. 

With  body  freed  from  decrepitude,  disease,  sin  and  fear  of  incan¬ 
tations,  and  requiring  extraordinary  strength  of  understanding  and 
the  senses,  with  all  efforts  crowned  with  success,  one  would  attain  to 
a  long  life  (by  using  this  ‘Rasayana.’)  75 

[THE  SIXTH  RASAYANA.] 

Take  the  decoction  of  Chebulic,  Emblic,  and  Belleric  myrobalans, 


t  The  five  groups  of  five  roots  have  been  mentioned  in  verses  41,  42,  and  43  above  of 


1028 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


(Haridra)  Curcuma  longa,  (Sthira)  Hedysarum  Gangetkum,  (Vacha) 
Acorus  calamus,  (Vidanga)  Embellia ,  Ribes,  (Amritavalli)  Tinoopora 
cordifolia,  (Viswaveshaja)  Dry  ginger.  (Madhuka)  liquorice,  (Pippali) 
Piper  longum,  and  (Somavalka)  Acacia  catechu  of  the  white  variety. 

Boil  it  with  milk  and  ghee,  as  also  with  ■honey  and  sugar. 

Add  a  hundred  palas  of  the  pulv  of  Emiblic  myrobalans,  macer¬ 
ated  in  the  expressed  juice  of  myrobalans  of  the  same  species  ;  also 
the  pulv  of  iron,  the  measure  of  which  should  be  a  fourth  of  the  pulv 
of  Emblic  myrobalans. 

One  should  take  two  tolas  of  the  ghee  thus  prepared,  every  morn¬ 
ing,  according  to  the  instructions  already  laid  down  (/,  e.  having 
entered  the  chamber  of  the  kind  described). 

In  the  evening,  he  should  take  (boiled)  ‘£ali’  and  ‘Shastika’  rice, 
with  the  soup  of  (Mudga)  the  seeds  of  P kaseolus  Mungo,  as  also  milk 
and  ghee. 

If  one  takes  ghee  (continually)  for  three  years,  one  lives  for  a 
hundred  years,  freed  from  decrepitude  or  decay.  He  succeeds  in 
retaining  what  he  hears.  No  disease  overtakes  him.  If  poison  comes 
in  contact  with  his  body,  it  fails  to  affect  him.  His  body  becomes 
as  compact  as  stone.  He  also  becomes  irresistible  to  view  unassail¬ 
able  by  all  creatures.  76 

( There  are  some  verses  here.) 

As  (amrita)  nectar  to  the  deities,  as  (sudha)  ambrosia  to  the  Nagas, 
even  so  was  the  use  of  ‘Rasayana’,  in  days  of  yore,  to  the  great 
Rishis.  77 

Those  who  used,  in  ancient  times,  to  take  ‘Rasayana’,  were  never 
subject  to  decrepitude,  or  weakness,  or  a  diseased  condition,  nor  death 
for  a  thousand  years.  78  . 

He  who  takes  ‘Rasayana’  according  to  the  method  laid  down,  not 
only  enjoys  a  long  life  in  this  world,  but  attains  also  hereafter  that 
auspicious  end  which  is  attainable  by  the  deities  and  the  Rishis, 
eternal  Brahma  is  also  attained  by  him.  79 

( It  ere  is  a  verse.) 

In  this  Lesson,  called  ‘Abhayamalakiya’,  six  combinations  have 


CHAR  AKA  -SA  MHITA. 


1029 


been  laid  down  of  ‘Rasayanas’  well  tested  by  experience.  Every  one 
of  them  lengthens  life.  80 

Thus  ends  the  first  group  of  ‘Rasayana  in  the  Lesson  called 
‘Abhayamlakiya’ 


SECTION  II. 

PR  AN  AK  AM  I YAR  AS  AYAN  A. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  section  known  as  ‘Pranakamiya- 
rasayana.’ 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.* 

Ye  that  are  desirous  of  attaining  to  longevity,  listen  to  the  ordi¬ 
nances  in  respect  of  ‘Rasayana’  (or  the  nourishment  of  the  body  by 
administering  proper  medicines)  that  are  now  being  laid  down  ! 

These  are  like  a  match  of  nectar  ;  beneficial  unto  the  very  sons  of 
Adity  ;  of  wonderful  and  inconceivable  virtues  ;  capable  of  prolonging 
life  ;  conducive  to  health  ;  endued  with  capacity  for  preventing  the- 
effects  of  age ;  efficient  in  dispelling  sleep,  drowsiness,  fatigue, 
langour,  idleness,  and  debility  ;  potent  to  preserve  the  harmony  of 
wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  ;  efficacious  in  compassing  the  compactness  of 
the  body  ;  preventive  of  flabbiness  of  flesh  ;  provocative  of  the  digest¬ 
ive  fire  ;  and  contributive  of  the  excellence,  lustre,  complexion,  and 
voice.f  2-3 

By  (help  of)  these,  great  Rishis  like  Chyavana  and  others  were 
restored  to  youth,  became  dear  unto  women,  with  bodies  compact, 


*  Rasayana  is  a  compound  made  of  two  words  ‘rasa’  and  ‘ayana.’  Thus  its  derivative 
sense  is  a  ‘means  of  nourishing  rasa’  or  the  seven  ingredients  of  the  body,  viz. ,  blood,  flesh, 
bone,  marrow,  Hence,  it  means  a  nourishing  medicine. 

Prankamiya  means  relating  to  Pranakama  or  the  desire  of  life. 

The  whole  compound,  therefore,  implies  ‘nourishing  medicines  for  persons  desirous  of 
longevity. — T. 

t  KaQyapa,  son  of  Marichi  who  was  one  of  the  many  sons  begotten  by  Brahman  by  only 
a  fiat  of  his  will,  married  many  wives.  Two  of  them  were  Diti  and  Aditi.  Of  Diti  were 
born  the  Daityas  or  Asuras.  Of  Aditi  were  born  the  Adityas  or  the  deities.  Hence,  the 
deities  are  frequently  referred  to  as  the  son  of  Aditi.— T. 


1030 


CHAR  AKA  -  SAM  HIT  A. 


symetrical,  and  well-developed  in  respect  of  flesh,  possessed  of  well- 
knit  and  undecaying  frames,  endued  with  vigour  of  strength,  com¬ 
plexion,  and  the  senses  ;  with  energy  unobstructed  everywhere  ;  and 
capable  of  enduring  every  toil.  4 

All  the  faults  of  the  body  are  generated  (excited)  by  the  bad  food 
[of  persons  who  take  things  that  are  sour,  saline,  pungent,  alkaline, 
and  dry,  or  potherbs,  such  pulses  as  Phaseolus  radiatus ,  sesame,  flesh 
and  cakes  ; 

Of  also  those  that  take  rice  obtained  such  paddy  as  has  put  forth 
sprouts,  or  as  is  new,  or  as  belongs  to  the  variety  called  £uka  or  that 
called  £ami,  or  such  things  as  consist  of  hostile  or  inharmonious 
ingredients  or  such  as  are  unassimilable,  or  as  are  dry  and  alkaline, 
or  such  as  suppress  the  healthy  secretions  of  the  body  ; 

Of  also  those  that  take  things  that  are  filthy,  heavy,  putrid,  or 
stale  ; 

Of  also  those  that  indulge  irregular  meals  or  eat  before  digestion 
has  taken  place  of  what  has  been  taken  before. 

They  are  again,  excited  in  the  bodies  of  persons  that  are  addicted 
to  sleep  at  daytime,  women,  and  wine  ;  S 

Of  also  those  whose  constitutions  have  received  shocks  from 
excessive  physical  exercises  or  indulgence  in  untoward  attitudes  ;  ' 

Of  those  also  who  cherish  in  excess  fear  and  wrath,  and  cupidity, 
and  heedlessness,  and  grief,  and  who  undergo  severe  toil.  6 

From  the  excitement  of  the  faults,  verily,  the  flesh  becomes  lax, 
the  joints  become  slackened,  the  blood  burns  (i.  e.,  becomes  heated), 
copious  measures  of  adeps  escape  (with  the  secretions),  the  marrow 
does  not  adhere  to  the  bones,  semen  is  not  generated,  arid  the  ‘ojos’ 
undergoes  waste.  7 

A  person  in  whom  these  conditions  manifest  themselves  becomes 
cheerless  and  fatigued,  and  overwhelmed  by  sleep,  drowsiness,  and 
inactivity,  always  becomes  very  soon  exhausted  by  toil. 

Further,  he  becomes  unfit  for  both  bodily  and  mental  exertions. 

His  memory,  understanding,  and  lustre  of  complexion  fade. 

Such  a  person  does  not  attain  to  the  full  limit  of  the  period  of  life 
assigned  to  human  beings.  8 

Hence,  observing  these  deficiencies,  one  should,  avoiding  these 
kinds  of  food  and  practices  which  have  been  declared  to  be  baneful, 
use  ‘Rasayana.’  9 


CHA  RAKA  -  SA  MB  IT  A, 


103  i 

Having  declared  this,  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri  said  : 

With  the  ‘swarasa’  (64  seers)  of  ‘Amalaka’  (the  fruits  of  Phyllan- 
thus  Emblicd)  born  upon  proper  soil  and  in  proper  time,  unimpaired 
in  respect  of  smell,  colour,  and  taste,  and  endued  with  the  full  mea¬ 
sure  of  juice,  of  fullness  of  size,  and  wealth  of  energy, 

and  with  the  ‘Kalkya’  (4  seers)  of  ‘Punarnava’  ( Boerhavia  diffusa) 
of  the  white  variety, 

an  ‘Adaka’  (16  seers)  of  ghee  should  be  cooked. 

After  this  the  ghee  should  be  cooked  with  the  ‘swarasa’  (64  seers) 
of  ‘Vidari’  {Convolvulus  paniculatus )  and  the  ‘Kalkya’  (4  seers)  of 
•Jivanti’  {Cwlqgyne  avails) ; 

After  this,  it  should  be  cooked  with  four  times  as  much  milk  (i.  e., 
64  seers),  and  the  ‘Kashaya’  (64  seers)  of  ‘Vala’  and  ‘Ativala’  (Si da 
cordifolia)  and  Si  da  rhombifolia).  and  the  ‘Kalkya’  (4  seers)  of  ‘£ata- 
vari  ( Asparagus  racemosus). 

According  to  this  method  it  should  be  cooked  a  hundred  times  or 
a  thousand  times. 

With  it  should  be  mixed  2  seers  of  sugar,  and  two  seers  of  honey. 

It  should  then  be  kept  in  a  vessel  of  gold  or  silver,  or  of  earth. 
If  it  is  an  earthen  vessel  that  is  used,  it  should  be  clean  and  strong, 
and  one  that  has  been  made  to  absorb  as  much  ghee  as  possible*  10-12 


*  ‘Swarasa’  is  a  technical  word  in  Hindu  Medicine.  It  means  the  expressed  juice 
which  is  prepared  by  pounding  fresh  vegetables  in  a  mortar.  After  the  juice  is  pressed  out, 
it  should  be  strained  through  a  piece  of  cloth. — T. 

‘Kalkya’,  is  paste.  It  is  prepared  by  grinding  dry  or  fresh  vegetable  substances  on  a 
stone  with  a  muller.  The  grinded  materials  are  then  made  into  a  paste  by  the  addition  of 
water  when  necessary. — T. 

‘Kashaya’,  or  ‘^ita-kashaya’  is  a  cold  infusion.  It  is  prepared  by  steeping  one  part  of 
a  drug  in  six  parts  of  water  for  one  night.  The  fluid  is  then  strained  in  the  morning. 
Sometimes  the  drugs  are  allowed  to  be  steeped  for  days  together. — T. 

‘Adhaka’  is  a  measure  of  8  seers.  Here,  although  the  word  ‘Adhaka’  is  used,  16  seers, 
and  not  8  seers,  of  ghee  should  be  taken.  When  precise  measures  are  not  laid  down  of 
‘Swarasa’,  ‘Kalkya’,  &c.,  agreeably  to  certain  general  instructions  laid  down  in  Hindu 
medical  treatises  on  Pharmacopoea,  if  the  drug  consists  of  one  part,  the  oily  substance  should 
be  4  parts,  and  the  water  should  be  4  times  the  measure  of  the  oily  substance. 

‘Qatapaka’  (cooked  a  hundred  times),  and  ‘Sahasrapaka’  cooked  a  thousand  times),  are 
thus  explained : 

The  ghee  should  be  first  cooked  with  the  juice  of  ‘Amalaka’  and  the  paste  of  ‘PunarnavfL’ 
This  is  one  stop. 


1032 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  ghee  thus  prepared  should  be  eaten  every  morning  according 
to  the  ordinances  already  laid  down  and  agreeably  to  the  measure  of 
one’s  appetite. 

After  the  ghee  taken  has  been  digested,  one  should  eat  rice  of  the 
£ali  and  the  Shasthika  varieties,  along  with  milk  and  (ordinary) 
ghee.  ,3 

In  consequence  of  taking  this  medicated  ghee  one  succeeds  in 
living  for  a  hundred  years  without  being  subject  to  any  disease. 
One’s  powers  of  mind  also  remain  in  full  vigour  for  the  entire  period 
of  life* 

All  diseases  of  such  a  person  disappear. 

Such  a  person  retains  the  power  of  sexual  congress  throughout 
his  life,  and  is  blessed  with  many  children.  H 

( Here  occur  two  verses.) 

This  Rasayana  makes  a  man  possessed  of  a  body  of  ample  propor¬ 
tions,  having  the  strength  of  adamant,  endued  with  senses  unimpaired 
and  invested  with  great  vigour,  invincible  by  others,  and  blessed  with 
an  appearance  that  is  exceedingly  handsome  and  lovely. 

The  person  who  takes  this  Rasayana  obtains  great  honours,  great 
happiness,  and  breadth  of  mind.  T5 


It  should  then  be  cooked  with  the  juice  of  ‘Vidari’  and  the  paste  of  ‘Jivanti.’  This  is  the 
second  stop. 

It  should  then  be  cooked  with  milk,  the  infusion  of  the  two  drugs  named,  and  the  paste 
of  the  drug  named.  This  is  the  third  stop. 

With  the  ghee  thus  cooked  thrice,  sugar  and  honey  of  the  measure  mentioned  should 
be  added. 

The  preparation  that  results  is  called  a  ‘yoga’ 

,  This  ‘yoga’  should  again  be  cooked  thrice  with  the  juices  and  pastes  and  infusions 
mentioned. 

Sugar  and  honey  should  again  be  added. 

The  process  should  in  this  way  be  repeated  a  hundred  times,  or  a  thousand  times. 

These  processes  of  cooking  are  known  by  the  names  of  ‘gatapaka’  and  ‘sahasrapaka’  in 
Hindu  Medicine.— T. 

*  ‘Qrutam’  is  here  used  in  the  sense  of  knowledge.  Hence,  the  literal  meaning  is  ‘All 
his  knowledge  lasts.’  Of  course  the  implication  is  that  the  powers  of  mind  of  such  a  person 
retain  their  vigour  to  the  last.  Some  of  the  Bengali  translators  render  it  by  saying  that  such 
a  person  becomes  a  ‘grutidhara’,  i.  e.,  capable  of  reproducing  whatever  he  hears  even  once. 
This  is  not  the  meaning. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHltA. 


1033 


His  strength  becomes  great.  He  becomes  possessed  of  superior 
purity  of  complexion. 

His  voice  resembles  the  roar  of  the  clouds  or  of  the  surging  ocean 
(dashing  agaiast  an  embankment). 

Such  a  man  gets  many  children  who  all  become  long-lived,  16 

AMLAKA-AVALEHA 
EXTRACT  OF  AMLAKA.* 

A  thousand  Amlakas  (fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica),  combined 
with  a  thousand  Pippalis  (fruits  of  Viper  longum ),  should  be  drenched 
in  water  in  which  has  been  dissolved  the  ashes  of  Palana  wood  ( Butea 
frandosa). 

The  water  (in  which  the  Amlakas  and  Pippalis  are  to  be  drenched 
should  be  dried  in  the  shade. 

Throwing  out  the  seeds  the  Amalakas  should  be  reduced  to  pulv 
along  with  the  Pippalis. 

With  the  pulv  should  be  mixed  honey  and  ghee,  each  of  four 
times  the  measure  of  the  pulv. 

Sugar  then  be  added  of  one-fourth  the  measure  of  the  pulv. 

The  compound  should  be  kept  in  an  earthen  jar  which  has  been 
allowed  to  suck  or  absorb  as  much  ghee  as  possible. 

The  jar  should  be  placed  underground  for  six  months.  18 

After  six  months  the  medicine  should  be  taken  up. 

One  should  take  it  in  measure  agreeable  to  one’s  strength  and 
appetite. 

The  morning  is  proper  for  the  administration  of  the  medicine. 

After  it  has  been  digested,  one  should  take  such  food  as  one  can 
easily  assimilate. 

One  should  not,  while  continuing  to  take  the  medicine,  take  any 
food  jh  the  afternoon  or  the  evening.  19 


*  ‘Avaleha’  or  Extract :  to  prepare  it,  decoctions  after  being  strained,  are  again  boiled 
down  to  the  consistency  of  thick  extract.  This  extract,  when  properly  made,  does  not 
readily  dissolve  in  water,  can  be  drawn  out  into  wires,  and  will  receive  impressions  of  coins 
on  the  surface.  Extracts  are  administered  with  the  addition  of  sugar,  decoctions,  or  powders. 
Generally  they  arc  licked  by  the  patient. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


*034 

The  effect  of  the  administration  of  this  ‘Rasayana’  is  that  one 
lives  for  a  period  of  hundred  years  without  any  sign  of  decrepitude. 

As  regards  its  other  virtues,  they  agree  with  those  of  the  ‘Rasa- 
yana’  spoken  of  before.  20 

AMALAKA-CHURNA 
AM  LAK  A-PO  WDERS.  * 

An  ‘adhaka’  (or  8  seers)  of  Amlaka  powder  should  be  soaked  in  the 
‘swarasa’  of  a  thousand  Amalakas  for  one  and  twenty  nights. 

It  should  then  be  mixed  with  2  adhakas  (i.  e.,  16  seers)  of  honey 
and  ghee. 

To- it  should  then  be  added  an  eighth  of  an  ‘adhaka’  ( i .  e.,  1  seer) 
of  the  powder  of  Pippali  ( Piper  longuni)  ;  and  a  fourth  of  an  ‘adhaka" 
(2.  2  seers  of  sugar.) 

The  compound  should  then  be  placed  in  an  earthen  jar  which  has 
been  made  to  suck  or  absorb  as  much  ghee  as  possible. 

The  jar  (thus  filled)  should  be  kept  buried  in  a  heap  of  ashes  in 
the  rainy  season  (2.  e.,  in  the  month  of  Ashada  or  £ravana). 

The  jar  should  be  taken  up  after  the  expiry  of  the  rainy  season. 

The  medicine  should  be  administered  after  the  manner  laid  down 
with  respect  to  the  ‘Avaleha’  or  extract  of  Amalaka  as  above. 

One  should,  while  continuing  to  take  the  medicine,  confine  oneself 
to  such  regimen  as  easily  assimilable. 

The  effect  of  the  administration  of  this  medicine  that  one  lives 
for  a  period  of  hundred  years  without  any  sign  of  decrepitude. 

As  regards  its  other  virtues,  they  are  similar  to  those  of  the 
‘RasSyana’  spoken  of  before. 

VIDANGA-AVALEHA 

EXTRACT  OF  VIDANGA. 

The  powder  of  the  grains  of  Vidanga  ( Embellia  Ribes ),  of  the 
measure  of  an  ‘adhaka’  (or  8  seers),  and  the  powder  of  the  grains  of 


*  ‘Churna’  or  powders  are  prepared  by  pounding  dry  substances  in  a  mortar  with  a  pestle 
and  straining  the  powder  through  a  cloth. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1035 

Pippali  {Piper  longum ),  of  the  same  measure,  and  an  ‘adhaka’  and  a 
half  (/.  e.,  12  seers)  of  white  (purified)  sugar,  and  4  ‘adhakas’  (32  seers) 
of  ghee,  4  ‘adhakas’  (32  seers)  of  sesame  oil,  and  4  ‘adhakas’  (32  seers) 
of  honey, — these  six  should  be  mixed  together. 

The  compound  should  be  dealt  with  as  before,  (that  is,  it  should 
be  placed  in  an  earthen  jar  which  has  been  made  to  absorb  as  much 
ghee  as  possible  ;  the  jar  should  then  be  buried  in  a  heap  of  ashes 
in  the  beginning  of  the  rainy  season  ;  it  should  be  taken  up  after  the 
expiry  of  the  season  of  rains  ;  the  medicine  should  be  administered 
in  a  measure  that  is  agreeable  to  one’s  strength  and  appetite,  &c, ; 
one  should  also,  while  taking  it,  confine  oneself  to  a  regimen  that  is 
easily  assimilable ;  the  effects,  again,  are  the  same  as  those  of  the 
medicines  mentioned  above).* 

ANOTHER  EXTRAT  OF  AMALAKA. 

A  thousand  Amlakas  endued  with  attributes  already  mentioned, 
should  be  heated,  placing  them  in  a  vessel  made  of  raw  ‘Palaga’  ( Butea 
frandosa )  wood. 

The  vessel  should  be  so  covered  as  not  to  let  any  vapour  escape 
from  it. 

The  fuel  to  be  employed  should  be  dried  cowdung  obtained  from 
fields  and  forests. 

When  properly  roasted,  they  should  be  allowed  to  cool,  and  their 
seeds  should  be  thrown  out. 

The  seedless  fruits  should  then  be  reduced  to  powder. 

With  an  ‘adhaka’  (8  seers)  of  the  powder  (thus  prepared)  of 
Amalakas,  and 

an  ‘adhaka’  (8  seers)  of  the  powder  of  Pippali  (P iper  longum),  and 

an  ‘adhaka’  (8  seers)  of  the  grains  of  Vidanga  ( Embellia  ribes),  and 


*  The  measure  is  not  stated  of  ghee,  oil,  and  honey.  The  only  indication  occuring  is 
the  plural ‘adhakaih.’  Gangadhara  correctly  explains  that  these  being  fluids,  their  measure 
should  be  double  that  of  the  powders  and  doubled  again  owing  to  the  direction  about  time. 
Hence,  the  measure  of  ghee,  as  also  of  oil,  and  of  honey,  should  be  4  ‘adhakas’  or  32  seers. 

‘Taila’  here  signifies  the  oil  of  sesame  and  not  of  mustard  seeds.  The  word  comes  from 
‘tila’  or  sesame  seeds.  It  should  be  observed  that  unless  otherwise  indicated,  ‘taila’  in  this 
Division  signifies  the  oilof  sesame.— T. 


ioj6 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA 


an  ‘3dhaka’  and  a  half  (12  seers)  of  sugar,  should  be  mixed 
32  seers  of  sesame  oil,  32  seers  of  honey,  and  32  seers  of  ghee. 

The  compound  should  then  be  placed,  for  a  period  of  one  and 
twenty  days,  in  an  earthen  jar  that  is  clean  and  strong,  and  that  has 
been  made  to  suck  or  absorb  as  much  ghee  as  possible. 

After  this  period  the  medicine  should  be  regarded  as  fit  for  use. 

The  effect  of  the  administration  of  the  medicine  is  that  one  lives 
for  a  period  of  hundred  years  without'  any  symptoms  of  decrepitude. 

Its  virtues  are  like  those  of  the  medicines  before  mentioned.*  24-26 

R  AS  AY AN A  OF  NAGABALA  (SID  A  ALBA.)\ 

The  roots  should  be  extracted  of  Nagabala  {Sida  alba)  growing  in 
a  region  which  is  dry  ;  which  is  overgrown  with  kuga  grass  (P oa  cyno- 
suroides)  ;  whose  soil  is  oily,  sweet,  and  black  or  of  the  colour  of  gold  ; 
which  is  free  from  faults  of  poison,  beasts  of  prey,  wind,  water,  and 
fire ;  which  has  never  been  subjected  to  cultivation  ;  which  is  free 
from  anthills  ;  which  has  no  crematorium  upon  or  adjacent  to  it ; 
which  has  no  chaitya  tree  upon  it ;  and  which  is  free  from  alkaline 
salts  :  and  which  is  exposed  to.  such  wind  and  water  and  sun  as  are 
agreeable  notwithstanding  the  character  of  the  season. 

The  plants  should  all  be  unharmed  ; 

They  should  not  be  overgrown  with  other  plants  ; 

They  should  be  neither  young  nor  old  ; 

They  should  be  such  as  have  not  sustained  any  diminution  of 
virtues  (owing  to  other  causes)  ; 

They  should  be  such  as  have  put  forth  new  leaves  after  casting  off 
their  old  ones  ;  and 

They  should  be  such  as  have  not  borne  fruits. 

The  roots  should  be  extracted  in  the  month  of  Magh  or  Phalguna. 

The  person  that  should  extract  them  should  be  in  a  state  of 
purity,  and  in  the  observance  of  self-restraint.  <- 


*  The  measure  of  oil,  of  honey,  as  also  of  ghee,  is,  as  stated  in  the  text,  2  ‘Sdhakas’, 

1.  e.,  16  seers.  These  articles,  however,  being  fluids,  double  the  stated  measures  should  be 
taken.  Hence  32  seers  of  each  is  the  quantity  indicated. — T. 

t  Of  ‘Bala’,  four  varieties  are  known.  They  are  1.  BatySlaka  or  Sida  cordifoiia ; 

2.  MahabalS  or  Sida  rhomboidea ;  3.  AtifealS  or  Sida  rhombifolia ;  and  N5gbala  or  Sida 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


IQ37 

:  He  should  set  himself  to  the  task  after  having  worshipped  the 
deities,  and  after  having  obtained  the  benedictions  of  Brahmanas 
(by  making  presents  to  them),  and  in  an  auspicious  hour*  27-28 

The  roots  thus  obtained,  should  be  properly  washed  in  clear  water. 

The  bark  only  of  the  roots  should  be  taken,  (the  pith  being 
rejected). 

.  Taking  an  ‘&mra’  or  an  ‘aksha’  of  the  barks,  it  should  be  pounded 
into  a  fine  paste. 

The  paste  should  then  be  dissolved  in  milk,  and  administered 
every  morning  to  one  desirous  of  taking  it ; 

.  Or,  reduced  to  pulv  and  mixing  it  with  milk,  it  should  be  drunk  ; 

Or,  mixing  it  with  honey  and  ghee  it  should  be  eaten. 

After  it  has  been  digested,  one  should  take  £ali  or  Sashthi  rice, 
(with  milk  and  ghee). 

By  taking  this  medicine  continuously  for  one  year,  one  lives  for  a 
hundred  years  without  any  indication  of  decrepitude. 

As  regards  its  other  virtues,  they  are  similar  to  those  of  the 
medicines  mentioned  before.f  29-30 

*  ‘Dhamvana’  is  a  region  that  is  dry  or  waterless.  It  is  often  used  to  signify  a  wilderness. 

The  region  should  be  free  from  certain  faults.  These  are  I.  fault  of  poison,  2.  fault  of 
snakes,  3.  fault  of-  wind,  4.  fault  of  water,  and  5.  fault  of  fire.  The  sense  is  this  :  There 
should-be  no  poisonous  trees  or  plants  or  creepers  there.  It  should  be  free  from  beasts  of 
prey.  The  wind  and  water  there  should  be  good  ;  i.  e.,  there  should  be  no  vitiated  wind  and 
vitiated  water.  The  region  should  not,  again,  be  one  that  has  been  the  scene  of  a  conflagra¬ 
tion.  No  part  of  the  soil  should  be  burnt. 

A  large  banian  or,  peepul  (Ficus  Indicus  or  Ficus  religiosa)  is  called  a  ‘Chaitya.’  The 
presence  of  a  ‘Chaitya’  weakens  all  plants  growing  in  adjacence  to  it. 

The  adjectival  phrase,  ‘yathokta  sukha  .  adityasevite,’  is  not  very  clear. 

Gangadhara  takes  it  to  imply  a  region  where  wind,  water,  and  sun  are  endued  with  attri¬ 
butes  opposed  to  those  of  the  seasons  ;  that  is,  where  the  regions  of  cold  or  heat  are  not 
observable  ;  hence,  such  places  where  the  climate  is  temperate.  In  winter  the  cold  should 
not  be  extreme.  In  summer,  the  heat  should  be  mild.  During  the  rainy  season,  the  rains 
should  not  be  heavy  and  continuous. 

*Anadhyarudhani’  implies  that  the  plants  should  be  such  as  have  no  parasites  growing 
on  them.  It  is  believed  that  parasitical  plants  lessen  the  strength  of  the  trees  upon  which 
they  grow. — T. 

f  An  ‘amra’  is  equivalent  to  a  ‘pala.’  The  following  is  the  measure  : 

6  Gunjos  make  one  anna.  12  Gunjos  make  one  Masha. 

8  Mashas  (or  16  annas)  make  one  Tola.  8  Tolas  make  one  Pala. 

8  Palas  or  64  tolas  make  a  seer  or  garava.  2  Seers  make  one  Prastlia. 

8  Seers  make  one  Adhaka.  32  Seers  make  one  Drona, 

too  Palas  or  \2'/£  seers  make  one 


Tula— T. 


charakasamhiTa. 


1038 

The  ‘swarasa’  or  expressed  juice  of  Bala  (Sida  cordifolia ).  Atibala 
(Si da  rhombifolia),  Chandana  (Pterocarpus  santilinus ),'  Aguru  (Aqui- 
laria  Agallocha ),  Dhava  ( Canocarpus  latifolia).  Tinisa  (Dalbergia 
oojeinensis ),  Khadira  (Acacia  catechu),  (^incapa  ( Dalbergia  sidoo),  Asana 
( Pentaptera  tomentosa ),  and  the  ‘swarasa’  of  the  ten  plants  ending 
with  Punarnava  which  have  been  mentioned  as  capable  of  preventing 
the  effects  of  age,  viz.,  Amrita  (Tinospora  cordifolia),  Abhaya,  (Che- 
bulic  myrobalans),  Dhattri  (Phyllanthus  Emblica),  Mukta  (Vanda 
Roxburghii),  Sweta  Aparajita  (Clitoria  ternatea)  of  the  white  variety, 
Jivanti  (Caelogyne  ovalis),  Stirasa  (Asparagur  racemosus),  Mandka- 
arni  (Hydrocotile  Asiatica),  Sthira  (Hedysarum  gangeticum),  and 
Punarnava  (Boerhavia  diffusa)  ;* 

should  be  taken  like  the  ‘Rasayana’  made  of  Nagbala  (Sida  alba) 
spoken  of  as  above.f  3* 

If  the  ‘swarasa’  or  expressed  juice  (in  the  cases  mentioned  above) 
be  not  obtainable,  the  following  is  the  method  by  which  a  substitute 
may  be  found  for  ‘swarasa.’ 

The  articles  whose  ‘swarasa’  is  wanted,  pounded  into  powder. 
An  ‘adhaka’  of  the  powder  should  be  steeped  in  a  adhaka’  of  water 
for  a  day  and  night. 

It  should  then  be  stirred  and  strained  through  a  piece  of  cloth. 

The  liquid  thus  obtained  should  be  regarded  and  used  as 
‘swarasa.’J  32 


BHALLATAKA-KSHIRA. 

OR 

THE  MILK  OF  (SEMECARPUS  ANACARDIUM). 

Proclaiming  such  fruits  of  Bhallataka  (Semecarpus  Anacardium) 
as  are  unharmed,  undiseased,  full  in  respect  of  juice,  size,  and  energy 


*  These  ten  are  spoken  of  as  ‘Vayasthapana’,  i.  e.,  capable  of  preventing  the  effects  of 
age.  ( Vide  Lesson  IV,  Sutrasthana,  ante.) 

t  What  is  meant  by  the  ‘swarasa’  of  these  being  prescribable  like  the  ‘Rasayana’  of 
Nagbala  is  that  the  directions  laid  down  for  the  administration  of  the  latter  apply  to  that  of 
the  former.  The  virtues  also  of  the  two  medicines  are  equal. — T. 

t  An  ‘adhaka’  of  water,  in  such  connection,  implies  not  8  but  16  seers,  for  the  general 
rule  is  that  the  liquid  should  be  of  twice  the  measure  of  the  solid  or  solids. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA, 


1039 


■i.  e.  virtues),  like  unto  ripe  fruits  of  Euginia  jainbolana ,  (in-respect  of 
colour),  in  the  month  of  ‘£uchi’  or  ‘£ukra’,  they  should  be  buried  in 
a  heap  of  barley  or  of  Phaseolus  radiatus.  33 

After  keeping  them  in  that  state  for  four  months  they  should  be 
taken  out,  the  time  of  administration  being  the  month  of  ‘Sahasa’  or 
‘Sahasya.’  34 

Before  taking  the  medicine,  the  body  should  be  nourished  with 
cooling,  oily,  and  sweet  : 

Taking  ten  of  the  fruits,  pound  them  into  powder.  Cook  the 
powder  properly  in  water  that  is  of  eight  times  the  measure  of  the 
powder  taken.  35 

The  cooking  should  go  on  till  an  eighth  of  the  water  remains  in 
the  pot. 

It  should  then  be  strained  and  drunk,  mixing  it  with  milk. 

Before  drinking  it,  one’s  mouth  should  be  wetted  with  ghee.  36 

Beginning  with  ten  fruits  one  should  increase  the  number  by  one 
every  day  till  it  reaches  thirty.  It  should  then  be  decreased  by  one 
every  day  till  it  reaches  ten  again.  37 

In  the  administration  of  the  Bhallatakas,  there  should  be  no 
excess  above  the  number  thirty.  Nor  should  one  take  more  than 
a  thousand  fruits,  agreeably  to  the  method  indicated.  38 

Allowing  a  sufficient  time  for  the  digestion  of  the  medicine,  one 
may  take  ‘£ali’  and  ‘Shasthika’  rice,  mixing  it  with  ‘ghee’  and  milk. 

After  the  period  is  over  of  taking  the  medicine,  one  should  take 
two  meals  a  day  (that  is,  one  in  the  morning  and  one  in  the 
evening).*  39 

In  consequence  of  the  administration  of  this  medicine,  one  is 
enabled  to  live  for  a  hundred  years  without  any  sign  of  decrepitude 
or  decay. 

Its  virtues,  in  other  respects,  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  ‘Rasa- 
yanas’  already  spoken  of.  4° 


*  ‘Qachan  £ukre  va  masi’,  that  is,  in  the  month  of  ‘Jaishtha’  or  ‘Ashada’  corresponding 
nearly  with  15th  of  June  to  15th  of  July,  or  15th  of  July  to  15th  of  August. 

‘Sapasi  sahasye  va  masi’,  that  is,  in  the  month  of  Agrahayana  or  Pausha,  corresponding 
nearly  with  15th  November  to  15th  December,  or  15th  December  to  15th  January. — T. 

132 


1040 


CHAR  AKA  -  SAMH.IT A. 


BHALLATAKA-KSHANDA, 

SEMECARPUS  ANACARDIUM  AND  HONEY. 

'  Take  a  certain  number  of  ‘Bhallatakas’,  or  fruit  of  Semecarpus 
Anacardium  (of  the  kind  mentioned  above  and  collected  also  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  method  indicated  above)  ; 

These  should  be  pounded  (into  a  paste)  and  kept  in  a  vessel 
having  a  hole  at  the  bottom  ; 

Take  another  (earthen)  jar  that  is  strong  and:  that  has  been  allow¬ 
ed  to  absorb  as  much  ghee  as  possible  ; 

Bury  the  last-mentioned  jar  up  to  its  neck  in  the  ground  ; 

Place  the  vessel  with  a,  hole  at  the  bottom  upon  the  buried  vessel ; 

The  upper  vessel  (in  which  the  pounded  fruits  are  kept)  should 
have  its  mouth  covered  with  an  (earthen)  cup,  and  black  earth  should 
be  plastered  over  it  (fpr  sealing  the  mouth  hermetically  ; 

The  upper  vessel  should  then  be  heated  with  fire  made  with  dried 
cowdung  (obtained  from  fields  and  forests).  41 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  ‘swarasa’  or  juice  of  the  fruits  will  then 
descend  into  the  buried  (or  lower)  jar  ; 

With  the  ‘swarasa’  should  then  be  mixed  honey  equal  to  an  eighth 
of  its  measure,  and  ghee  that  is  twice  the  measure  of  the  ‘swarasa.’ 
Thus  prepared,  the  medicine  should  be  taken.*  42 

In, consequence. of  the  administration  of  this  medicine,  one  is  able 
to  live  for,  a.  hundred  years,  without  any  sign  of  decrepitude  or.  decay. 

As  regards  its  other,  virtues,  they  are  like  those  of  the  medicines 
mentioned  before.  43 

OIL  OF  SEMECARPUS  ANACARDIUM. 

Take  a  ‘patra’  of  the  oil  (manufactured  rn  the  above  manner)  of 
the  fruits  of  S emecarpus  Anacardium  (of  the  kind  indicated  above  and 
obtained  also  in  the  manner  described  above). 

Mix  it  with  cow’s  milk. 


*  ‘Pishta  swedanamT  implies  a  vessel  with  a  hole  at  the  bottom,  the  literal  meaning  being 
‘that  which  is  capable  of  allowing  juicy  matter  to  escape.’ 

"The  honey  to  be  mixed  should  be  one  year  old.  The  ghee  also  should  be  one  year  old. 
Besides,  it  should  be  obtained  from  cow’s  milk . — T. 


charaka-saMhita. 


1041 


Mix  it,  again,  with  an  ‘aksha’^of  the  paste  of  liquorice. 

Cook  it  a  hundred  times. 

As  regards  the  manner  of  administration,  diet  during  the  period 
it  is  administered  and  after  that  period,  as  also  its  effects,  the  same 
observations  apply.*  44 

The  Ordinances  about  the  Administration  of 

BHALLATAKA  OR  SEMECARPUS  ANACARDIUM. 

Bhallataka-miik,  Bhallataka-hbney,  Bhallataka-oil,  as  also  Bhalla- 
taka-treacle,  Bhallataka-soiip,  Bhallataka-ghee,  Bhallataka-flesh,  Bhal- 
lataka-flour,  Bhallataka-salt,  and  Bhallataka-tarpana,  are  the  diverse 
forms  in  which  Bhallataka  is  administered. 

Thus  end  the  ordinances  about  the  administration  of  Bhallataka 
the  fruits  of  (S emecarpus  Anacardiuwi).\  45 

( Here  occur  some  verses.) 

Bhallatakas  are  keen  ;  they  promote  digestion  ;  they  are  like  fire. 

Administered  according  to  the  ordinances  laid  down,  they  become 
like  nectar  (in  their  effects  on  the  constitution).  46 

The  above  are  the  ten  methods  of  administering  them. 

The  physician  conversant  with  diseases,  the  nature  of  the  human 
constitution,  and  the  laws  of  assimilation,  should  select  the  method 
of  administration.  47 

There  is  no  disease  born  of  phlegm,  there  is  no  form  of  constipa¬ 
tion,  which  Bhallataka  (properly  administered)  cannot  alleviate 


*  A  ‘patra’  is  equivalent  to  an  ‘adhaka’  or  8  seers.  The  measure  of  the  oil  being  stated 
to  be  8  seers,  double  the  quantity,  that  is,  16  seers,  should  actually  be  taken,  in  consequence 
Of  the  general  rule  about  liquids.  The  measure  Of  the  milli  to  be  mixed  with  it  should  be 
64  seers.  The  measure  of  the  paste  of  liquorice  should  be  2  tolas.  The  process  of  boiling 
on  a  slow  fire  should  go  on  till  the  measure  of  milk.'  e.  e.,  64  seers,  should  evaporate.  The 
product  that  remains  should  then  be  strained  through  a  piece  of  cloth.  Add  64  seers  of  milk 
again,  and  2  tolas  of  liquorice,  and  boil  it  down  again'till  64  seers  evaporate.  The  process 
should  in  this  way  be  repeated  a  hundred  times. 

The  measure  in  which  the  medicine  should  be  administered  should  accord  with  the 
measure  of  one’s  appetite,  &c. — T. 

t  After  'Bhallataka- tailam’  comes  ‘ evani  Guda-Bhallatakam  &c.’  The  fact  is,  the 
method  of  preparing  the  first  three,  viz ,  Bhallataka-milk,  Bhallataka-honey,  and  Bhallataka- 
oil,  have  been  explained.  The  methods,  however,  of  preparing  the  rest  have  not  been  laid 
down.  They  are  all  preparations  df  Bhallataka  which  possess  great  merits.  The  physi¬ 
cian  must  learn  to  make  them. — T. 


1042 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


promptly.  Bhallataka  enhances  mental  powers  and  the  digestive 
fire.  48 

In  days  of  yore,  great  Rishis  beginning  with  Chyavaria,  when 
overtaken  by  decrepitude  and  aspiring  for  longevity,  attained  through 
(the  effects  of)  these  ‘Rasayanas’,  which  are  highly  beneficial,  to  count¬ 
less  years.  49 

Having  attained  long  periods  of  life,  they  acquired  and  enjoyed 
knowledge,  (the  merit  of)  penances,  (the  merit  of)  continence,  conver¬ 
sance  with  the  Self,  and  contemplation,  and  proceeded  to  heaven.  5° 

Hence,  those  that  are  desirous  of  longevity  and  happiness  should, 
for  lengthening  the  period  of  life,  observe  duly  and  with  proper  atten¬ 
tion,  the  ordinances  in  respect  of  the  administration  of  ‘Rasayana.’  51 

( Here  occurs  a  verse  containing  a  summary ). 

In  this  Lesson  called  ‘Prankamiya’,  have  been  laid  down  seven 
and  ten  well-tested  preparations  of  ‘Rasayana’  by  the  Rishi  (Punar- 
vasu)  who  was  inspired  with  the  desire  of  benefiting  all  creatures.  52 

Thus  ends  the  second  Section  on  ‘Rasayanas’  in  the  Lesson  called 
‘Prankamiya’,  in  the  Division  called  ‘Chikitsa’  in  the  treatise  of 
Agnivega  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


SECTION  III. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Section  called  ‘Karaprachitiya- 
Rasayana.’ 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  1 

Of  Amlakas  (fruits  -  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica)  which  have  been 
plucked  with  the  hand  (and  not  by  shaking  the  branches),  in  the 
month  of  Magh  or  Phalguna,  which  possess  all  the  virtues  that  have 
already  been  indicated, 

whose  seeds  have  been  thrown  away, 
which  have  been  dried  in  the  sun  and  reduced  to  powder, 
after  having  been  made  to  absorb  one  and  twenty  times,  the 
expressed  juice  of  other  fruits  of  the  same  kind, 
take  an  adhaka  (8  seers). 

Of,  again,  those  groups  of  drugs,  which  are  called  ‘Jivaniya’  (those 
which  lengthen  life),  ‘Vringhaniya’  (those  which  promote  nutrition), 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


1043 


‘Stanyajanana’  (those  which  increase  the  lacteal  secretion),  £ukra- 
vardhana’  (those  which  increase  the  semen),  and  ‘Vayasthapana’ 
(those  which  prevent  the  effects  of  age),  and  which  have  been  spoken 
of  in  the  Lesson  called  ‘The  six  centuries  of  Purgatives,’*  as  also  of 
the  stems  of  ‘Chandana’  ( ' Pterocarpus  santalinus),  ‘Aguru’  ( Aquilaria 
Agallocka),  ‘Dhava’  {Conocarpus  latifolid)  ‘Khadira’  ( Acacia  catechu ), 
‘Singsapa’  ( Dalbergia  sissoo),  and  ‘Asana’  ( Terminalia  tomentosa ), 
cut  into  very  small  pieces,  and  also  of  ‘Haritaki’  (Chebulic  myroba- 
lans),  ‘Vibhitaka’  (Terminalia  Bellerica ),  ‘Pippali’  ( Piper  longum), 
‘Vacha’  ( Acorus  calamus ),  ‘Chavya’  ( Viper  choba ),  ‘Chitraka’  (P lumbago 
Zeylanica),  and  ‘Vidanga’  ( Embellia  Ribes ),  pounded  together  ; 

take  an  ‘adhaka’  (8  seers). 

Boil  the  measure  so  taken  of  all  these  in  water  of  the  measure  of 
160  seers,  till  only  16  seers  of  the  decoction  remains  in  the  vessel.f 

Strain  the  product  thus  obtained  through  a  piece  of  cloth. 

Into  it  should  then  be  thrown  the  ‘adhaka’  of  the  powder  of  the 
fruits  of  ‘Amalaka’  (P hyllanthus  Emblica )  mentioned  before. 

The  result  should  be  heated  by  fire  made  of  dried  cowdung 
(obtained  from  fields  and  forests),  or  of  split  bamboos,  or  of  the  reeds 
of  the  class  called  Saccharum  sara. 

The  heating  should  go  on  till  the  liquid  entirely  evaporates. 

Care  must  be  taken  so  that  the  solid  portion  may  not  be  burnt. 

The  solid  portion  should,  after  the  evaporation  of  the  liquid, 
be  taken  from  the  vessel  and  spread  upon  an  iron  plate  for  drying. 


*  The  fourth  Lesson  of  ‘Sutrasthana’  is  called  ‘the  six  centuries  of  purgatives.’ 

As  regards  the  ‘Jivaniya  group,  they  are  ten,  beginning  with  ‘Jivaka.’  Vide  p.  30, 
Lesson  IV,  Sutrasthana  ante. 

The  ‘Vririghaniya’  group  consists  of  ten,  beginning  with  ‘Kshirini.’  Vide  p.  31,  Lesson 
IV,  Sutrasthana,  ante. 

The  ‘Stanyajanana’  group  consists  of  ten,  beginning  with  ‘Virana.’  Vide  p.  36,  Lesson 
IV,  Sutrasthana,  ante. 

The  ‘(Jukravardhana’  group,  otherwise  called  ‘(Jukrajanana,’  consists  of  ten,  beginning 
with  ‘Jivaka.’  Vide  p.  36,  Lesson  IV,  Sutrasthana,  ante. 

The  ‘VayasthSpana’  group,  consists  of  ten,  beginning  with  ‘Amrita.’  Vide  p.  47,  Lesson 
IV,  Sutrasthana,  ante. — T. 

t  The  measure  of  water  being  stated  to  be  of  80  seers,  double  the  quantity  should  be 

The  quantity  to  which  the  whole  is  to  be  boiled  down  being  stated  to  be  an  ‘adhaka’  or 
8  seers,  it  should  be  understood  to  imply  16  seers,— T. 


1044 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


When  it  is  dry,  it  should  be  pounded,  on  a  stone  placed  on  a  black 
deer-skin,  into  a  fine  pulv,  and  then  kept  in  a  vessel  of  iron. 

The  pulv  so  obtained  should  then  be  mixed  with  an  eighth  of  its 
own  measure  of  the  fine  pulv  of  iron. 

It  should  then  be  administered,  mixing  it  with  honey  and  ghee, 
the  dose  being  regulated  by  the  strength  of  one’s  digestive  fire,  W 

{Here  are  some  verses.) 

In  days  of  yore,  Vagishtha,  Kagyapa,  Angiras/Jamadagni,  Bhara- 
dwaja,  Bhrigu,  and  others  like  them,  having  taken  this  ‘Rasayana’ 
under  proper  restraints,  became  free  from  the  fear  of  fatigue,  disease, 
and  decrepitude.*  8  Endued  with  great  strength,  those  Rishis, 
through  the  puissance  of  this  ‘Rasayana’  were  able  to  practise  pen¬ 
ances,  as  long  as  they  liked.  9  In  consequence  of  their  penances, 
sexual  continence,  meditation  (on  Brahma),  and  tranquillity  of  mind, 
as  also  of  their  taking  this  ‘Rasayana’,  their  lives  did  not  come  under 
the  touch  of  Time.f  10 

There  were  no  great  Rishis  before  (the  time  of  Vagishtha  and 
others) ;  there  was  no  ‘Rasayana’,  the  men  of  those  days  were  boorish, 
engaged  in  acts  other  than  penances,  and  of  souls  entirely  unres¬ 
trained  ;  hence  success  they  had  not.*  11 

Brahman  (the  Grandsire  of  the  universe)  invented  this  ‘Rasayana’ 
through  exertions  that  occupied  him  for  a  thousand  years.  This 
‘Rasayana’  is  alleviative  of  disease  and  decripitude,  and  invigourates 
the  senses  and  understanding.  12 


*  Gangtdhara’s  reading,  ‘muktagrama  vyadhijarabhayah’  is  not  neat.  The  correct 
reading  is  ‘muktah  gramavyadhijarabhayat.’ — T. 

t  ‘Kala  or  Time,  implies  Yama  or  Death,  Did  not  come  under  the  touch  of  Time, 
means  ‘were  above  the  control  of  Yama  or  Death  in  other  words,  they  lived  as  long  as  they 
liked.  In  laying  down  their  lives  they  acted  of  their  own  motion.  Death  did  not  come  to 
them  till  they  desired  its  approach. — T. 

t  Gangadhara  explains  this  verse  differently.  According  to  him  the  meaning  is  this  : 
“there  were  great  Rishis  before  (the  time  of  Vagishtha  and  the  others  named)  :  but  there 
was  no  ‘Rasayana’  ?  the  great  Rishis,  however,  of  those  days  were  boorish,  engaged  in 
acts  other  than  penances,  and  of  unrestrained  souls ;  hence,  success  was  not  theirs.”  This 
can  hardly  be  the  sense.  If  there  were  ‘Maharshis’,  that  is,  great  Rishis,  they  could  not 
have  been  boorish,  &c.  It  is  a  blasphemy  to  describe  great  Rishis  as  ‘gramya’  &c.  The 
fact  is,  the  ‘na’  in  the  first  line  applies  to  all  the  statements  made  ;  that  is,  ‘Maharshayah 
na  sthitah  ;  na  kinchit  Rasayanam  sthitam  ;  and  ‘siddhischa  na  sthitah,’ — T, 


CHALiAKA-SAMHl'FA. 


1045 


Thus  end  the  ordinances  about  the  preparation  of  Amalaka- 
Syasa-Rasayana.’  (i.  e.,  Rasayana  of  Amlaka  and  iron.)} 

RASAYANA  OF  AMALAKA  ALONE. 

One  should  live,  subsisting  upon  milk  alone,  "in  the  midst  of  kine 
continually,  mentally  thinking  of  ‘SSvittri’,  practising  sexual  conti¬ 
nence,  and  with  senses  under  control.*  13 

After  the  expiration  of  a  year,  on  the  day  of  the  full  moon  of  the 
month  of  Pousha,  or  of  Magha,  or  of  Phalgoon,  after  having  previ¬ 
ously  observed  a  fast  for  three  days,  one  should  enter  an  Amalaka 
forest.  r4 

He  should  then  climb  an  Amalaka  tree  that  is  large,  and  that  is 
endued  with  wealth  of  fruits.  He  should  then  pluck  with  his  hand 
a  few  fruits  from  the  branches  of  that  tree. 

He  should  then,  holding  the  fruits  in  his  hands,  mentally  recite 
that  which  is  called  ‘Pranava’,  viz,,,  the  syllable  Om,  which  is  identical 
with  Brahma,  till  nectar  comes  into  it. 

Verily,  while  mentally  reciting  the  ‘Pranava’  nectar  will  come  into 
the  fruits  for  at  least  a  short  space  of  time,.  At  that  time  the  fruits 
will  become  as  sweet:  as  sugar,  or  honey,  juicy,  and  soft,,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of.  their  union,  with  nectar. 

One  will  live  in  the  enjoyment  of.  youth,  for  as  many  thousands 
of  years  as  the  number  of  fruits,  one.  eats  according  to  this  method.f  15-17 

By  eating  these  fruits  till,  one’s  hunger  is  gratified,  one  becomes 
like  unto  an  immortal  (i.  e.,  a  deity). 

Then,  again,  these  three,  viz.,  £ree,  the  Vedas,  and  Speech  in  her 
embodied  form,’  come  unto  such  a  person.!  18 

LAUHADI  RASAYANA. 

Take  a  leaf  of  keen  iron  that  is  long  by  the  breadth  of  four  fingers 
and  of  the  thickness  of  a  sesame  seed. 


*  ‘Mentally  thinking  of  Savittri’,  i.  e.,  mentally  reciting  the  Gayattri,  which  is  the  most 
sacred  verse  in  the  Vedas. — T. 

f  ‘Pluck  with  the  hand’,  i.  e.,  not  by  shaking  the  tree  or  branches  and  allowing  the  fruits 
to  drop  down  on  the  ground. 

As  sweet  as  sugar,  &c.’,  implying:  that  their  astringent  taste  will  disappear. — T. 
t  ‘Qree’  is  the  goddess  of  prosperity. 

‘The  Vedas  come  unto  him’  implies  that  he  succeeds  in  mastering  the  Vedas  without  toil 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1046 

Make  it  red-hot  in  fire. 

Dip  it  then  in  the  juice  of  the  three  myrobalans. 

Heat  it  again  in  fire  till  it  becomes  red  like  fire,  and  dip  it  in 
cow’s  urine. 

Heat  it  once  more  in  fire  till  it  becomes  red  like  fire,  and  dip  it  in 
water  in  which  have  been  dissolved  the  ashes  of  the  green  spikes  of 
barley. 

Heat  it  again  and  dip  it  in  water  in  which  salt  has  been  dissolved. 

Place  it,  again,  on  fire  till  it  becomes  red-hot, and  dip  it  in  water 
in  which  have  been  dissolved  the  ashes  of  the  wood  of  ‘Ingudi.’ 

Heat  it,  once  more  till  it  becomes  red  like  fire  and  dip  it  in  water 
in  which  have  been  dissolved  the  ashes  of  the  wood  of  ‘Kingsuka’ 
( Butea  frandosa) 

When  the  leaf,  by  this  process,  attains  a  hue  as  black  as  collyrium, 
pound  it  into  pulv. 

Mix  the  pulv  with  honey  and  the  juice  of  ‘Amalak’  ( Phylanthus 
emblica ). 

When  it  is  thus  reduced  to  a  paste  fit  for  being  licked,  put  it  in  a 
vessel  which  has  been  allowed  to  suck  as  much  ghee  as  possible. 

The  vessel  should  then  be  placed  for  a  year  under  a  heap  of  barley. 

The  intelligent  physician  should  move  the  vessel,  every  month, 
in  such  a  way  that  the  whole  of  its  contents  be  stirred.* 

At  the  expiration  of  a  year  this  medicinal  product  should  be 
administered  with  honey  and  ghee,  every  morning,  considering  the 
strength  of  the  digestive  fire  (of  the  patient). 

When  this  ‘Rasayana’  becomes  digested  such  diet  should  be 
prescribed  as  can  be  assimilable. 

Thus  have  been  declared  the  (ordinances  about  the)  administration 
of  the  ‘Rasayana  made  of  iron.f 


‘Speech’,  that  is  goddess  of  speech,  viz.,  Saraswati,  comes  to  him  in  her  embodied  form. 

Saraswati  is  the  goddess  of  learning. — T. 

*  In  the  text  there  is  no  reference  to  the  fact  that  honey  and  the ...  expressed  juice  of 
‘Amalaka’  ( Phyllanthus  emblica )  should  be  poured  into  the  vessel  when  its  contents  are  to  be 
stirred  every  month.  Gangadhara,  in  his  commentary,  gives  this  direction.  Probably,  it 
is  traditional. — T. 

t  The  direction  is  that  the  medicine  should  first  be  taken  in  empty  stomach.  After  it 
has  been  digested,  i.  e.,  after  three  or  four  hours  one  may  take  such  food  as  one  is  capable  of 
assimilating.  No  food  should  be  taken  immediately  after  taking  the  medicine. — T. 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland,  C.  S.  A.  .  --You  have  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco ,  California: —  . As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent . 

there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical’ science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia ,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satelite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis ,  Ohio,  U.  S.  A.  : — The  Work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge: — A  careful  translation  of  this  Undent  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq. ,  Beats  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York  : — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  Ames  icon  f otirnal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia-. — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia  .'—I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  Copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
great  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  o]  Cashmere  .—No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-Western 
University,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition  : — I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  : — Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  Way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking.  1 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  19,  East  38th  Street,  New  York  .-—Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Praise,  Dramstadt  : — The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist : — I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere,  174.,  Boulcvatse,  Saint  Germain  Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  •  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every- success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  X  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  : — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  of 
Charaka  I  always  arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  ; — if  the  physicians  of  the 
present  day  would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopoea  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals, 
and  treat  their  patients  according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  ;be  less  work 
for  the  undertakers,  and  fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure 
to  the  completion  of  the  work,  fpr  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street ,  Calcutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  ICabiratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
[about  drawing  their  attention  to]  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after, — 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note  .  considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  me  t 
before  in  Medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing : — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful..  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector : — Your  patriotic 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve' the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  H.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  : — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note  the 
comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Gierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gya  It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  Wales  : — The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  : — Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a.I'arge  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as  pos¬ 
sibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning  to 
find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every  system 
of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is  a  work 
that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji,— The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  wel  1 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


4  V  357 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 

(TRAN SLA  TED  INTO  ENGLISH ). 


,  PUBLISHED  BY 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (ill  Original)  WITH  COMMENT¬ 
ARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 
journal  in  Bengali)  ;  practitioner  of  THE  HINDU 
SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C..  &C. 


CALCUTTA : 

2oo,  Cornwallis  Street. 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N.  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRATNA  PRESS, 
12,  SIMLA  STREET,  BYE-LANE. 

1905. 

(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved.) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters.) 

Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — .  I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention. 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my. 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office — .  Your 

excellent  translation  .  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

. Many  important  additions  tp  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.,  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gotheuburgh,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A. — I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing,  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris : — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany  : — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physiciaus  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsbureh,  Germany  : — English  translation  of- 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important- 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E„  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal : — I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  tolife, 
cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS 

OF.' 

PART  XXXIV. 

Section  III  of  Lesson.  I  is  concluded  in  the  first  portion  of 
this  Part. 

The  ingredients  of  ‘Aindri-Rasayana’,  ‘Medhakara-Ras&yana’, 
‘Pippali-Rasayana’,  ‘Pippalivardhamana-RasSyana’,  ‘TripholS-Rasa- 
yana’,  and ‘9ilajatu-Rasayana’ are  set  .down.  (Pp.  1047—1055). 

Then  commences  Section  IV.  It  is  called  ‘Ayurveda-sam- 
utth&niya  Ras&yanapSda.’  The  origin  of  the  Science  of  Life  is 
explained.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  account  given  here  differs 
in  some  respects  from  that  given  in  Lesson  I  of  Sutrasth^na. 

The  ingredients  of  a  few  more  ‘RasSyanas’  are  explained. 

The  most  interesting  portion  of  this  Section  is  that  which  is 
headed  ‘Rasayana  of  conduct.’  Purity  of  conduct  and  observance 
of  healthful  practices  constitute,  by  themselves,  a  ‘Rasayana’  of 
great  efficacy. 

The  qualifications  of  physicians  and  their  title  to  the  respect  of 
all  persons,  are  here  set  forth.  (Pp.  1068 — 1070). 

Lesson  II  commences  at  p.  1071.  It  is  called  ‘Vsjikarana.’  It 
treats  of  aphrodisiacs. 

It  will  be  difficult  to  find  another  passage  in  any  literature, 
ancient  or  modern,  that  can  match  what  is  said  of  woman. 

All  the  objects  of  the  senses  exist  in  a  state  of  combination  in 
woman  alone.  As  existing  in  woman,  they  are,  again,  the  foremost 
of  their  types.  The  beauty  that  resides  in  woman  is  superior  to 
the  beauty  that  resides  anywhere  else. 

The  agreeableness  of  touch  that  resides  in  woman  is  superior  to 
the  agreeableness  of  touch  residing  in  the  softest  velvet. 

The  different  phases  also  of  love  have  been  described  in  half  a 
dozen  verses  which  may  be  taken  as  the  quintessence  of  the  entire 
literature  of  love,  in  prose  or  poetry,  in  all  the  languages  of  the 
world.  Pp.  1072 — 1073). 


A  comparison  occurs  here  between  a  childless  man  and  a  man 
having  many  children.  A  childless  man,  the  Rishi  says,  is  like  a 
branchless  tree,  without  shadow  and  without  fruit,  and  emitting  a 
a  disagreeable  odour.  He  is  even  like  a  painted  lamp,  a  dry  tank, 
a  gilded  metal,  or  a  human  figure  made  of  straw.  He  has  no  posi¬ 
tion.  He  is  nude  and  empty,  and  he  has  necessity  for  work.  A 
man  with  many  children  is  like  one  who  has  many  forms,  as  one 
having  many  faces,  or  one  having  many  bodies,  as  one  having  great 
activity,  or  one  having  many  eyes,  or  one  having  many  souls. 

The  importance  of  progeny  is  explained. 

One  should  always  exert  to  have  many  children  of  robust  con¬ 
stitutions  and  good  character. 

The  section  concludes  with  the  mention  of  some  good  aphrodisiacs. 

This  part  will  amply  repay  perusal. 


CHAR  A  KA -SAM HIT  A. 


1047 


Agreeably  to  this  method  (i.  e.,  that  which  has  been  laid  down 
above)  should  ‘Rasayanas’  be  prepared  of  gold  and  silver. 

The  administration  of  every  one  of  these  ‘Rasayanas’  extends  the 
period  of  life  as,  has  been  fully  tested  by  experiment,  and  dispels  all 
sorts  of  disease.  *9.-25  ■ 

The  person  who  takes  ‘Rasayana’  made  of  iron  for  a  whole  year, 
becomes  as  follows  :  endued  with  the  strength  of  an  elephant,  and 
possessed  also  of  senses  in  their  full  vigour,  he  never  succumbs  to 
aggressions  of  violence  committed  on  his  person,  or  to  diseases 
of  any  kind,  or,  to  the  decrepitude  of  age,  or  to  death  itself. 
Further,  he  becomes  possessed  of  great  intelligence,  and  great  fame. 
Whatever  he  utters  becomes  accomplished.*  Whatever  he  hears  even 
once  he  succeeds  in  remembering.  His  strength  also  becomes 
great.  26-27 


AINDRI-RASAYANA, 

RASAYANA  MADE  OF  CUCUMIS  COLOCYNTHES ,  &c. 

Take  ‘Aindri’,  otherwise  called  ‘Indravaruni’  ( Cucumis  Colo- 
cynthes ),  ‘Matsyakshika’  (the  roots  of  AmaranThus  spinoszis)  ‘Brahmi* 
{Siphonanthus  Indica),  ‘Vacba’  (. Acorns  calamus ),  ‘Brahma-suvarchala’ 
(a  variety  of  Polanisia  icosandra),  Piper  longtim ,  and  ‘Saindhava’ 
salt,  gold,  ‘£ankhapushpi’  ( Pladera  decussata ),  Aconitum  ferox, and 
ghee.  The  measure  of  each  of  these,  except  gold,  ghee  and 
Aconitum  ferox ,  should  be  three  ‘yavas.’  Of  gold  the  measure 
should  be  two  ‘yavas’ ;  of  aconite  the  measure  should  be  two  ‘tilas’, ; 
and  of  ghee  the  measure  should  be  one  ‘pala.’  All  the  above  ingre¬ 
dients  (taken  in  the  aforesaid  measures)  should  be  mixed  together 
(and  taken  by  the  patient  in  proper  measure). 


*  ‘Vaksiddha’,  literally,  implies  one  who  has  attained  to  success  of  speech.  In  other 
words,  one  whose  words  become  immediately  accomplished  is  called  so.  If  such  a  man 
were  to  say  at  midday  that  it  is  night,  forthwith  the  sun  would  hide  itself  and  darkness 
shroud  the  world.  The  benedictions  and  curses  of  such  a  man  are  sure  to  bear  immediate 
fruit. 

This  ‘siddhi’,  or,  success  of  speech,  is  one  of  the  eight  kinds  of  tsiddhi'  which  a 
Yogin  acquires  by  penances.  The  others  are  ‘Anima’  or  the  power  of  becoming  attenuated 
into  an  atom  ;  ‘Laghima.’  or  the  power  of  becoming  as  light  as  the  air,  &c, — T. 

133 


[048 


CHARAKA-S  AM  Hl'TA. 


When  the  medicine  has  been  digested,  the  diet  fit  to  be  taken  is 
boiled  rice  mixed  with  honey  and  a  copious  measure  of  ghee. 

This  ‘Rasayana’  is  alleviative  of  (the  effects  of)  decrepitude  and 
disease.  It  is  highly  efficacious  in  invigorating  the  memory  and 
the  understanding.  It  promotes  longevity.  It  nourishes  the  body. 
It  improves  the  voice  and  the  complexion.  It  is  the  foremost  of  all 
those  things  which  generate  ‘ojas.’  The  potency  of  this  ‘Rasayana’ 
has  been  well  tested. 

No  incantations  according  to  Atharvan  rites  can  injure  a  man 
who  takes  this  medicine.  ‘Alakshmi’,  or  the  spirit  of  adversity  also 
cannot  approach  him.  Poison  cannot  affect  him.  Neither  does  he 
succumb  to  any  disease.* 

Through  the  use  of  this  medicine,  leprosy  of  the  white  and 
the  tubercular  variety,  diseases  of  the  stomach,  abdominal  tumours, 
enlarged  spleen,,  chronic  and  obstinate  fever,  and  all  those  diseases 
that  destroy  understanding,  memory,  and  consciousness,  and  all 
varieties  of  rheumatism,  acute  and  painful,  are  cured.  28-33 

MEDHAKARA  RASAYANA, 

RASAYANA  THAT  INVIGORATES  THE  UNDERSTANDING. 

The  expressed  juice  of  ‘Mandukaparni’-]-  .{Hydrocotyle  Asiatica), 
liquorice  reduced  to  pulv,  or  the  juice  of  ‘Guduchi’  ( Tinospora 


*  ‘Kritya’  is,  literally,  a  fire  ignited  with  the  aid  of  ‘mantras’  occurring  in  the  Atharva 
Veda.  Its  efficacy  in  destroying  a  foe  is  highly  spoken  of.  In  the  Vishnu-Purana,  the  priests 
of  the  Asura  king,  Hiranyaka5ipu,  invoked  a  ‘Kritya’  fire  for  consuming  Prahlada.  Here 
it  stands  for  an  act  of  incantation  by  which  a  person  may  be  brought  under  subjection,  or 
deprived  of  reason,  or  even  of  life. 

‘Lakshmi’  is  the  goddess  of  Prosperity.  In  the  popular  imagination  there  is  a  goddess 
called  ‘Alakshmi’  who  is  clothed  with  attributes  opposite  to  those  of  Lakshmi.  Alakshmi 
is  worshipped  on  the  same  day  as  Lakshmi,  viz.,  the  evening  of  the  new  moon  of  KSrtika. 
Her  image  is  formed  of  cow-dung.  Offerings  are  made  to  her  of  torn  human  hair  and  broken 
dowries.  The  priest  sits  with  his  back  towards  her  and  uses  the  left  hand  for  making  the 
offerings  to  her,  while  the  children  of  the  house  beat  winnows  made  of  bamboo,  the. 
sound  being  regarded  as  highly  inauspicious.  Generally  speaking,  Alakshmi  stands  for: 
adversity  embodied.— T. 

t  ‘Mandukaparni’— Gangadhara  explains  it  as  ‘Danti’  ( Baliospemum  montanum).  — T. 


CH  ARA  KA  -  SA  MHI T A . 


1049 


cordifolia ),  should  be  used  with  milk.  The  paste  also  of  the  roots  and 
the  blossoms  of  ‘(^ankhapushpi’  ( Pladera  decussata)  should  be  used 
with  the  liquid. 

These  ‘Rasayanas’  promote  longevity,  destroy  disease,  increase 
strength,  and  improve  digestion,  complexion,  and  voice.  They  also 
•invigorate  the  understanding. 

Of  these,  again,  that  made  of  ‘^ankhapushpi’  {Pladera  decussata) 
especially  conduces  to  strength  of  understanding.  34-35 

PIPPALI  RASAYANA, 

RASA  YANA  MADE  OF  PIPER  LONGUM. 

One  that  seeks  the  virtues  of  ‘Rasayana’  (for  nourishing  oneself) 
should  use,  for  a  whole  year,  five,  six,  seven,  or  ten  fruits  of  Piper 
longum',  with  honey  and  ghee.  3*5 

One  that  seeks  the  virtues  of  .‘Rasayana’  (for  nourishing  oneself) 
should,  (as  an  alternative),  use  the  following  preparation  of  Piper 
longum.  “ 

Take  a  handful  of  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum.  Soak  them  in  water 
hr  which  the  ashes  of  the  wood  of  ‘Kinsuka ’  {Butea  ffondosa)  \sa.\h 
been  dissolved. 

Fry  them  next  in  ....  ; 

Three  such  fruits  of  Piper  longum  should  be  taken  (thrice,  a. day), 
in  the  morning,  before  meals,  and  after  meals,  with  honey  and  ghee. 

Such  a  preparation  is  potent  to  cure  bronchites,  phthisis,  asthma, 
consumption,  hiccup,  all  diseases  of  the  throat,  piles,  disease  of  the 
‘Graham’  (chronic  lienteric  dysentery),  chlorosis,  obstinate  fever, 
hoarseness  of  voice,  inflammation  of  the  Schneiderian  membrane 
with  loss  of  the  sense  of  smell,  inflammatory  swellings,  abdominal 
tumours,  and  all  diseases  that  are  born  of  excited  wind  And 
phlegm.*  37-39 


*  ‘Kinsukaksharabhavitah’— Gkngadhara  says  .  that  the  process  of  soaking  should  be 
.repeated  seven  .times,.  Moreover,,  the  second  preparation  of .  Piper  longum  should  be  used  for 
a  whole  year.  The  diet  should  be  the  same  as  in  thq  .case.qf  other  ‘Rasayanas. ’—T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1050 


PIPPALIVARDHAMANA  RASA  YANA, 

RASAYANA  OF  PIPER  LONGUM. 

Ten  fruits  of  Piper  longum  should  be  taken  with  milk  on  the  first 
day.  The  number  of  fruits  should,  in  this  way,  be  increased  by 
ten  a  day.  Use  the  medicine  for  ten  days.  From  the  eleventh 
day  the  number  of  the  fruits  should  be  decreased  by  ten  every 
day.*  4° 

Every  day,  when  the  medicine  is  digested,  one  should  take  boiled 
rice  of  the  variety  called  ‘Shashthika’  with  milk  and  ghee. 

The  use,  in  this  way,  of  a  thousand  fruits  of  Piper  longum  consti¬ 
tutes  ‘Pippalivardhamana  Rasayana.’  41 

These  should  be  taken  in  the  form  of  powder  by  a  strong  man  j 
in  that  of  decoction  by  a  man  of  average  strength  ;  and  in  that  of 
cold  infusion  by  one  that  is  endued  with  little  strength. 

This  ‘Rasayana’  should  be  administered,  considering  the  particular 
fault  (excited)  and  the  particular  disease.  4Z 

The  use  of  the  ‘Rasayana’  which  begins  with  ten  fruits  of  Piper 
longum  is  regarded  very  beneficial  in  point  of  efficacy.  That  of  the 
•Rasayana’  which  begins  with  six  fruits  of  Piper  longum,  is  (consi¬ 
dered  as)  tolerable ;  and  that  administration  of  ‘Rasayana’  which 


*  The  verse  is  rather  periphrastic.  It  is  difficult  to  render  it  literally.  ‘Dagapippalikaro 
dinam’  means  a  day  characterised  by  ten  fruits  of  Piper  longum. 

‘Kramavriddhi1  means  gradual  increase. 

•Dagahani  vardcfhayet’  means  that  the  increase  should  go  on  tilt  the  tenth  day. 

That  the  increase  should  be  by  ten  is.  implied  by  the  word  ‘daga’  in  ‘dagapippalika.’ 

The  decrease  should  be  also  by  ‘ten’  every  day. 

It  is  said  that  a  thousand  fruits  of  Piper  longum  should  be  used  in  this  way. 

From  this  we  get  that  the  use  of  the  medicine  should  continue  for  nineteen  days  in  all. 

On  the  first  day  the  number  of  fruits  is  ten  ;  on  the  second  it  is  twenty  ;  on  the  third 
thirty  ;  on  the  tenth  it  comes  to  one  hundred. 

The  total  number  on  the  tenth  day  becomes  550.  On  the  eleventh  the  number  is  90,  on 
the  twelfth  So.  Allowing  the  number  to  decrease  by  ted,  on  the  nineteenth  day  the  number 
becomes  ten.  The  total  of  the  9  days  from  the  eleventh  to  the  nineteenth  day  reaches  to 
450.  550  and  450  make  up  1,000. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


I05i 

begins  with  three  fruits  (at  the  outset)  is  considered  as  the  least  (of 
the  three  in  point  of  efficacy.)* 

The  last  variety  of  ‘Rasayana’  should  be  used  by  a  weak  man.  43 

This  ‘RasSyana’  of  Piper  longiim  promotes  strength,  improves  the 
voice,  and  conduces  to  longevity.  It  alleviates  enlarged  spleen  and, 
indeed,  all  other  diseases  of  the  stomach.  It  counteracts  the  effects 
of  age  and  sharpens  intellect.  44 

TRIPHALA  RASAYANA, 

RASAYANA  MADE  OF  THE  THREE  MYROB ALANS. 

After  the  food  (taken  before)  is  digested,  take  one  fruit  of  ‘Hari- 
taki’  (Chebulic  myrobalan)  before  the  (next)  meal ;  take  two  fruits  of 
‘Vibhitaka’  ( Terminalia  Bellerica ),  and  (just)  after  meals  take  four 
fruits  of  ‘Amalaka’  ( Phylanthus  Emblica).  All  these  fruits  should  be 
taken  with  honey  and  ghee.  45 

This  ‘Rasayana’  of  the  three  myrobalans  should  be  taken  for  a 
whole  year. 

By  its  use  one  would  live  for  a  full  hundred  years  without  being 
influenced  by  age,  and  without  being  afflicted  by  disease.  46 

Another  preparation  of  ‘Triphala-Rasayana’  is  as  follows  : 

Take  a  (thin)  new  iron  leaf  and  keep  it  laved  with  the  paste  of 
the  three  myrobalans  for  a  whole  day  and  night.  Take  out  the  paste 
(the  next  day)  and  use  it  with  honey  and  water.f  47 


*  ‘Shatpippali  Rasayana’  or  ‘Rasayana’  which  begins  with  six  fruits  of  Piper  longiim. 
On  the  first  day  six  should  be  taken,  on  the  second  twelve,  on  the  third  eighteen,  and  so  on 
to  the  thirteenth  day.  The  total  number  taken  in  thirteen  days  comes  up  to  546.  From 
the  fourteenth  the  number  should  decrease  by  6.  That  is,  on  the  fourteenth  day  the  number 
should  be  72,  on  the  fifteenth  66,  and  so  on,  until  on  the  twentyfifth  day  the  original  number 
of  6  is  reached.  The  grand  total  comes  up  to  1,014.  Gangadhara  remarks  that  the  excess 
of  14  fruits  over  the  number  1,000  allowed  in  the  text,  is  not  injurious. 

‘Tripippali  Rasayana’  or  ‘Rasayana’  which  begins  with  three  fruits  of  Piper  longiim. 
On  the  first  day  the  number  should  be  three,  on  the  second  six,  and  so  on  increasing  by  3 
a  day  to  the  nineteenth  day.  The  total  for  the  19  days  comes  up  to  513.  The  highest 
number  of  the  day,  57,  should  decrease  by  3,  until  it  attains  to  the  original  number  3  on 
the  thirty-sixth  day.  The  total  for  the  36  days  becomes  1,026.  The  excess  of  26  is 
not  baneful. — T. 

t  ‘Traiphalena  kalkena.’  The  measure  of  the  three  myrobalans  to  make  the  paste  should 
be  uniform.  The  same  quantity  of  each  ingredient  should  be  taken. — T. 


1052 


.  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


When  the  medicine  is  digested,  one  should  take  such  food  as  is 
mixed  with  a  copious  quantity  of  ghee  and  milk. 

From  use  of  this  ‘Rasayana’  for  a  full  year,  one  becomes  free  from 
-decrepitude  and  disease  and  lives  for  a  hundred  years.  48 

Another  preparation  of ‘Triphala  Rasayana’  is  as  follows  : 

The  three  myrobalans  should  be  used  with  the  pulv  of  liquorice, 
or  with  Tugakshiri  (bamboo  manna)  reduced  to  pulv,  or  with  the' pulv 
of  Piper  longum,  or  with  honey  and  ghee,  or  with  sugar. 

These  five  different  preparations  of  myrobalans  have  been  well 
tried.*  49 

The  three  myrobalans  used  with  all  varieties  of  iron  reduced  to 
powder,  or  with  gold,  or  with  ‘Vacha’  (Acorus  Calamus ),  or  with  honey 
and  ghee,  or  with  ‘Vidanga’  ( Embelia  Ribes ),  or  with  (powdered)  fruits 
of  Piper  longum,  or  with  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  make  a  very  potent 
‘Rasayana.’ 

If  used  for  a  full  year,  any  of  these  ‘Rasayanas’  would  sharpen  the 
understanding  and  the  memory,  and  infuse  strength.  It  would  impart 
longevity.  It  is  deserving  of  high  praise  ;  it  counteracts  the  effects 
of  age  and  alleviates  diseases.  5°-5i 

QILAJATU  RASAYANA, 

RASAYANA  MADE  OF  QILAJATU. 

(Qilajatu  is  slightly  sour  ;  it  is  astringent,  and  becomes  pungent  in 
course  of  digestion.  It  is  neither  very  heating  nor  very  cooling  111 
its  effects. 

-  Its  birth  is  from  four  metals,  viz.,  from  gold,  from  silver,  from 
:  copper,  and  from  black  iron  also  ;  that  from  the  last  being  regarded 
as  the  best.f 


*  The  measure  of  the  ingredients  which  are  to  be  mixed  with  the  three  iqyrctbalans  should 
be  equal  to  that  of  the,  myrobalans  themselves.  The.  measure  of  each  of  the  myrobalans, 
again,  should  be  the  same. — T. 

t./.  e.,  each,  of  the  four  metals  mentioned,  lower  down,  begets  Qilajatu.  It  is  not  the 
common  product  of. all  the  four  jointly.  ■  ...... 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. . 


1053 


'  (By  itself)  (^ilajatu  is  a  ‘Rasayana.’ 

Used  according  to  the  ordinances  it  increases  the  semen.  It  is 
also  an  alleviative  of  diseases  of  all  kinds.  52-53 

If  it  be  soaked  in  the  decoction  of  such  drugs  as  are  alleviative 
of  the'  excited  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  its  efficacy  becomes  very 
great.  It  may  be  soaked  in  (the  decoction  of)  such  drugs  also  as  are 
alleviative  of  only  one  of  the  faults.  Its  efficacy  in  this  case  also 
will  improve.* * * §  54 

The  process  of  soaking  should  be  as  follows  : 

Dip  £ilajatu  in  the  decoction  which  should  be  slightly  warm. 
Take  it  out  (and  have  it  dried  in  the  sunshine).  Again,  dip  it  in  the 
lukewarm  decoction.  Take  it  out  once  more  and  expose  it  to  the 
rays  of  the  sun.  The  process  should  continue  for  7  days.  55  , 

(^ilajatu,  corrected  by  the  aforesaid  process  and  taken  with  the 
pulv  of  iron,  and  milk,  imparts  a  long  happy  life.-^-  56 

It  prevents  the  effects  of  age  and  removes  all  diseases. 

It  is  the  foremost  of  all  medicines  which  make  the  body  compact 
and  durable. 

It  invigorates  the  memory  and  the  understanding. 

It  gives  tone  to  the  system. 

It  should  be  used  by  one  who  takes  milk.  57 

The  administration  of  the  medicine  has  been  laid  down  to  be  of 
three  sorts,  1.  full,  2.  intermediate,  and  3.  partial,  i.  e.,  according  as-- 
it  is  continued  for  seven  weeks,  three  weeks,  one  week  only.!  58 

The  measure  to  be  used  is  also  prescribed  to  be  of  three-  sorts,. 
1.  one  ‘pala’  (eight  tolas),  2.  half  a  ‘pala’  (four  tolas),  and  3.  ‘karshas’.' 
(two  tolas),§  59 


*  The  construction  of  the  second  line  of  fiftyfour  is  this  :  ‘Rasayanam  tat  vidhibhistad— 
vrishyam.’  The  vernacular  translators  have  not  understood  it  correctly-  Gangadhara  is- 
silent  on  the  point. — T. 

t  The  measure  of  the  pulv  of  iron  should1  be  the  same  as  that  of  Qilajatu. — T. 

J  The  words  of  the  text  are  tPara’,  “Madhya’  and  ‘Avara’,  which  mean  superior,  average,, 
and  inferior.  The  superiority  of  the  administration  lies  in  its  fullness, -and  so  on..— T. 

§  The  measure  to  be  used  depends  upon  the  strength-  pf  the  user.  If-  he  be  a  man  of 
superior  strength,  he  should  use  the  full  measure.  If  he-  be  of  average  strength,- .  .the -inter¬ 
mediate  measure  should  be  used.  The  lowest  measure  is  ordained  for  a  weak  person. 

There  is  a  difference  of  reading  in  this  verse.  Gangadhara  reads  ‘Matrapalamardhapalam. 
s.y5t  karshastu  kaniyasi’.  The  other  reading  is — ‘Palamardhapalam,  karsho  .  matra  tasya-. 
tridha  mata.’  Gangadhara’s  reading  is  slovenly.— T- 


1054 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


Now,  we  shall  dwell  upon  the  characteristics  of  the  different 
classes  of^ilajatu  as  also  the  ordinances  regarding  them. 

The  metals  of  the  mountain,  viz.,  gold  and  the  rest,  begin  to 
dissolve,  heated  by  the  sun.  6o 

That  which  constitutes  the  impurity  of  these  metals,  is  termed 
£ilajatu.  It  resembles  lac  or  earth  in  colour,  and  is  soft. 

That  kind  of  £ilajatu  which  is  (partly)  sweet  and  (partly)  bitter 
in  taste,  which  is  like  unto  the  flower  of  Hibiscus  Rosa-sinensis  (in 
colour),  which  is  pungent  in  course  of  digestion,  and  which  is  cooling 
in  its  effects,  is  the  dissolved  impurity  of  gold. 

That  sort  of  £ilajatu  is  the  result  of  silver  which  is  pungent  in 
taste,  white  in  colour,  cooling  in  its  effects,  and  sweet  in  course  of 
digestion. 

That  kind  is  the  product  of  copper,  which  resembles,  in  '  colour, 
the  throat  of  the  peacock,  which  is  bitter  in  taste,  possessed  of  heating 
virtues,  and  pungent  in  course  of  digestion. 

That  which  has  the  sheen  of  ‘Guggula’  {Balsamodendron  Mukul), 
which  is  bitter  and  saline  in  taste,  and  pungent  in  course  of  digestion 
is  born  of  iron.  It  is  the  foremost  of  all  sorts  of  ^ilajatu.  61-63 

All  the  varieties  have  the  smell  of  cow’s  urine.  They  are  fit  for 
use  in  all  sorts  of  medication. 

But  when  (^ilajatu  is  to  be  used  as  a  Rasayana’,  the  last  variety, 
1 viz.,  that  derived  from  iron,  is  the  best.*  64 

The  impurities  that  are  born  of  the  metals,  gold,  &c.,  are  prefer¬ 
red  respectively  in  (curing  diseases  bom  of)  excited  wind,  excited 
bile,  excited  phlegm,  and  the  three  faults  excited  together.^  63 

While  using  Cilajatu,  one  should  avoid  food  that  causes  an  acrid 
or  a  burning  sensation,  and  is  heavy.  The  seeds  of  ‘Kulattha’,  {Doli- 
chos  biflorus )  should,  as  a  rule,  be  avoided.  66 


*  The  different  sorts  of  medication  are  the  administration  of  ‘Rasayana’,  that  of  ‘Baji- 
karana’  or  aphrodisiacs,  and  that  of  ‘Rogaharana’  or  curatives.  See. — T. 

t  Plainly  speaking,  the  meaning  is  that  the  (Jilajatu  born  of  gold  is  specially  suited  to 
the  cure  of  diseases  caused  by  both  wind  and  bile  excited  together  ;  that  the  variety  born 
of  silver  is  fitted  for  diseases  that  arise  from  phlegm  and  bile  excited  together ;  that  the 
variety  horn  of  copper  is  the  curative  of  diseases  caused  by  phlegm  alone,  and  that  the 
Qlajatu  of  iron  is  beneficial  for  diseases  born  of  all  the  three  faults  excited  together. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


.1055. 


Since  these,  i.  e.,  the  seeds  of  ‘Kulattha’,  are  exceedingly  hostile 
(to  it),  they  are  pre-eminently  piercers  of  stone,  as  seen  by  men. 
Hence  their  use  is  interdicted.*  67 

Different  kinds  of  milk,  sour  gruels  (or  vinegar),  meat-juices,  the 
soup  of  different  kinds  of  pulses,  water,  cow’s  urine,  and  different 
sorts  of  astringent  liquids,  are  used  for  dissolving  this  product  of  the 
•mountains.  One  or  other  of  these  agents  should  be  selected,  consi¬ 
dering  the  effect  to  be  produced  (that  is,  the  disease  to  be  treated.)  6* 
There  Is  no  such  curable  disease  on  earth  which  £ilaj‘atu  cannot 
conquer. 

Administered  to  a  healthy  person,  according  to  the  ordinances  in 
respect  of  its  combinations,  it  imparts  excessive  vigour  to  him.  69 
Thus  ends  the  discourse  on  ‘£ilajatu-Rasayana.’ 

( Here  is  a  "verse). 

In  this  section,  called  ‘Karaprachitika’,  the  great  sage  has  declared 
ten  and  six  well-tested  combinations  of  Rasayanas. 

Thus  ends  the  third  Section  on  ‘Karaprachltiya  Rasayana.’ 


§  IV, 

We  shall  now  expound  the  section  on  ‘Rasayana’  called  ‘Ayur- 
veda-samutthaniya  Rasayanapada.’h 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  uaf  ,Atri. !l 

Once,  In  days  of  yore,  the  Rishis,  in  general,  became  worldly  and 
boorish.  They  betook  themselves  to  wrong  ways.  They  used  rustic 


*  The  construction^  rather  difficult.  The  fact  is,  ‘Atyantaviruddhatwat’  has  reference 
to  •‘Afman.’  The  sense,  therefore,  is, — being  hostile  to  ‘A^man’,  the  seedsof  ‘Itulattha’ 
are  ‘Agmanah  bhedanah.’  The  statement,  therefore,  amounts  to  this  :  the  seeds  of 
■‘Kulattha’  are  piercers  of  stone.  ‘Qilajatu’  is  the  product  of  stone.  Hence,  the  seeds 
mentioned  are  hostile  to  ‘Qilajatu’  as  well.  Their  use,  therefore,  is  interdicted  after  the 
•administration  of  Qilajatu. — T. 

t  The  compound  ‘Ayurveda-samutthana’,  implies  ‘origin  or  rise  of  Ayurveda  or  the 
Science  of  Life.’  This  lesson,  it  will  be  seen,  treats  of  the  origin  of  Medical  Science,  after 
the  manner  of  what  has  been  said  in  lesson  I.  of  Sutrasthana.  It  will  be  further  seen 
that  the  account  given  here  differs  in  many  respects  from  that  given  in  lesson  I  of 
•Sutrasthana.— T. 

JJ4 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


1056. 


drugs  and  food,  and  became  men  of  wealth.  As  such,  they  grew  idle, 
and  did  not  attend  to  the  auspicious  observances  (prescribed  for 
them.)*  2 

Being  unable  to  perform  their  duties  (such  as  worship  and 
meditation,  the  study  of  the  Vedas  and  performance  of  sacrifices), 
and  attributing  their  faults  to  their  rustic  residence,  and  regarding 
their  former  abodes  (on  the  breast  of  the  Himavat)  as  free  from  the 
faults  of  their  rustic  habitat,  they  repaired  to  the  Himavat  mountains 
which  were  auspicious,  sacred,  specious,  inaccessible  (to  the  sinful), 
the  source  of  Ganga,  frequented  by  deities,  Gandharvas,  Yakshas,  and 
Kinnaras,  abounding  with  jewels  and  gems  of  diverse  kinds,  of  in¬ 
conceivable  and  wonderful  grandeur,  the  resort  of  regenerate  Rishis 
and  Siddhas  and  Charanas,  the  source  of  many  waters  of  high 
sanctity  and  medicinal  herbs,  an  asylum  worthy  of  being  sought,  and 
protected  by  the  chief  himself  of  the  celestials.!  3-5 

The  great  Rishrs  that  thus  repaired  to  the  Himavat  mountains 
were  Bhrigu,  Angiras,  Atri,  Vagishtha,  Ivacyapa,  Agastya,  Pulastya, 
Vamadeva,  Asita,  Gautama,  and  others.!6 

U nto  them  Indra  endued  with  a  thousand  eyes,  said, — 

Welcome  to  you,  ye  regenerate  Rishis,  ye  that  are  conversant^ 
with  Brahma  (the  Vedas),  ye  that  have  Knowledge  and  Penances  for 

*  The  word  ‘(Jalina’  generally  means  bashful.  Here,  it  is  used  in  a  peculiar  sense,  viz., 
one  Who  is  devoted  to  worldly  affairs  and  who  is  deficient  in  delicacy.  ( Vide  Wilson’s 
Dictionary).  It  may  also  mean  an  opulent  householder.  The  sense,  probably,  is  that  the 
Rishis,  instead  of  remaining  denizens  of  forests,  became  householders  and  showed  a  decided 
leaning  towards  the  acquisition  of  wealth. 

‘Yayavara’  implies  one  who  betakes  oneself  to  wrong  paths,  deviating  from  the  high 
road  ;  literally,  it  means  also  a  wanderer  or  vagrant.  Hence,  figuratively,  one  who  deviates 
from  the  path  of  duty  and  is  engaged  in  evil  or  improper  acts. — T. 

t  ‘Udara’  here  implies  broad  or  specious,  as  opposed  to  narrow  or  confined.  ‘Broad  or 
specious  as  a  mountain-breast’,  ‘free  as  the  mountain  air’,  &c.,  are  stereotyped  phrases. 

‘Achintya . prabhava’  :  here  ‘prabhava’  is  evidently  used  for  grandeur  or  majesty  o 

appearance.  It  has  no  reference  to  puissance  or  energy. 

‘Divya  tirtha  &c.’ — ‘Tirtha’  implies  a  sacred  water,  be  it  a  river,  or  a  lake,  or  even  a  well. 
They  are  places  of  pilgrimage.  There  can  be  no  ‘tirtha’  without  water.  As  nearly  all  the 
rivers  of  the  Gangetic  basin  rise  from  the  Himavat  mountains,  those  mountains  are  fitly  de¬ 
scribed  as  the  origin  of  ‘tirthas.’  ‘Divya’  implies  excellent  or  eminent.  As  regards  medicinal 
herbs, "again,  the  Himavat  mountains  are  regarded  as- producing  the  best  kinds  or  species.  To 
this  day,  all  noted  physicians  obtain  their  supplies  of  medicinal  herbs  from  Morung  in  Nepal, 
and  other  regions  on  the  breast  of  the  Himalayas. — T. 

t  Compare  this  list  with  the  fuller  one  given  in  Lesson  I  of  Sutrasthana. — -T. 


CHA  RA ICA  -  SA  MH1 TA . 


io  57 


your  sole  wealth  !  I  see  in  you  a  depression  of  spirits,  loss  of  puis¬ 
sance,  hoarseness  of  voice,  loss  of  complexion,  and  all  those  ailments 
that  are  caused  by  rusticity  of  habitat  and  that  are  concomitants 
of  unhappiness.*  7 

Verily,  rusticity  of  habitat  is  the  root  of  all  unhappiness.  That 
you  who  are  all  of  pious  practices  had  betaken  yourselves  to  that  life 
without  attending  to  the  safety  of  your  own  bodies,  was  certainly  a 
favour  shown  to  men  of  the  world.  8 

The  time  has  come  for  the  inculcation  of  the  Science  of  Life.  For 
the  good  of  regenerate  Rishis,  of  my  own  self,  and  of  all  creatures, 
the  twin  Agwins  imparted  to  me  the  (knowledge  of  the)  Science  of 
Life.  The  Lord  of  all  creatures  (viz.,  Daksha)  had  imparted  it  to  the 
twins.  The  Grandsire  (Brahman)  had  imparted  it  to  the  Lord  of  all 
creatures.  Considering  the  shortness  of  the  period  of  life  which 
human  beings  now  have,  and  which,  again,  is  subject*  to  decrepitude 
and  diseases  of  diverse  kinds,  considering  the  misery  and  the  con¬ 
comitants  of  unhappiness  to  which  they  are  liable,  and  considering 
also  that  the  stock  is  small,  of  human  beings,  of  (the  merits  of) 
penances,  self-restraint,  vows,  gifts,  and  study  (of  the  Vedas),  it  be- 
hoveth  you  to  hear  from  me,  bear  in  mind,  and  promulgate,  for  the 
good  of  all  creatures,  the  Science  of  Life,  which  is  the  most  sacred  (of 
all  sciences),  which  promotes  longevity,  which  prevents  the  effects  of 
decrepitude  and  disease,  which  infuses  strength,  which  is  as  nectar 
itself,  which  is  most  beneficial  to  all  beings,  which  affords  pro¬ 
tection  unto  .the  afflicted,  and  which  is  unsectarian  as  regards  its 
doctrines.f  9-n 


*  ‘Glani’  means  a  depression  of  spirits.  It  may  stand  also  for  disease  or  ailments.  As, 
however,  ailments  are  specially  mentioned  in  this  very  sentence,  ‘glani’  should  be  taken  to 
stand  for  depression  of  spirits. — T. 

+  The  descent  of  the  Science  of  Life,  as  traced  here,  is  this  :  originally  emanating  from 
the  Grandsire  himself,  it  was  imparted  by  him  to  Daksha,  one  of  those  sops  who  were 
created  by  only  a  fiat  of  his  will.  Daksha  is  regarded  as  a  ‘Prajapati’  or  Lord  of  all  creatures, 
because  it  was  he  who,  with  some  of  his  brothers,  undertook,  at  the  command  of  Brahman, 
to  create  beings  of  all  kinds.  Daksha  imparted  a  knowledge  of  the  science  to.  the  twin 
Agwiris  who  are  regarded  as  the  physicians  of  the  celestials.  The  twins  having  acquired  it 
thus,  communicated  it  to.  Indra-,  the  chief  of  the  deities.  India,  having  got  it,  communi¬ 
cated  it  to  none.  The  ordinance  of  the  Hindu  religion  is  that  one  that  has  acquired  a 
science  incurs  the  obligation  of  imparting  it  to  another.  If  one  acts  in  a  different  way,  one 
As  regarded  as  incurring  a  great  sin.  The  practice  was  unknown  in  those  days  of  preceptors 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


1058 

And  the  Vedas  are  (the  property)  of  the  Rishis.  Universal  friend¬ 
ship  and  compassion  constitute  the  best  and  the  highest  merit  that  the 
Soul  can  achieve  ;  and  they  are  known  as  acts  relating  to  Brahman, 
which  are  eternal*  12 

Hearing  these  words  of  the  chief  of  the  celestials,  all  the  Rishis, 
being  gladdened,  sang  the  praises  of  that  foremost  of  immortals  with 
many  a  rik,  and  welcomed  his  speech.  13 

Then  Indra  imparted  the  Science  of  Life,  which  is  like  unto 
nectar,  unto  the  Rishis  and  said  : 

All  this  should  be  practised.  This  is  the  auspicious  time  for 
Rasayanas.  Excellent  are  the  medicinal  herbs  that  are  born  on 
Himavat,  and  they  have  now  attained  to  maturity  and  potency.  *4 


taking  fees  from  pupils  for  teaching  them  any  branch  of  knowledge.  So  far  from  taking 
fees,  they  were  obliged  to  even  feed!  and  lodge  the- pupils  that  came  to  them.  This  practice 
prevails  to  this  day  not  only  in  all  the  great  seats  of  learning  but  is  observed  by  individual 
teachers  in  their  respective  abodes. — T. 

*  The  text  is  crucial.  Gangadhara  reads  ‘Maitrim.’  We  have  not  followed  him,  because 
that  reading  does  not  give  any  sense.  The  commentator,  encumbered  by  his  own  reading, 
has  made  a  mess  of  the  passage.  He  takes  the  words  ‘Prativarttate’  as  understood.  ‘Prati’ 
has  relation  with  ‘maitri’,  ‘karunya’,  and  also  with  ‘punya.’  He  explains  ‘arsham’  as 
‘Rishinam  swabhavikodharmah’  or  the  natural  attributes  of  the  Rishis.  He  leaves  ‘Brahma’ 
unexplained.  Indeed,  we  cannot  deduce  from  his  comments  what  he  understands  by  the 
words  ‘arsham  Brahma  cha.’  His  comment  runs  thus  ‘arsham  Rishinam  swabhaviko¬ 
dharmah  Brahma  tachcha  Rishitwadharmo-Brahma  hi  maitrim  prati  mitrataya  bhage  varttate, 
karunyam  prati ;  atmanagchanultamam,  udaram  punyam  prati  varttate.’  The  ‘abhasa’  he 
gives  is  ‘Nanu  kasmat  vayam  prajanugraham  vidadhamab  ityatah  aha.’  From  even  this 
elaborate  note  we  have  not  been  able  to  glean  any  sense.  We  take  Brahma  to  mean  ‘Veda.’ 
‘Cha’  connects  this  portion  of  Indra’s  speesfi.  with  theprevious  one.  Indra  said  before  that  the 
Rishis  should  hear  from  himself  and  remember  and  publish  to  the  world  the  Science  of  Life. 
Thinking  that  the  Rishis  adght  question  their  own  capacity  for  learning  this  new  science, 
Indra  shows  that  they  have  that  capacity.  Brahma  or  Veda  is  ‘arsha’  or  a  thing  belonging  to 
the  Rishis.  Ayurveda  or  the  Science  of  Life  is  a  portion  of  the  ‘Veda.’  So  the  Rishis  have 
the  right  and  the  capacity  to  understand  it.  The  rest  of  the  text  shows  why  the  Rishis 
should  learn  this  new  science.  It  has  been  already  said  that  a  knowledge  of  this  science 
would  enable  them  to  do  good  to  the  world.  Why  should  they  bother  themselves  for  the 
good  of  others  ?  Indra  says  that  universal  compassion  should  form  the  creed  of  the  arsha 
heart.  Thereby  they  would  not  be  losers.  Rather,  they  would  be  benefited.  There 
is  nothing  more  meritorious  than  this  universal  love.  This  act  of  charity  is  a  Brahma  act, 
or  an  act  of  which  even  the  great  Brahman  may  be  proud.  It  is,  again,  everlasting.  It  is  not 
lost.  Its  good  effects  last  for  ever.  Nothing  can  give  more  happiness  in  the  future  life  than, 
universal  love  and  charity. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1059 

THE  RASAYANA  INCULCATED  BY  INDRA. 

Take  Aindri  ( Cucumis  colocynthis),  Brahmi  ( Siphonanthus  Indica), 
Kshirakakoli  (a  bulbous  root  of  the  onion  tribe  brought  from 
the  Himalayas),* * * §  Kshirapushpi  (blossom  of  Alangium  hexapetalum ), 
£ravanif  ( Hydrocotyle  Asiatica ),  MahagravaniJ  (a  large  variety  of  the 
plant  known  as  Thulkudi),  (^atavari  ( Asparagus  racemosus)  Vidari 
( Convolvulus  paniculatus ),  Jivanti  ( Ccelogyne  ovalis),  Punarnava 
(Boerhavia  diffusa),  Nagbala  (Sida  spinosa),  Sthira  {Hedysarum  Gan- 
geticum,  better  known  as  (^tlaparni),  Vacha  ( Acorus  calamus ),  Cchatra- 
ticchatra  §  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ,  otherwise  called  Katuka),  ‘Meda’, 
Mahameda||  and  other  drugs  of  the  ‘Jivaniya’  group.  Make  a  paste 
of  all  these  ingredients.  Used  with  milk  for  six  months,  this  medi¬ 
cine  promotes  longevity,  preserves  youth,  prevents  disease,  confers 
wealth  of  voice  and  complexion,  sharpens  the  understanding, 
strengthens  the  memory,  gives  great  strength,  and  produces  other 
desirable  effects.  This  is  a  well-tried  preparation.15-17 
DRONIPRAVEgiKA  RASAYANA, 

RASAYANA  REQUIRING  ONE  TO  ENTER  INTO  AN  WOODEN  VESSEL. 

There  is  a  . medicinal  herb  named  ‘Brahma-suvarchala’,  otherwise- 
known  as  ‘Hiranyakshira’  (in  consequence  of  its  exudation  being; 
of  a  golden  colour).^)  .  Its  leaves  are  like  those  of  the  lotus. 


*  ‘Kshirakakoli’  is  not  yet  identified.  Therefore,  it  has  not  received  any  scientific- 
appellation.  In  the  text,  the  word  that  occurs  in  ‘Payasya.’  Gangadhara  takes  it  as  ‘Kshira-- 
kakoli.’  In  Bengal,  it  is  called  ‘Kshirakankla’  or  ‘Kala-bhuikumda  which  literally  means-, 
a  sort  of  black  gourd. — T. 

+  ‘gravani’  is  better  known  as  ‘Mandukaparni.’  Its  Bengali  name  is  ‘Thulkudi.’ — T. 

J  ‘Mahagravani’  is  not  identifiable.  In  Bengali  it  is  called  ‘Vada-Thulkuri.’  Its  other- 
Sanskrit  names  are  :  I.  Mabamundi,  2.  Lochani,  3.  Kadamvapushpi,  4.  Vikacha,  5.  Kroda- 
chuda,  6.  Palankasha,.,7.  Nadikadama,  8.  Alamvusha,  &c.  We  give  these  names  for  its 
identification.  Different  names  may  be  in  vogue  in  different  parts  of  Ihdia. — T. 

§  The  word  ‘Cchatra’  means  “Madhurika’  (fennel  seeds)',  or  ‘Dhanyaka’  {Coriandram- 
sativum),  or  ‘Manjistha’  ( Rubict  cordifolia),  or ‘gilindhra’  (mushroom)..  The  word  ‘Ati- 
cchatra’ is  synonymous  with  ‘Cchatra ticchatra.’  We  have  followed  Gangadhara  in  taking 
‘Cchatraticchatra’  as  one  herb. — T. 

||  ‘Meda  and  ‘Mahameda’  are  not  identifiable. — T. 

a.  ‘Brahmasuvarchala’  is  a  variety  of  Adityabhakta  (Bengali,  ‘Hudhude’)  or  Cleame- 
viscosa.  Ayurvedarthachandrika  describes  it  as  ‘an  aquatic  plant  whose  leaves  are  like- 
those  of  the  lotus.’ 


ro6o 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


There  is  also  another  herb  named  ‘Adityaparni’(^),  otherwise  called 
'‘Suryakanta.’  Its  exudation  is  (also)  of  a  golden  colour.  Its  flower 
resembles  the  disc  of  the  sun.  r9 

There  is  an  herb  named  ‘Nari.’(c)  It  is  better  known  as  ‘Agwa- 
vala.’  Its  leaves  look  like  a  goat.  20 

There  is  an  herb  called  ‘Kashtagodha.’(^)  Its  shape  is  like  that 
of  an  iguana. 

There  is  an  herb  called  ‘Sarpa’(«)  which  has  the  shape  of  a  snake. 

There  is  an  herb  named  ‘Soma.’(/)  It  is  the  king  of  all  herbs.  It 
lias  five  and  ten  leaves.  It  waxes  and  wanes  like  the'  moon.  21 

There  is  another  herb  named  ‘Padma.’(g-)  It  resembles  the  lotus  in 


b.  ‘Adityaparni’  is  described  in  Sugruta  as  a  plant  with  a  bulbous  root,  having  five  deep 
red  leaves  which  turn  towards  the  sun.  It  is  known  in  Bengal  as  Suryamukhi.  It  is,  there¬ 
fore,  a  variety  of  Adityabhakta. — T. 

c.  ‘Nari’  has  not  been  identified.  Sugruta  describes  it  as  a  plant  of  great  efficacy. 
It  has  twelve  leaves  resembling  in  colour  and  shape  the  plumes  of  a  peacock.  Its  milk  is 
golden  in  hue.  It  has  a  bulbous  root-stock.  It  is  found  by  the  side  of  a  lake  in  Cashmere, 
known  by  the  name  of  ‘Kshudraka-Manasa.’ — T. 

d.  ‘Kashtagodha’  has  not  been  identified.  Sugruta  does  not  seem  to  have  mentioned 
it.— T. 

e.  ‘Sarpa’  has  not  been  identified.  Sugruta  gives  another  name  by  which  it  is  known, 
•viz.,  ‘Ajagari’,  and  describes  it  as  a  plant  endued  with  five  leaves  which  have  the  shape  of 
the  extended  hood  of  a  snake. — T. 

f.  ‘Soma’,  better  known  as  ‘Somalata’,  is  identified  with  Sarcostemma  Brevisiigma,  syn. 
Asclepias  acida.  The  beverage  prepared  from  this  plant  was.  regarded  by  the  Rishis  as 
sacred.  The  gods  drank  it  in  sacrifices.  The  Vedas  sing  its  praises.  Sugruta  mentions  that 
it  has  two  and  twenty  varieties.  Considering  the  frequent  mention  of  this  plant  in  Hindu 
sacred  literature,  the  names  of  those  varieties  deserve  to  be  recorded.  They  are 
I.  Angumat ;  2.  Manjavat ;  3.  Chandramas  ;  4.  Rajataprabha  ;  5.  Durvasoma  :  6.  Kaniyas  ; 
7.  Qwetaksha ;  8.  Kanakaprabha ;  9.  Pratanavat ;  10.  Talavrinta  ;  II.  Karavira  ;  12.  Sway- 
amprabha;l3.  Mahasoma ;  14. -Garudahuta  ;  15.  Gayatra  ;  16  Traishtupa  ;  17.  Pankta  ; 
18.  Jagatya  ;  19.  (Jankara  ;  20.  Agnishtoma^  21.  Raivata  ;  and  22.  Udupati. 

The  commentators  explain  that  the  leaves  grow  with  the  moon  and  fall  off  with  her. 
The  growth  begins  in  the  lighted  half  of  the  month.  On  the  first  lunar  day  of  the  lighted  half 
of  the  month,  only  one  leaf,  on  the  second,  two,  grow.  Thus  on  the  day  of  the  full  moon  the 
herb  is  adorned  with  fifteen  leaves.  This  is  the  maximum  number.  The  leaves  fall  off  one 
by  one  during  the  dark  half  of  the  month  till  on  the  day  of  the  new  moon  the  herb  is  shorn 
■of  all  its  leaves. — T. 

g.  ‘Padma’  has  not  been  identified.  It  stands  sometimes  for  ‘Lavanga’  ( Caryophyllus 
•aromaticus),  ‘Bhargi’  or  ‘Brahmana-yashtika’  (Siphonanthus  Indica ),  and  some  other  plants. 
INone  of  these, -however,  is  intended  here. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMH1 TA. 


1061 


shape.  Its  colour  is  as  red  as  that  of  a  lotus.  It  has  also  the  fragrance 
of  the  lotus. 

There  is  another  herb  named  ‘Aja’  {h)  which  is  better  known  as 
‘Ajagringi.’  22 

There  is  another  herb  named  ‘Nila.’(z)  Its  milk  is  blue  in  colour. 
It  has  blue  blossoms.  It  is  adorned  with  many  a  creeping  branch.  23 

Of  these  eight  herbs,  whichever  may  be  obtained,  the  expressed 
juice  should  be  drunk  by  one  to  the  measure  of  gratification.  24 

One  should  then  lie  naked  within  a  vessel  which  has  been  con¬ 
structed  with  the  raw  -wood  of  Butea  frondosa  and  which  has  been, 
allowed  to  suck  as  much  gkee  as  possible.  The  vessel  should  be 
covered  at  the  time.  25 

One,  subjecting  oneself  to  this  process,  becomes  attenuated  into 
nothingness.  One  grows,  again,  within  six  months.  Goat’s  milk 
should  be  one’s  sustenance.*  26 

When  this  process  is  continued  for  full  six  months,  one  becomes 
like  unto  a  celestial  in  age,  complexion,  voice,  shape,  strength  and 
lustre.  27 

One,  by  this  process,  gets  such  an  excellence  that  one’s  speech 
reveals  even  the  past. 

One’s  eyes  and  ears  become  like  those  of  the  immortals.  28 

One  can  traverse  a  thousand  ‘yoyanas’  at  a  stretch. 

One’s  period  of  life  is  extended  to  full  ten  thousand  years,  unin¬ 
terrupted  by  any  ailment..  29 


h.  ‘Aja’  has  not  been  identified.  SuQruta  describes  it  as  a  plant  whose  bulbous  root- 
stock  resembles  the  udders  of  a  goat.  It  is  as  white  as  the  ‘Kunda?  flower  (Jasminum 
pubescens) — T. 

i.  ‘Nila’  generally  means  the  indigo  plant.  It  stands  also  for  ‘Laksha’  or  shell-lac. 
None  of  these  is  evidently  meant  here.  The  fact  is,  many  of  the  herbs  mentioned  here  are 
not  to  be  found.  It  should  be  noted  that  they  are  named  by  Indra,  the  chief  of  the  celes¬ 
tials,  to  Rishis  of  great  puissance  who  resided  on  the  breast  of  the  Himavat  mountains.  The 
way  in  which  Agnivega  speaks  of  them  shows  that  they  were  obsolete  and  unidentifiable 
even'in  his  days.— T. 

*  As  to  how  goat’s  milk  should  be  given  to  one  who  is  desirous  of  taking  this  ‘Rasayana’, 
Gangadhara  explains  that  a  hole  should  be  made  in  the  lid  of  the  ‘droni’  It  is  through  that 
hole  that  the  milk  is  to  be  poured,  drop  by  drop,  into  the  mouth  of  the  person. — T. 


1062 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Here  occur  some  verses. 

The  effects  of  these  celestial  herbs  can  be  borne  by  persons  like 
yourselves.  It  cannot  be  borne  by  sinful  souls.  3° 

Through  the  potency  of  these  (medicinal)  herbs,  -you  shall  achieve 
all  sorts  of  blessings,  and  be  able  to  perform  all  your  duties  (as  laid 
■down  in  the  scriptures).  31 

Those  also  of  the  regenerate  order  that  are  in  the  ‘Vanaprastha’ 
(or  third  period)  of  life,  and  those  householders  who  are  pure  (in  body 
and  mind)  and  who  have  their  passions  under  control,  are  able  to 
undergo  the  processes  required  for  the  administration  of  these  drugs 
‘  if  they  are  obtainable  in  localities  inhabited  by  human  beings.*  32 

Since  these  {viz.,  those  specimens  of  the  drugs  mentioned  that  are 
obtainable  in  inhabited  localities)  are  endued  with  mild  potency,  in 
consequence  of  the  virtues  of  the  soil  on  which  they  grow,  “they  can 
be  used  by  one  possessed  of  middling  merits  (of  action).  The  ordi¬ 
nances  about  the  use  of  these  herbs  are  the  same  in  their  case  as  in 
that  of  the  Rishis  (who  are  possessed  of  superior  merits).-]-  33 
ANOTHER  RASAYANA  DECLARED  BY  INDRA. 

Those  who  seek  ease  and  are  unable  to  seek  out  herbs  and  under¬ 
go  the  discomforts  <®.f  administration,  for  them  the  following  other 
preparation  of  ‘Rasayana’  is  suitable  : 

Take  the  juice  of  each  of  the  following,  separately  : 

The  group  of  ten  drugs,  called  ‘Valya’  (or  tonics,  viz.,  those  which 
increase  strength)  ; 

Also  the  group  of  ten  called  ‘Jivaniy.a'*  (or  those  which  prolong 
life)  ;■ 


*  There  are  four  orders  of  men,  ndz.^  Brahmans,  Kshatriyas,  Vai$yas,  and  '(^udras. 
The  three  first  are  .called  twice-born  or  regenerate  ones,  in  consequence  of  their  being  invest¬ 
ed  with  the  sacred  thread  which  ceremony  is  regarded  as  a  new  birth.  Generally,  by  the 
‘twice-born’-  or  ‘regenerate’  order  is  meant  only  Brahmans. 

As  regards,  again,  persons  of  the  regenerate  order,  they  have  four  periods  or  stages  of  life  J 
U.  Pupilag4  when  they  have  to  live  in  the  houses  of  their  preceptors,  engaged  in  the  acqui¬ 
sition  of  learning 2.  domesticity  or  the  status  of  householders,  when  after  return  from  the 
houses  of  their  preceptors,  they  marry  and  begat  children,  and  discharge  the  duties  of  hospi¬ 
tality  ;  3.  ‘Vanaprasthya’  or  retirement  into  the  woods,  renouncing  domesticity,  of 
religious  meditation  ;  and  4.  ‘Sannyasa’ or  complete  renunciation. — T. 

f  The  correct  reading  seems  to  be  ‘madhyamena  cha  karmina’,  implying  a  person  of 
middling  m  erits  of  action. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHJTA. 


£<063 ' 

Also  the  group  of  teri  called  ‘Vringhaniya’  (or  those  which 
promote  nutrition  and  increase  corpulency) ; 

Also  the  group  of  ten  called  ‘Vayasthapana’  {or  those  which 
prevent  the  effects  of  age)  ; 

Also  Khadira  ( Acacia  catechu),  Asana  (' Terminalia  tomentosa ), 
Kharjjura  (fruits  of  Phcenix  sylvestris),  Madhuka  (flowers  of 
Bassia  latifolia ),  Musta  (the  bulbous  roots  of  Cyperus  rotundas ), 
Utpala  ( Nymphcea  stellata ),  Midvika  (Uvce  passes),  Vidanga 
(seeds  of  Embelia  Ribes),  Vaeha  (Acorus  calamus),  Chitraka 
( Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  £atavari  ( Asparagus  racemosus),  Payasya 
(a  bulb  of  the  onion  tribe  brought  from  the  Himalayas),  Pippali 
( Piper  longum),  Jongaka  (otherwise  called  Kakanasa  or  Leea 
hirta),  Riddhi,*  Nagabala  (Sida  spinosa),  Haridra  (Curcuma 
longa),  Dhava  {Anogtsusus  latifolia,  syn.,  Conocarpus  latifolia), 
the  three  myrobalans,  Kantakari  ( Solanum  Xanthocarpum\ 
Vidari  ( Batatus  paniculata),  Chandana  ( Pteracarpus  santalinus), 
I  kshu  ( Saccharum  offioinarum),  the  -  roots  of  Sara  (, Sacckarum 
Sara),  £riparni  (otherwise  called  Gambhari,  GmeUna  .arborea\ 
and  Tinisa  ( Ougenia  Dalbergioides)  ; 

Take  also  the  ashes  of  the  wood  of  Palaga  ( Butea  frondosa).  , 

The  measure  of  each  of  these  drugs  should  be  1  pala  (8  tolas). 

Mix  these  with  cow’s  milk  whose  measure  should  be  four  times 
that  of  the  several  drugs  taken  together. 

Take  sesame  oil  of  the  measure  of  32  seers. 

Take  also  ghee  obtained  from  cow’s  milk,  of  the  same  measure 
ip.  e.,  32  seers): 

Cook  (or  boil)  all  these  together. 

When  well-boiled,  (that  is,  when  the  watery  portion  has  evapo¬ 
rated),  the  oily  remnant  should  be  taken  down  from  the  fire.f  35-4° 


*  ‘Riddhi’  farms  one  of  the  drugs  which  constitute  the  group  called  ‘Ashtavarga."’  It  is 
unidentifiable.  The  plant  that  is  used  as  a  substitute  for  it  is  Bala  or  Sida  cordifolia. — T. 

t  By  ‘rasa’,  rendered  juice,  Gangadhara  explains,  is  meant  decoction.  Hence,  accord¬ 
ing  to  him,  the  deCOction  of  each  of  the  drugs  mentioned  should  he  taken. 

The  decoction  should  be  prepared  in  the  following  way  :  take .32  seers  of  each  ingredient.; 
add  water  4  times  their  measure  ;  boil  till  a  fourth  part  ©f  the  liquid  remains. 

As  ^regards  the  ashes  of  Palaga,  the  quantity,  as  explained  by  Gangadhara,  should  toe 
boiled  with  water  measuring  6  times  and  strained  21  times. 

By ‘pafonmitan  bhagSti’ is  implied,  as  Gabgadhara  says,  the  paste  of  each  of  the  drugs, 
measuring  1  pala. — T. 


CH A  R  A  K AS  A  M  HI  7  A . 


J064 

With  the  product  thus  obtained  should  be  mixed  an  ‘adhaka’  (or 
8  seers)  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica  reduced  to  powder. 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica,  before 
being  powdered,  should  be  soaked  a  hundred  times  in  the  expressed 
juice  of  fruits  of  their  own  species. 

Add  new  honey  of  the  measure  of  16  seers. 

Throw  into  the  product  thus  obtained  sugar  of  the  measure  of 
I  patra  (8  seers)  ; 

also  ‘Tugakhiri’  (bamboo  manna)  of  the  measure  of  two  seers  ; 

also  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum ,  reduced  to  powder,  of  the  measure 
of  2  seers. 

Then  stir  these  with  a  ladle,  and  throw  the  contents  into  a  clean 
and  well-washed  earthen  jar  which  has  been  allowed  to  suck  as  much 
ghee  as  possible. 

Keep  them  in  that  vessel  for  five  and  ten  days.  (The  product  then 
becomes  fit  for  administration). 

The  dose  to  be  administered  should  be  according  to  the  strength 
of  one’s  digestive  fire.  41-43 

Take  the  pulv  of  gold,  copper,  coral,  ivory,  crystal,  pearls,  stones 
of  lapis  lazuli,  conchs,  and  silver,  each  weighing  one-sixteenth  of  the 
measure  of  the  dose  that  may  be  determined. 

Add  the  several  varieties  of  pulv  to  the  dose  of  the  medicine  and 
then  take  it. 

While  continuing  to  use  the  medicine,  one  should  refrain  from  toil 
and  sexual  congress. 

When  the  medicine  is  digested,  one  should  take  boiled  rice  of  the 
‘shastika’  variety,  with  a  copious  measure  of  milk  and  ghee.  44-45 

This  ‘Rasayana  is  an  alleviative  of  all  sorts  of.  diseases.  It  gene¬ 
rates  semen.  It  promotes  longevity.  It  strengthens  the  mind,  the 
memory,  the  body,  the  digestive  fire,  the  intellect,  and  the  senses.  It 
is  the  foremost  of  all  medicines  that  impart  vigour  to  the  constitution. 
It  improves  the  complexion  as  well.  It  counteracts  the  action  of 
poisons  and  the  Genius  of  Adversity.*  It  imparts  to  one  the  power 
of  knowing  the  past. 

They  who  desire  to  have  their  objects  fulfilled  at  will,  to  retain 


*  ‘Alakshmi’,  the  reverse  of  ‘Lakshmi.’  The  latter  is  the  goddess  of  Prosperity.  Hence, 
the  former  is  the  genius  of  Adversity.  Vide  note  in  page  1048,  ante. — T. 


CH4RAKA-SAMHITA. 


io6s 

their  youth,  to  preserve  the  capacity  of  being  liked  or  loved  by  all,* 
and  to  acquire  fame  in  this  world,  should  use  this  Vedic  ‘Rasayana’ 
of  unlimited  puissance,  agreeably  to  the  ordinances  laid  down.  46-48 
For  those  that  are  endued  with  strength,  those  that  are  free  from 
diseases,  those  that  are  intellectual,  those  that  have  their  minds  under 
control,  those  that  are  of  a  forgiving  disposition,  and  those  that  have 
men  and  riches  at  their  command,  for  them  only  is  the  ordinance 
about  entering  a  hut  (for  taking  this  Rasayana)  beneficial.  49 

Unto  those  that  are  of  a  different  disposition  the  ordinace  about 
entering  a  hut  does  not  apply.  On  the  other  hand,  they,  while  taking 
this  ‘Rasayana’,  should  expose  themselves  to  both  sun  and  wind.  Of 
the  two  methods  (viz ,  entering  a  hut  and  exposure  to  sun  and  wind) 
the  former  is  certainly  superior.  It  should,  however,  be  stated  that 
the  superior  method  is  exceedingly  difficult  of  observance.!  5° 

If  in  consequence  of  any  deviation  from  the  rules  regarding  the 
use  of  ‘Rasayana’  diseases  set  in,  the  taking  of  the  (Rasayana) 
should  be  suspended,  and  the  treatment  should  be  taken  up  of  those 
diseases.  Si 

RASAYANA  OF  CONDUCT. 

One  that  is  truthful,  and  free  from  wrath,  that  abstains  from  wine 
and  sexual  indulgence,  that  has  no  animosity,  that  undergoes  only 
such  labour  as  involves  no  fatigue, j  that  is  tranquil  and  of  amiable 
speech,  that  is  accustomed  to  the  silent  recitation  of  sacred  texts,  and 
is  pure  (in  body  and  mind),  that  is  endued  with  gravity  and  firmness, 
that  is  always  charitable  and  engaged  in  penances,  that  honours  the 
deities  and  kine  and  Brahmanas  and  preceptors  and  spiritual  guides 
and  men  of  advanced  years,  that  is  always  averse  to  cruelty,  that  is 
always  compassionate,  that  is  regular  in  respect  of  sleep  and  wake¬ 
fulness,  that  takes  milk  and  ghee,  that  has  knowledge  of  time  and 


*  ‘Prajapriyatwam’  implies  the  capacity  of  being  liked  by  all  ;  hence,  amiability  and 
agreeableness  of  features  — T. 

+  The  two  methods  are  I.  ‘Kutipravecjika’,  and  2.  ‘Sauryam5rutika.’  The  former,  as  has 
been  explained,  means  entrance  into  a  closed  hut  while  taking  the  ‘Rasayana.’  The  latter 
implies  exposure  to  sun  and  wind.  Not  that  the  person  who  takes  this  ‘Rasayana’  is  actu¬ 
ally  to  sit  in  the  sun  and  expose  himself  to  the  wind.  All  that  it  means  is  that  while  taking 
the  medicine,  one  is  not  commanded  to  shut  oneself  up  within  any  closed  chamber. — T. 

t  ‘An&yasam’,  literally,  means  one  who  does  not  toil ;  that  is,  a  person  who  has  not  to 
■toil  for  acquiring  the  means  of  subsistence,  or  one  who  has  not  to  toil  hard.— T. 


eo66- 


CHAR  AKA -SAM HI  TA. 


place  as  also  authority,  that  is  conversant  with  reasons,* * * §  that  is  reft 
of  pride,  that  is  of  practices  which  are  praiseworthy,  that  is  possessed 
of  a  liberal  min^f  that  has  senses  directed  towards  the  soul,}:  that 
honours  men  of  advanced  years  as  also  those  who  are  endued  with 
faith  and  who  have  their  souls  under  control,  that  is  devoted  to  the 
scriptures,  should  be  known  as  a  user  of  ‘Ras3yana.’§  52-& 

(Further)  he  who,  endued  with  these  high  attributes,  uses 
Rasayana’,  enjoys  all  the  effects  enumerated  of  ‘Rasayaria.’  57 

That  person  who,  without  casting  off  (at  least)  the  graver  faults 
of  both  body  and  mind,  (uses  ‘Rasayana’),  never  reaps  the  effects  of 
Rasayana.)!  5s 

(Rasayanic)  combinations,  which  have  for  their  objects  the  length¬ 
ening  of  (the  period  of)  life  and  the  prevention  of  decrepitude  and 
disease,  succeed  with  those  who  are  cleansed  in  respect  of  mind  and 
body  and  who  have  their  souls  under  control.  59 

All  this  (that  has  been  said  of  ‘Rasayana’)  should  not  be  imparted 
to  those  persons  who  have  slain  their  seifs,  or  to-  those  who  are  free 
from  ailments,  or  who  do  not  belong  to  the  twice-born  classes,  or 
who  have  no  desire  to  hear  it.f  60 


*  ‘Yuktijha’,  i.  e.,  one  that  is  conversant  with  reasons,  meaning  the  reasons  of  things. 
Hence,  one  that  is  conversant  with  both  authority  and  the  reasons  upon  which  authority  is 
Based  :  that  is,  scriptural  injunctions  and  their  reasons. — T. 

t  ‘Asankirna’,  f.  e.,  freed  from  narrowness  ;  hence,  possessed  of  a  liberal  mind,  or  having 
Eberal  views. --T. 

$  The  correct  reading  seems  to  Be  ‘Adhyatmapravanendriyam’  and  not  ‘Adhyatmaprava- 
Fendriyam.’  Hence,  the  meaning  is,  one  whose  senses,  instead  of  being  turned  towards 
external  objects,  are  turned  towards  the  inner  serf. — T. 

§  This  section  is  headed  ‘Achara-Rasayanam’,  that  is,  the  ‘Rasayana  of  conduct’.  The- 
Eind  of  person*  here  described  should  be  known  as- one  whose  very  conduct  operates  as  a 
•Rasayana.’  Such  a  person  does  not  require  the  aid  of  any  ‘Rasayana’  of  drugs.  He  attains, 
through  his  conduct,  to  all  the  effects  of  ‘Rasayana.’ — T. 

||  Gangadhara,  it  seems,  has  misunderstood  the  sense  of  this  couplet.  According  to 
him,  the  meaning  is- this  :  ‘one  who  uses  Kasayana  without  casting  off  the  faults  of  body  and 
and  mind,  does  not  obtain  the  superior  or  subtler  virtues  of  ‘Rasayana^  although  he  may  reap 
its  grosser  virtues.’  This  can*  scarcely  be  the  meaning.  What  the  Rishi  says  here  is  that  if 
one  takes  ‘Ras5yana’,  indulging  all  the  white  in  ail  sorts  of  evil  practices,  one  can  never  be 
benefited  by  ‘Rasayana.’  This  agrees  with  common  sense. — T. 

Besides^  this  interpretation  derives  support  from  what  follows. — T. 

IT  ‘HatsUroan’  is  one  who  has  slain  his  self  ;  that  is,  one  who  is  addicted  to1  evil  practices 
of  every  kind,  or-  one  who  disregards  all  duties, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1067 


All  combinations  appertaining  to  ‘Rasayana’,  as  also  all  combi¬ 
nations  appertaining  to  ‘Vrishya’  (aphrodisiacs),  and  all  those  which 
are  remedies  of  ailments,  depend  upon  the  physician.  61 

Hence,  he  that  is  endued  with  knowledge,  should,  to  the  best  of 
his  power,  worship  him  who  is  a  preceptor  of  the  Science  of  Life,  who 
is  possessed  of  intelligence,  and  who  has  reached  the  other  end  of 
the  Veda  (of  life),  even  as  thephief  himself  of  the  deities  worshipped 
the  twin  Agwins.  62 

The  twin  Acwins  are  celestial  physicians.  It  has  been  said  that 
they  are  partakers  of  a  share  of  the  offerings  made  in  sacrifices.  (In 
days  of  yore)  when  the  head  of  Sacrifice  had  been  severed  from  his 
body,  it  was  the  Acwins  who  fixed  it  again  on  the  trunk.  63 

The  broken  teeth  of  Pushan,  the  torn-out  eyes  of  Bhaga,  and  the 
^stupefaction  of  the  arms  of  the  wielder  of  the  thunder-bolt,  were 
treated  by  them.*  64 

The  deity  also  of  cool  rays  (viz.,  Soma)  was  treated  by  them  when 
he  was  seized  by  phthisis.  Verily,  when  Chandra  was  (in  consequence 
of  phthisis)  divested  of  his  handsome  features,  it  was  the  Agwins  who 
restored  him  to  happiness  (by  curing  him  of  his  malady).  65 

Chyavana,  the  son  of  Bhrigu,  had  not  given  up  desire  when  he 
had  become  old  and  been  overtaken  by  ugliness,  and  when  he  had 
been  afflicted  by  loss  of  complexion  and  voice.  It  was  the  Agwins. 
who  restored  him  to  youth  once  more.f  66 

Those  foremost  of  physicians,  by  these  and  diverse  other  acts  (of 
success  in  treatment)  became  objects  of  worship  with  many  high- 
souled  deities  and  others  having  Indra  for  their  first.  67 

‘Adwijatibhyah’  implies  ‘to  those  who  are  not  twice-born  ones’,  i.  e.,  Qudras. 

It  is  not  clear  whether  ‘arujebhyah’  qualifies  ‘adwijatibhyah.’  If  it  does,  the  meaning  is 
‘healthy  (Judras.’— T. 

*  The  allusion  is  to  the  destruction  of  the  sacrifice  performed  by  Daksha.  Mahadeva, 
having  been  excluded  from  that  sacrifice,  destroyed  it  in  wrath. 

Sacrifice,  in  his  embodied  form,  sought  to  fly  away,  but  Mahadeva  pursued  him  and 
severed  his  head  from  the  trunk.  The  teeth  of  Pushan  were  dragged  out ;  the  eyes  of  Bhaga 
were  torn  out the  arms  of  Indra  were  stupefied.  The  celestial  physicians  restored  to 
Sacrifice  his  head,  to  Pushan  his  teeth,  and  to  Bhaga  his  eyes.  They  also  cured  the  para¬ 
lysed  arms  of  Indra. — T. 

t  Chyavana  had  married  a  beautiful  princess,  Sukanya,  in  the  full  bloom  of  youth. 
The  Agwins,  who  had  been  excluded  by  Indra  from  participating  in  sacrificial  offerings, 
sought  the  aid  of  Chyavana  and  made  him  a  young  man  by  their  medicaments.  The  Rishi, 
in  return,  forced  Indra  to  restore  their  rights.— T, 


ro68 


CHAR  AKA -SAM HIT  A 


Rites  relating  to  the  acceptance  of  offerings,  hymns,  various  Man¬ 
tras  (sacred  texts),  libations  of  clarified  butter,  the  fragrant  smoke  of 
incense,  and  animals  are  devised  for  them  by  Brahmans.* * * §  68 

Every  morning,  at  ‘Savana’,  Indra  drinks  ‘soma’  with  the  Agwins. 
In  sacrifices,  again,  the  illustrious  chief  of  the  deities  makes  himself 
merry  with  the  Agwins  in  his  company .f  6g 

Like  Indra  and  Agni,  the  Agwins  also  are  praised  by  the  Brah¬ 
mans.  They  are  praised  in  Vedic  words.  Verily,  other  deities  are 
not  praised  in  similar  language.*  7° 

Verily,  the  Agwins,  those  celestial  physicians,  are  worshipped  with 
devotion  by  the  deities  with  their  chief  (Indra)  at  their  head,  they 
who  are  immortal,  who  transcend  decrepitude,  and  who  are  above 
change.  7i 

Why  then  should  not  physicians  be  worshipped  by  men,  to  the 
best  of  their  power,  who  are  liable  to  death  and  disease  and  decrepit 
tude,  who  are  exposed  to  every  misery,  and  who  are  desirous  of 
obtaining  happiness  ?  72 

It  has  been  declared  that  one  who  is  a  preceptor  of  the  Science 
of  Life,  who  is  possessed  of  pure  conduct,  who  is  endued  with  intelli¬ 
gence,  who  is  devoted  (to  the  science  he  professes),  who  belongs  to 
the  regenerate  orders,  and  who  has  thoroughly  mastered  the  scrip¬ 
tures  (bearing  upon  his  science),  should  be  worshipped  by  all  persons 
even  as  a  Guru  is  worshipped.  §  73 

Upon  the  completion  (of  the  acquisition  by  him)  of  Vedic  lore, 
the  physician’s  third  birth,  it  is  said,  takes  place. 


*  ‘Grahah’  is  explained  as  implying  ‘Grahanavidhayah’,  that  is,  rites  relating  to  the 
acceptance  of  offerings.  The  fact  is,  when  offerings  are  made  to  the  deities,  these  are  never 
accepted  unless  proper  rites  be  devised  and  proper  mantras  be  uttered.  What  is  said  in  this 
verse  is  that  the  Brahmans  have  devised  proper  ceremonials  for  the  worship  of  the 
Agwins. — T, 

t  The  object  of  this  verse  is  to  show  the  respect  in  which  the  Agwins  are  held.  They  are 
praised,  like  Indra  and  Agni,  in  Vedic  language.  Other  deities  are  praised  in  ‘Laukika’  or 
common  speech.  The  commentatos  do  not  point  out  this  implied  difference.— T. 

t  The  word  ‘savana’  generally  implies  a  bath.  It  is  doubtful  in  what  sense  it  is  used 
here.  The  commentators  do  not  clear  the  difficulty.  It  stands  here,  probably,  for  a  puri¬ 
ficatory  bath,  or  a  Vedic  rite. 

•Sautramani’  was.  a  kind  of  sacrifice.  It  is  used  here  for  all  sacrifices  in  general. — T. 

§  This  verse  is  important  for  more  than  one  reason,  for  the  question — who  can  be  a  physi¬ 
cian — is  answered  here.  Some  texts  read  ‘dwijati’  ;  Gangadhara  reads  ‘trijati.’  If  the 
iormer  reading  be  adopted,  the  meaning  would  be  ‘one  belonging  to  the  twice-born  o* 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA, 


1069 


In  the  absence  of  Vedic  lore  the  word  ‘Vaidya’  can  never  be 
applied  to  one. 

One  does  not  become  a  Vaidya  by  only  one’s  previous  (or  actual) 
birth.*  74 

Upon  the  completion  (of  the  acquisition  by  him)  of  Vedic  lore, 
the  mind  described  as  Brahmya,  or  as  appertaining  to  that  of  a  RishT, 
verily  enters  the  person  in  consequence  of  such  lore.  Hence,  one 
who  is  a  Vaidya  is  said  to  have  three  births.f  75 

(Hence)  one  that  is  endued  with  intelligence  and  desirous  of 
longevity  should  never  cherish  evil  intentions  towards  a  preceptor  of 
the  Science  of  Life,  or  speak  ill  of  him,  or  do  any  injury.^  76 

That  person  cannot  free  himself  (from  sin)  who,  being  treated  by 
a  physician,  does  not  come  to  his  service  (at  the  time  of  need) 
whether  he  hears  of  it  or  not.  77 

The  physician  also,  who  desires  to  win  merit  of  the  highest  order, 
should,  with  tender  care,  protect  all  his  patients,  like  his  own  children, 
from  diseases.§  78 

The  great  sages,  who  were  desirous  of  attaining  to  that  goal  (or 
status)  which  knows  no  change,  and  who  had  piety  for  their  sole  aim, 


regenerate  order  ;’  hence  a  BrShmana,  or  a  Kshatriya,  or  a  Vaidya.  The  reading  ‘trijatih’ 
seems  to  be  ungrammatical.  ‘Jatih’  always  means  birth  ;  it  was  never,  in  ancient  literature, 
used  to  imply  caste,  for  which  the  word  was  ‘Varna.’  By  adopting  the  reading  ‘trijati’ 
Gangadhara  wishes  to  bring  in  the  modern  Vaidyas  who  are  a  mixed  class. 

In  Pauranic  literature,  many  passages  occur  which  forbid  Brahmanas  from  becoming 
physicians.  In  fact,  a  Brahmana,  according  to  these  authorities,  falls  away  from  his  high 
status  by  becoming  a  physician. — T. 

*  The  second  line  is  differently  read  in  some  editions.  If  that  reading  be  adopted,  the 
meaning  will  be, — ‘only  such  a  man  deserves  the  appellation  of  Vaidya ;  one  cannot 
become  a  Vaidya  by  heredity.’  This,  perhaps,  does  not  differ  materially  from  the  sense  of 
the  reading  adopted  by  us. 

The  fact  is,  Brahmanas,  Kshatriyas,  and  Vaigyas  are  said  to  have  two  births  :  I.  actual 
birth  upon  delivery  by  the  mother,  and  2,  investiture  with  the  sacred  thread,  on  which 
occasion  the  Gayatri  is  communicated.  Besides  these  two,  the  physician  is  said  to  have 
an  additional  birth,  viz,  upon  the  completion  of  his  studies,  or  the  attainment  of  his  lore. — T 

t  As  to  various  kinds  of  mind,  viz.,  Brahmya,  &c..  Vide  Lesson  IV,(jiarirasthana,<r«fe. — T. 

t  ‘Anitwaram’  implies  ‘agatwaram’,  i.  e.  the  reverse  of  transitory.  It  qualifies  ‘5yus.’ 

‘Abhidhy5et’  does  not  mean  here  coveting  the  wealth  of  the  physician,  but  cherishing 
evil  intentions  towards  him. — T. 

§  Gangadhara  reads, — ‘Ichcchannayuranuttamam.’  It  means  ‘desirous  of  longevity.’ 
This  can  hardly  be  correct.  The  other  reading,  which  we  adopt,  is  -Ichcchandharmamanu- 
tamam’,  i.  e.,  ‘desirous  of  merit  of  the  highest  order.’ — T. 


1070 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.. 


promulgated  the  Science  of  Life  for  the  sake  of  piety,  wealth,  and 
enjoyment.  79 

That  physician  who,  not  for  self-interest,  neither  for  his  own 
enjoyments,  but  out  of  compassion  for  creatures,  devotes  himself 
to  treatment,  excels  all  (people).*  80 

Those  physicians  who,  for  the  sake  of  their  living,  sell  treatment 
as  an  article  of  trade,  (may  be  said  to)  throw  off  heaps  of  gold  and 
accept  heaps  of  ashes  in  return.  8i 

The  physician  cutting  the  very  chains  of  Yama  (the  destroyer  of 
creatures)  gives  life  to  one  that  is  being  hauled  towards  the  abode  of 
the  son  of  Vivaswat  by  means  of  terrible  diseases.  82 

Another  giver  of  piety  and  wealth  like  a  physician  cannot  be 
conceived  of  in  this  world,  since  there  is  no  gift  which  excels  the  gift 
of  life — (for  the  gift  of  life  involves  the  gift  of  piety  and  wealth,  since 
it  is  the  living  alone  that  can  acquire  these).  s3 

He  who,  thinking  that  compassion  for  creatures  is  the  supreme 
virtue,  devotes  .himself  to  treatment,  has  his  ends  (of  life)  accom¬ 
plished  and  enjoys  eternal  felicity.  84 

{Here  are  two  verses  containing  a  summary.) 

The  source  of  the  Science  of  Life,  the  auspicious  ordinances  about 
the  celestial  herbs,  and  the  jewel  of  all  the  Rasayanas  which  is  wed¬ 
ded  to  success,  and  which,  indeed,  differs  very  little  from  Nectar  itself 
in  its  virtues,  and  which  is  inculcated  by  the  chief  himself  of  the 
immortals  unto  Brahmacharins  endued  with  success  of  penances, — all 
these  have  been  declared  in  this  Section  called  ‘Ayurveda-samutthana’ 
(by  Punarvasu).  1-2 

Thus  ends  the  fourth  section  of  Rasayana,  called  ‘ Ayurveda- 
samutthana. ’f 

Thus  ends  Lesson  I,  called  ‘Rasayana’,  in  the  Division '  called 
‘Chikitsa’,  of  Agnivega’s  treatise  as  revised  by  Charaka. 

*  Verses  79  and  80  at  first  sight  appear  to  be  contradictory  ;  for’if  the  Kishis  promulgated 
ithe  Science  of  Life  for  the  sake  of  piety,  of  wealth,  and  of  enjoyments,  how  can  it  be  improper 
for  a  physician  to  take  wealth  and  secure  his  own  enjoyments  ?  The  truth  is,  the  physician 
is  not  commanded  to  disregard  wealth  and  enjoyments,  but  to  secure  these  without  losing 
sight  of  piety.  Only  that  physician  is  censurable  who  seeks  wealth  and  enjoyments  Without 
regard  for  piety  He,  on  the  other  hand,  who  disregarding  wealth  and  enjoyments,  acts  from 
compassion  alone,  transcends  all  people  in  merit. — T. 

t  This  Division  of  the  treatise  is  calledJChikitsa’  or  Treatment.  The  first  Lesson,  i'n  this 
Division  is  called  ‘Rasayana.’  This  Lesson  is  distributed  into  four  sections.  The  fourth 
section,  called  ‘Ayurveda-samutthana’,  ends  here,  and  with  it,  the  Lesson  atsoends. — T- 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1071 

LESSON  II. 

VAJIKARANA. 

S'  1.  SAMYOGA-^ARAMULIYA. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Section,  called  ‘Samyoga-^aramuliya’ 
of  (the  Lesson  on)  ‘Vajikarana.’ 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.*  1 

A  person  who  has  his  self  under  control,  should  seek  for  ‘Vaji¬ 
karana’  (use  of  aphrodisiacs),  since  piety  and  wealth,  and  enjoyment 
and  fame,  depend  upon  it.  2 

The  use  of  aphrodisiacs  is  the  source  of  progeny.  The  aforesaid 
acquisitions  all  depend  upon  progeny.  The  best  field  for  (the  action 
of)  aphrodisiacs  is  that  woman  who  fills  with  joy,  at  her  very  sight, 
the  person  who  intends  to  use  them  :  3 

Since  each  of  the  desirable  objects  (of  the  senses)  is  said  to  be 
exceedingly  pleasing,  what  need  then  be  said  of  (the  pleasure-giving 
power  of)  all  the  objects  (of  the  senses)  which  exist  in  a  state  of 
combination  in  the  body  of  woman  ?f  4 

A  combination  of  all  the  objects  of  the  senses  exists  in  women 
only.  Such  a  combination  does  not  occur  anywhere  else. 

Then,  again,  that  combination,  which  exists  in  woman,  of  the 
objects  of  the  senses,  is  conducive  of  the  greatest  pleasure.^  S 

In  women  is  pleasure  in  especial. 

Upon  women  rests  offspring. 

Piety  and  wealth  depend  on  women. 

Lakshmi  (goddess  of  Prosperity)  depends  on  women. 


*  ‘Vajikarana’  Implies  the  administration  of  aphrodisiacs  or  medicines  which  increase 
semen  and  enhance  sexual  power. 

Like  Lesson  I,  this  Lesson  also  is  divided  into  four  Sections.  The  first  of  these  Sections 
is  called  ‘Samyoga-CJaramuliya’,  because  it  treats  first  of  sexual  union  and  then  of  ‘Qaramula’ 
or  the  roots  of  Saccharum  Sara  which  occur  first  in  the  first  combination  of  drugs  (pos¬ 
sessed  of  aphrodisiac  virtues)  mentioned  below.— T. 

f  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  the  objects  of  each  of  the  senses  are  highly  delightful. 
They  exist  separately  in  separate  things.  In  the  body  of  woman,  however,  the  objects  of  ali 
the  senses  exist  together.  Hence,  the.  power  of  woman  to  contribute  to  our  pleasure  is 
superior  to  that  of  all  other  things  in  the  world. — T. 

+  Things  may  exist  in  which  a  combination  occurs  of  the  different  objects  of  senses. 
Take,  for  example,  a  harmonium.  It  may  have  a  delightful  appearance.  It  has  a  delightful 
sound.  If  laved  with  otto-de-rose,  it  may  have  a  delightful  scent.  If  covered  with  velvet,  its 
touch  also  may  be  delightful.  Yet  it  cannot  be  compared  with  a  beautiful  woman.— T. 

136 


1072- 


CH ARAKA-SAM H IT  A 


All  the  worlds  depend  on  women*.  6 

That  woman  who  is  exceedingly  beautiful,  who  is  in  the  full 
vigour  of  youth,  who  is  adorned  with  auspicious  marks,  who  is  pliant 
(to  the  will  of  her  husband),  and  who  is  educated,  is  herself  the  best 
of  aphrodisiacs.  7 

The  accomplishments  of  women,  viz.,  beauty  and  the  rest,  (which 
arise)  from  the  influence  of  destiny  and  also  from  diverse  kinds 
of  food  and  enjoyments  occurring  in  this  world,  increase  (in  degree) 
when  they  get  congenial  male  companions  (for  pairing  with  them).f  s 
She  who,  in  consequence  of  her  age,  beauty,  speech,  and  gestures, 
is  regarded  by  one  as  the  best  of  her  species,  she  who,  through 
destiny  or  her  own  acts,  enters  into  one’s  heart,  9 
she  who  is  the  feast  of  one’s  heart,  she  who  has  a  heart  that  beats 
in  unison  with  one’s  heart,  she  who  is  of  the  same  temperament 
with  one,  she  who  is  pliant  to  one’s  will,  she  who  gratifies  one 
with  all  the  means  of  gratification,  10 
she  who,  in  consequence  of  her  superior  accomplishments, 
enchains  all  the  senses  of  one,  she  from  whom  when  one  is 
separated  one  becomes  unable  to  derive  pleasure  from  anything 
and  looks  upon  the  whole  world  as  destitute  of  woman,  11 
she  without  whom  one  bears  one’s  body  as  if  it  were  reft  of  all 
senses,  she  whose  very  sight  dispels  one’s  grief  and  anxieties 
and  cheerlessness  and  fears,  12 


*  ‘All  the  worlds  depend  upon  women’,  that  is,  women  continue  the  creation  ;  besides, 
as  piety  and  wealth  depend  upon  women,  the  future  worlds  may  be  said  to  depend  upon 
women,  for  it  is  by  piety  and  wealth  that  man  wins  the  future  worlds.  Women  give  birth 
to  sons,  by  whomHhe  father  pays  off  his  debts  to  his  ancestors,  and  gains  religious  merits. 
Man  may  earn,  but  unless  assisted  by  a  good  wife,  he  cannot  save.  By  the  wealth  saved 
he  performs  sacrifices  and  religious  rites  which  enable  him  to  acquire  merits  that  improve 
his  position  hereafter. — T. 

+  This  verse  is  difficult  to  be  understood.  The  above  rendering  is  offered  tentatively. 
Gangadhara  reads  ‘nivartante.’  In  other  editions  occurs  ‘vivarddhante.’  Beauty  and  other 
accomplishments  of  women  certainly  arise  from  the  influence  of  destiny  which  has  been 
explained  to  be  the  acts  of  previous  lives.  They  are  due  also  to  food  and  enjoyments.  A 
starving  and  miserable  woman,  even  if  born  beautiful,  loses  her  beauty.  So  one  gains  in 
beauty  by  good  living. 

What  is  meant,  however,  by  beauty,  &c. ,  being  enhanced  by  the  companionship  of  con¬ 
genial  males,  is  not  very  clear,  unless  it  be  that  beauty  is  improved  by  the  cheerfulness 
caused  by  agreeable  companionship. — T, 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHI T A. 


1073 


she  in  whose  company  one  passes  one’s  hours  in  complete  trust¬ 
fulness,  she  whose  sight  fills  one  with  raptures,  she  unto  whom 
one  goes  with  ever-recurring  pleasure  and  downright  speed  as  if 
unto  a  charmer  unseen  before,  13 
she  unto  whom  one  goes  repeatedly  without  a  feeling  of  satiety, 
she  is  regarded  as  the  foremost  of  aphrodisiacs  which  one  can  have. 
This  variety  is  due  to  the  variety  of  temperament  which 
distinguishes  human  beings.*  H 

One  who  is  desirous  of  offspring  should,  when  he  is  free  from 
disease,  go  to  a  woman  that  belongs  to  a  different  ‘Gotra’,  that  is 
herself  an  aphrodisiac,  that  is  cheerful,  that  is  free  from  disease,  and 
that  has  purified  herself  by  the  prescribed  bath  after  her  functional 
flow.f  15 

As  a  branchless  tree  that  is  without  shadow  and  without  fruit, 
and  that  emits  a  disagreeable  scent,  even  so  is  a  man  who  is  lone  and 
childless.^  16 

As  a  painted  lamp  (which  does  not  yield  light) ;  as  a  dry  tank 
(which  has  no  water),  as  a  thing  that  looks  like  a  (precious)  mineral 
without  being  at  all  a  mineral,  even  so  should  a  childless  man  be 
known  to  be  (no  man  but  only)  a  human  figure  made  of  straw.  *7 
A  man  who  has  no  offspring  should  be  regarded  as  one  having 
no  position,  as  one  who  is  nude,  as  one  who  is  empty,  as  one  who 
has  only  one  sense,  and  as  one  who  has  no  necessity  for  work.  18 
A  man  with  many  children  is  like  one  who  has  many  forms,  or 
one  having  many  faces,  or  one  having  many  bodies,  or  one  of  great 
activity,  or  one  having  many  eyes,  or  one  having  varied  experience, 
or  one  having  many  souls.  19 

A  man  with  many  children  is  praised  as  one  who  is  auspicious, 
or  one  that  is  possessed  of  excellence,  or  one  that  is  deserving  of  high 


*  The  original  is  very  terse.  I  expand  it  a  little  to  bring  out  its  sense  clearly.  In  the- 
above  verses  (9  to  the  first  line  of  14),  various  kinds  of  women  have  been  indicated.  This 
variety  is  due,  as  the  Rishi  explains,  to  the  variety  of  temperament  of  human  beings. — T. 

t  As  regards  ‘Atulyagotra’,  i.  e.,  belonging  to  a  different  ‘ gotra vide  (Jarirasthanam, 
Lesson  II.— T. 

t  ‘EkaQakha’-  is,  literally,  one-branched  ;  implying  a  tree  that  is  without  any  branch  and 
that  consists  of  only  a  stem. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1074 

applause,  or  one  endued  with  great  energy,  or  one  having  many 
branches.  20- 

Joy,  strength,  happiness,  livelihood,  expansion,  wealth,  continu¬ 
ation  of  lineage,  fame,  future  worlds  of  bliss,  happiness  hereafter, 
gratification,  all  depend  on  progeny.  21 

Hence,  one  who  seeks  progeny,  as  also  the  merits  that  are  depend¬ 
ant  on  progeny,  and  also  the  pleasures  of  sexual  congress,  should 
habitually  use  aphrodisiacs.  22 

I  shall,  after  this,  declare  the  various  combinations  of  aphrodisiacs, 
which  enhance  the  delights  of  (sexual)  enjoyment,  which  have  been 
well-tested,  and  which  increase  one’s  energy  and  (the  number  of) 
progeny.  23 

NUTRITIVE  PILLS. 

The  roots  of  ( Saccharum  Sard),  the  roots  of  Ikshu  ( Saccharum 
efficiniram),  the  roots  of  KSndekshu  fa  variety  of  Saccharum ),  the 
roots  of  IkshubSlika  (a  variety  of  Saccharum  officinarum ),  ^atSvari 
( Asparagus  racemosus),  PayasyS  (otherwise  called  KshirakSkoli,  a 
bulb  of  the  onion  tribe  brought  from  the  Himalayas),  VidSri  ( Batatus 
paniculatus).  KantakSri  {Solatium  Xanthocarpum ),  Jivanti  {Ccelogyne 
ovalis)  Jivaka,  * * * §  Meda,  f  Vira  (otherwise  called  £Slaparni,  Desmo- 
dium  gangeticum ),  Rishavaka,  J  BalS,  {Sida  cordifolia ),  Riddhi,  § 
Gokshuraka  {Tribulus  lameginosus),  RasnS  {Vanda  Roxburghii), 
Atmagupta  {Mucuna  pruriens ),  and  Punarnava  ( Boerhavia  diffusa )  : 
each  of  these,  of  the  measure  of  3  palas,  should  be  taken  ;  also  an 
‘adhaka’  (8  seers)  of  new  seeds  of  Phaseolus  Roxburghii ;  boil  all. these 
together  in  a  ‘drona’  (64  seers)  of  water  till  only  a  fourth  of  the  water 
{viz.,  16  seers)  remains.|| 

Into  it  should  be  thrown  the  paste  of  liq  uorice,  the  fruit  of  Vitis 
Vinifera ,  Phalgu  (the  fruit  of  Ficus  hispida ),  the  fruit  of  Pippali 


*  Not  identifiable.  Physicians  use,  instead  of  it,  Guduchi  or  Tinospora  corifolia. 

t  Meda  also- is  not  identifiable.  Physicians  use  Agwagandha,  or  Physalis  JCexuosa,  as 
3  substitute. — T. 

4  Not  identifiable.  The  substitute  used  is  ‘Vansalochana’  or  bambu-manna. — T.  , 

§  Not  identifiable.  The  substitute  used  is  Bala  or  Sida  cordifolia. — T. 

II  A  drona  means  32  seers.  Double  the  measure,  or  &4  seers,  should  be  taken  because  of 
its  being  a  liquid.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1075 


{Piper  longum ),  AtmaguptS  ( Mucuna  pruriens),  Madhuka  ( Bassia 
latifolia ),  Kharjjura  ( Phcenix  sylvestris),  and  £atavari  ( Asparagus 
racemosus) ; 

To  this  the  physician  should  add  the  expressed  juice  of  Vidari 
( Batatus  paniculatus ),  of  Amlaka  ( Phyllanthus  Emblica ),  of  Ikshu 
( Sacckarum  officinarum),  and  ghee,  each  of  the  measure  of  an  ‘adhaka’ 
(16  seers),  and  also  cow’s  milk  of  the  measure  of  a  ‘drona’  (64  seers) : 

All  these  should  once  more  be  boiled  together  till  only  (the 
measure  of)  the  ghee  remains. 

Straining  the  product,  the  physician  should  mix  with  it  sugar  and 
TugSkshira  (bambu  manna),  each  reduced  to  pulv  and  of  the  measure 
of  a  ‘prastha’  (2  seers) ;  also  Magadhi  ( Piper  longum ),  4  palas  ;  and 
pepper,  1  pal  a  ;  also  Tvach  fthe  bark  of  Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum)t 
Ela  ( Elettaria  cardamomum),  and  Kegara  (otherwise  called  Nlga- 
kegara,  or  Mesua  ferrea J,  each  reduced  to  pulv  and  of  the  measure  of 
half  a  pala. 

The  product  should  then  be  mixed  with  honey  of  the  measure  of 
2  ‘kudavas’  (32  tolas  or  half  a  seer). 

This  should  then  be  divided  into  pills  each  weighing  1  pala. 

The  pills  thus  formed  should  be  administered  to  one  in  measure 
according  to  one’s  power  of  digestion. 

This  preparation  is  an  eminent  aphrodisiac. 

It  is,  besides,  possessed  of  highly  nutritive  virtues,  and  it  enhances 
strength. 

By  the  use  of  this  medicine  a  man  can  approach  a  woman  like  a 
stallion.  24-32 


APHRODISIAC  GHEE. 

Take  the  seeds,  that  are  new,  of  Masha  (Pkaseolus  Roxburghii)> 
and  the  seeds,  that  are  new,  of  Atmagupta  ( Mucuna  pruriens ),  each 
of  the  measure  of  an  ‘aclhaka’  (8  seers). 

Add  Jivaka  ( a ),  Rishavaka  (1 b ),  Meda  (c),  Vira  (otherwise  called 
Kakoli,  a  root  brought  from  Morung),  Riddhi  (d},  £atavari  (Asparagus 
racemosus ),  liquorice,  and  Agwagandha  ( Physalis  jlexuosa ),  each  of 
the  measure  of  32  tolas. 

The  physician  should  cook  these  together. 

To  this  should  be  added  ghee  of  the  measure  of  1  ‘prastha’  (4  seers) 
and  the  expressed  juice  of  Ikshu  (Saccharum  officinarum ),  of  the 


'  CHARAKA-SAMHiTA. 


same  measure  ;  the  expressed  juice  of  Vidari  (Batatus  paniculatus), 
of  the  same  measure  ;  and  cow’s  milk,  of  ten  times  the  measure  of 
each  of  these. 

The  total  product  should  then  be  cooked  on  a  mild  fire. 

After  the  cooking  is  over,  the  ghee  should  be  taken  down  (from 
the  fire). 

Into  it  should  be  thrown  sugar,  bambu  manna,  and  honey,  each 
of  the  measure  of  4  palas  ;  also  the  pulv  of  the  fruit  of  Pippali  {Piper 
longum),  of  the  measure  of  1  pala. 

One  pala  of  this  preparation  should  be  licked  every  day,  according 
to  the  digestive  fire  of  the  person  desirous  of  this  aphrodisiac. 

.  After  the  medicine  has  been  digested,  one  should  take  boiled  rice 
(according  to  directions  already  given). 

Even  this  should  be  the  programme  of  the  person  who  is  desirous 
of  a  never-failing  supply  of  vital  seed  as  also  strength  of  genital 
organ.  33-37 

THE  APHRODISIAC  KNOWN  AS  PINDARASA. 

Take  these  six,  viz.,  sugar,  the  pulv  of  the  seeds  of  Masha  ( Phaseo- 
lus  Roxburghii),  bambu-manna,  milk,  ghee,  and  wheat  flour. 

With  the  aid  of  ghee,  make  a  pudding  of  these.* 

Without  boiling  it  too  much,  it  should  be  pounded  (with  the  hand). 

To  it  should  then  be  added  hot  meat-juice  of  fowl,  rendered 
sweet  (by  the  addition  of  .  sugar)  and  fragrant,  so  that  the  pudding 
may  become  thick  and  solid. 

The  product,  thus  arrived  at,  is  called  ‘Pindarasa.’ 

It  is  a  good  aphrodisiac,  possessing  at  the  same  time  nutritive 
properties.  It  enhances  the  strength  also. 

By  this  medicine  one  becomes  so  strong  as  to  be  able  to  approach 
a  woman  like  an  excited  stallion. 

With  the  meat-juice  also- of  the  peacock,:  the  partridge,  and  geese 
‘Pindarasa’  may  be  prepared  after  the  same  manner.  38-41 


*  The  process  of  making  the  pudding  is  this  :  fry  the  pulv  and  wheat-flour  Sic.,  in  ghee. 
Then  boil  them  in  milk  and  add  sugar.  The  product  should  be  neither  a  liquid  nor  a 
solid.— T.  .  .  .  _  - 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


io  77 


APHRODISIAC  JUICES. 

.  .  Take  ghee  and  the  seeds  of  Masha  (Phaseolus  Roxburghii),  and 
the  testicles  of  goats. 

Cook  these  with  the  meat-juice  of  buffalo  flesh. 

Straining  this  juice  properly,  it  should  be  mixed  with  the  juice 
of  such  sour  fruits  as  those  of  Dfidima  ( Punica  granatuni-,  Amlaka 
( Phyllanthus  Emblica ),  &c. 

Thus  mixed,  it  should  be  fried  in  ghee. 

Add  to  it,  after  the  frying  is  over,  a  little  salt,  as  also  (the  pulv  of) 
coriander  seeds,  cumin  seeds,  and  dry  ginger. 

This  excellent  juice  is  a  good  aphrodisiac,  tonic,  and  nutritive.  42-43 

OTHER  APHRODISIAC  JUICES. 

Cook  the  flesh  of  the  sparrow  in  the  meat-juice  of  the  partridge  ; 
and  the  flesh  of  the  partridge  in  the  meat-juice  of  fowl ;  and  the  flesh 
of  fowl  in  the  meat-juice  of  the  peacock  ;  and  that  of  the  peacock  in 
the  meat-juice  of  the  duck  or  the  goose. 

Each  of  these  preparations  should  be  fried  in  new  ghee,  and 
should  then  be  mixed  with  the  juice  of  such  sour  fruits  as  those  of 
Punica  granatum,  Phyllanthus  Emblica,  &c. 

Make  each  of  the  preparations  sweet  and  perfumed  agreeably  to 
the  taste  (or  constitution)  of  the  person  desirous  of  using  it. 

All  these  meat-juices  promote  strength.  44-45 

He  who,  after  being  gratified  .with  the  flesh  of  the  sparrow,  takes 
milk,  does  not  lose  the  turgidity  of  his  organ,  nor  does  his  vital  seed 
escape  during  that  night.  46 

He  who  takes  boiled  rice  of  the  ‘Shastika’  variety,  mixed  with  a 
copious  measure  of  ghee,  and  the  soup  of  MSsha  ( Phaseolus  Rox¬ 
burgkii),  and  afterwards  takes  a  draught  of  milk,  succeeds  in  keeping 
himself  awake  for  the  whole  night,  retaining  the  full  vigour  of  youth 
(as  regards  sexual  ability).  47 

He  who  takes  to  his  fill  the  flesh  of  fowl  fried  in  the  semen  of 
the  crocodile  cannot  sleep  at  night  with  unexcited  organ.  48 

Boil  fish-roe  (in  water)  and  thereby  extract  its  juice. 

Fry  the  juice  in  ghee ,  and  take  it. 

Take  also  the  eggs  of  geese,  pea-hens,  and  fowl.  49 


CHAR  A  JC A-S  AM  HIT A. 


1078 


( Here  are  two  verses ). 

When  a  person,  after  his  body  has  been  purified  (by  purgatives 
and  emetics),  and  the  ducts  have  been  cleansed,  takes  a  beneficial  and 
prescribable  aphrodisiac  in  proper  time,  such  aphrodisiac  is  seen  to 
operate  on  him  efficiently. 

An  aphrodisiac,  taken  under  such  circumstances,  promotes  nutri¬ 
tion  and  imparts  strength.  5° 

Hence,  it  is  necessary  to  first  correct  the  system  (by  administering 
purgatives  and  emetics)  agreeably  to  what  the  system  can  bear.  In 
a  body  that  has  not  been  cleansed  (by  correctives),  preparations 
whose  virtues  have  even  been  well  tested  do  not  produce  the  expected 
results  even  as  well-prepared  colours  do  not  properly  tinge  a  piece 
of  cloth  that  is  unwashed  of  dirt.  Si 

( Here  are  two  verses  containing  a  summary ). 

The  virtues  of  the  administration  of  aphrodisiacs,  for  what  man 
■what  woman  is  proper  soil,  what  the  demerits  are  of  men  that  are 
childless,  the  merits  of  persons  who  have  children,  the  five  and  ten 
combinations  that  enhance  energy  and  progeny,  and  that  impart 
nutrition  and  strength,  have  all  been  set  forth  in  this  Section  called 
^aramulya.  52-53 

Thus  ends  the  first  Section,  called  ‘Samyoga-^aramulya’  of 
Lesson  II  called  ‘Vajikarana’,  of  the  Division  called  ‘ChikitsS.’ 


8  II.  ASIKTAKSHIRIYAM. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  second  Section,  called  ‘Asiktakshiriyam’ 
of  the  Lesson  on  ‘Vajikarana.’ 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.*  1 

Take  some  grains  of  ‘Shastika’  paddy,  in  which  only  the  milky 
juice  occurs  ;  which  are  only  partially  developed  ;  which  are  green 
(and  not  dry)  ;  and  which  are  cleansed  of  all  filth. 

Soaking  them  in  cow’s  milk  till  they  become  swollen  (and  look 
like  fully  developed  seeds),  pound  them  in  a  mortar. 


*  That  which  follows  clearly  explains  why  this  Section  is  called  ‘asikta-kshiriyam.’ 
‘Kshira’  is  milk,  or  milky  juice.  With  the  milky  juice  of  a  variety  of  paddy  when  unripe, 
certain  good  aphrodisiacs  are  made. — T. 


Tames  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  W  stmiuister  Maryland ,  U.  S.  A.: — Vouhave  undertaken' 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco ,  California  : —  . As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  gre  tier  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent . 

there  is  mqch  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia ,  U.  S.  A.  .-—You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  l>e  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis.  Ohio,  U.  S.  A.  : — The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest'.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge : — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq. ,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  A  met  icon  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila- 
delphia: — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia : — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  l 
.expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  oj  Cashmere  : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Pi  ofessor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-Western 
University,  Secretaiy  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition  I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Stayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  —Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  rq,  East  g  8th  Street,  New  York: — Wish  you  a  success  in 
-  your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derse/hofber  Traise,  Dramsladt : — The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
.  in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
,  takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brother s’  Druggist : — I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mods.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere,  174.,  Boulevatse,  Saint  Germain  : — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  : — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  I 
arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop 
from  the  P  harmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients 
according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and 
fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of 
the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street,  Calcutta : — My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
[about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after. — 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia : — I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing : — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector  : — Your  patriotic, 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  A.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hypocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively'  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Gierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gya : — It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  Work. 

,  Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  Wales  : — The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  : — Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
nqro^er  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
pqssjlyjy  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to,  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is 
a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji, — The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well, 
our  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


PART  XXXV. 


4  i\$r.s 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 

(TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH). 

PUBLISHED  BY 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  Original)  WITH  COMMENT¬ 
ARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 

journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  the  Hindu 

SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,,  &C.,  &C.,  &C. 


CALCUTTA : 

2oo,  Cornwallis  Street. 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N.  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRATNA  PRESS, 
12,  SIMLA  STREET,  BYE-LANE. 

1905. 

(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved. ) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters.) 

Professor  Max  Muller :— I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish.— Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says,— .  I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention. 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office —  .  Your 

excellent  translation  . a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

. Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York,  u.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A.— I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing,  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
'  antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris  .-—I  praise  you  pn  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany : — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsbureh,  Germany  : — English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country.- 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E,,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal:— 1  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life, 
cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  CONTENTS 

PART  XXXV. 

Pages  1074  to  1096  complete  Lesson  II. 

Various  aphrodisiac  preparations  have  been  set  forth.  Almost 
all  of  them  have  been  well  tested,  says  the  Rishi. 

Lesson  III  begins  at  p.  1096,  on  Fever. 

The  observations  of  the  Rishi  on  the  origin  of  Fever  and  the 
diverse  kinds  of  Fever  are  fraught  with  great  interest. 

The  passage  on  the  mythological  origin  of  Fever  is  evidently 
an  interpolation. 

Observations  also  on  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  and  their  corres¬ 
pondence  with  the  several  seasons  are  extremely  interesting. 

The  treatment  of  some  varieties  of  Fever  occurs  in  this  Lesson. 
The  Rishi’s  observations  on  this  subject  are  fraught  with  sound 
sense. 

Altogether,  the  aphorisms  on  Fever,  its  varieties,  the  methods 
of  treatment,  and  the  Regimen  of  the  patient,  will  abundantly 
repay  a  careful  perusal. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


*Q79 

They  should  then  be  pressed  (for  obtaining  the  juice  that  is  in 
them). 

(Having  obtained  the  juice),  the  pounded  grains  should  once  more 
be  pounded  and  then  grinded  (with  the  hand)  with  milk. 

The  paste  (thus  formed)  should  again  be  pressed  (for  obtaining 
its  juice). 

All  these  processes  should  "be  gone  through  with  care. 

Taking  the  juice  (that  is  thus,  obtained),  it  should  be  mixed  with 
(an  equal  measure  of)  milk.  It  should  then  be  strained  (through  a 
pieoe  of  cloth). 

It  should  then  be  mixed  with  the  juice  of  the  seeds  of  Atmagupta 
( Mucuna  pruriens ),  the  juice  of  Dhanya  ( Coriandrum  sativum ),  of 
Masha  ( Phaseolus  radiatus')  of  Bala  (Si da  cordifolia ),  of  Supyaparni, 
(otherwise  called  Mudgaparni,  i.  e.,  Phaseolus  trilobus ),  of  Jivanti 
( Ccelogyne  ovalis),  of  Jivaka  (a),  of  Rishabhaka  (b\  of  Riddhi  (<r),  of 
Kakoli  (d),  £wadangshtrS  ( Tribulus  lanugimosus),  Madhuka  (liquorice), 
£atavari  (Aspargus  racemosus'),  Vidari  ( Convolvulus  paniculatus\ 
Drakshfi  (the  fruit  of  Vitis  viniferroi),  and  Kharjjura  (the  fruit  of  the 
.date).  Mixing  these  together  in  equal  measures,  boil  them  duly. 

Into  the  boiled  product  should  be  cast  the  pulvs  of  the  following, 
viz.,  Tugakshiri  (bamboo  manna),  Masha  (Phaseolus  radiatus),  £ali 
(paddy  of  the  well-known  variety  so  called),  Shashtika  (paddy  of  the 
variety  so  called),  and  Godhuma  (wheat). 

In  consequence  of  these,  the  boiled  decoction  would  become  thick:. 

When  it  has  become  thick  owing  to  the  addition  of  these  powders, 
a  copious  measure  of  honey  and  sugar  should  be  added  for  sweeten¬ 
ing  it 

After  this,  boluses  of  the  size  of  jujubes  should  be  made  of  it. 
These  should  then  be  fried  in  ghee. 

The  boluses  should  be  administered  according  to  the  strength  of 
the  digestive  fire  of  the  person  desirous  of  taking  them. 

While  taking  the  boluses,  one’s  diet  should  be  milk  and  meat-juice. 

By  using  this  medicine,  a  person,  even  if  he  be  old  in  years,  gets 
many  children  of  his  own  loins,  all  of  whom  become  long-lived. 


a.  Not  identifiable.  The  substitute  used  is  Guduchi  ( Tinospora  cordifolia). 

b.  Not  identifiable.  The  substitute  used  is  bamboo  manna. 

c.  Not  identifiable.  The  substitute  is  Bala  ( Sida  cordifolia ). 

d.  A  root  brought  from  Nepal. 

137 


Io8o 


CH A  RAKA-SA  M HI  T A 


Even  this  is  the  composition  of  ‘ShashtikSdi-gudika’  (boluses 
made  of  paddy  and  other  ingredients),  capable  of  making  a  man  the 
father  of  many  children.  2-9 

COMPOSITION  OF  APHRODISIAC  CAKES. 

The  physician  should  obtain  the  semen  of  these,  viz.,  sparrows, 
geese,  cocks,  peacocks,  porpoises,  and  alligators  ; 

Also  ghee  of  cow’s  milk  ; 

Also  the  fat  of  the  boar  and  the  shrike  ; 

Also  the  pulv  of  rice  obtained  from  ‘Shashtika’  paddy,  and  flour 
of  wheat. 

Mixing  these  together,  make  ‘Pupalikas’,  or  ‘(^ashkulis’,  or  ‘Varti- 
kas’  of  the  product ;  or  cakes  of  other  kinds,  or  edibles  of  different 
sorts.* 

In  consequence  of  the  administration  of  these  edibles,  one  be¬ 
comes  as  invigorated  as  a  stallion, 

EXPRESSED  JUICE  OF  APHRODISIAC  VIRTUES. 

Take  the  seeds  of  Atmagupta  ( Mucuna  pruriens),  the  seeds  of 
Masha  ( Phaseolus  radiatus),  the  fruit  of  date,  £atavari  ( Asparagus 
racemosus),  Sringataka  ( Trapa  bispinosa),  and  Mridwika  (dried  grapes) 
of  the  measure  of  one  ‘prastha’  (2  seers). 

Boil  these  in  a  ‘prastha’  of  milk,  as  also  a  ‘prastha’  of  water, f  till 
only  a  ‘prastha’  remains.^  . 

Strain  this  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth,  and  mix  with  it  three 
‘prasritas’  of  each  of  these,  viz.,  sugar,  bamboo  manna,  and  new  ghee. 

This  should  be  taken  with  a  mixture  of  honey  (the  dose  being 
regulated  by  the  measure  of  one’s  appetite). 

During  the  period  the  medicine  is  taken  or  continued,  one  should 
eat  boiled  ‘Shashtika’  rice  (with  a  copious  measure  of  ghee  and  milk.) 

By  using  this  preparation,  even  a  person  that  is  reft  of  strength 
and  overtaken  by  decrepitude,  succeeds  in  obtaining  a  large  number 


*  Cakes  are  made  of  diverse  sizes  and  shapes.  Those  that  have  conical  ends  with  the 
middle  portion  thicker,  are  called  ‘Pupalikas.’  Those  that  are  flat  and  circular  are  called 
‘£ashkulis.’  Those  that  are  round  and  fried  in  ghee  or  oil,  are  called  ‘Vartikas.’ — T. 

t  Being  liquids,  the  measures  should  be  doubled  ;  that  is,  4  seers  of  milk,  and  4  seers  of 
water  are  to  be  taken. — T. 

t  This  would  necessarily  imply  not  2  but  4  seers. — T. 


CHAR  A  K A-S. AM HIT A. 


1081 

of  children,  and  in  approaching  women  with  the  energy  of  a  young 
man.  M-17 


APHRODISIAC  MILK. 

The  heads  of  date  trees,  the  seeds  of  Masha  ( Phseolus  radiatus), 
Kshirakakoli  (a  bulb  of  the  onion  tribe  brought  from  the  Himalayas), 
(^atavari  ( Asparagus  racemosus),  date  fruit,  the  fruit  of  Madhuka 
(Bassia  latifolia ),  Mridwika  (dried  grapes),  and  the  seeds  of  Ajada 
( Mucuna  pruriens ),  each  of  the  measure  of  one  pala,  should  be  boiled 
in  water  of  the  measure  of  one  ‘Adhaka’  (8  seers). 

When  only  a  fourth  part  of  the  liquid  remains,  one  ‘prastha’  of 
milk  should  be  added  and  boiled  with  it,* 

When  reduced  to  the  measure  of  the  milk  that  is  thus  added,  it 
should  be  taken  down  and  regarded  as  fit  for  use,  adding  sugar  to  it 
of  the  proper  measure. 

(The  dose  should  be  according  to  the  measure  of  one’s  appetite). 

While  taking  or  continuing"  the  medicine,  one  should  eat  boiled 
‘Shashtika’  rice,  mixed  with  a  copious  measure  of  ghee. 

This  preparation,  with  sugar  added  to  it,  is  regarded  as  one  of  the 
foremost  of  aphrodisiacs.  18-20 

APHRODISIAC  GHEE. 

Jivaka(a),  Rishabhaka  (£),  Meda(c),  Jivanti  ( Ccelogyne  ovalis),  the 
two  varieties  of  (^ravani  ( Hydrocotile  Asiatica),  date  fruit,  the  fruit  of 
Madhuka  (Bassia  latifolia ),  the  fruit  of  Draksha  (dried  grapes),  Pippali 
{Piper  longurn ),  Vigwabheshaja  (dry  ginger),  £ringataka  ( Trapa  bispi- 
nosa),  Vidari  ( Batatus  paniculatus ),  new  ghee,  and  water,  should  be 
boiled  together. 

When  reduced  to  the  measure  of  the  ghee>  it  should  be  taken 
down.f 


*  The  water  should  be  of  double  the  measure,  that  is,  16  seers.  So  the  milk  also  should 
be  of  the  measure  of  2  ‘prasthas,’  i,  ~e.,  8  seers.  The  whole  should  be  boiled  down  to 
4  seers.— T. 

a.  Not  identifiable.  Guduchi  or  Tinospora  cordifolia  is  used  as  a  substitute. — T. 

b.  Not  identifiable,  bamboo  manna  being  used  as  a  substitute. 

c.  Not  identifiable.  A^wagandha  or  Physalis  flexuosa  is  used  as  a  substitute. — T. 

t  Gangadhara  explains  that  when  the  measures  are  not  set  forth,  the  solid  articles  should 
be  together  of  the  measure  of  I  seer.  The  ghee  should  be  4  seers  ;  milk,  4  seers  ;  and  water, 
12  seers.  The  compound  should  be  boiled  down  to  4  seers, — T. 


to8z 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


To  this  should  be  added  half  a  seer  of  sugar,  and  half  a  seer  of 
honey. 

The  dose-  should  be  according  to  the  measure  of  one’s  appetite. 

While  continuing  to  take  the  medicine,  one  should  take  boiled 
rice  of  the  ‘Shashtika’  variety,,  mixed  (not  with  other  ghee  but)  with 
the  ghee  (thus  prepared). 

This  preparation  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  best  aphrodisiacs.  It 
is,,  besides,  an  efficacious  tonic. 

It  possesses  also  the  virtue  of  improving  the  complexion  as  also 
the  voice.  It  is  also  a  nutritive,  capable  of  increasing  the  bulk  of 
the  body.  2i-z3 

APHRODISIAC  CURDS. 

Take  the  cream  of  curds  that  should  be  as.  white  as  the  autumnal 
moon,  and  free  from  every  defect. 

The  intelligent  physician  should  then  mix  with  it  sugar,  and 
honey,  and  (the  pulv  of)  pepper,  and  bamboo  manna,  and  Elettaria 
cardamomum,  reduced  to  powder. 

Straining  the  compound,  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth,  keep  the 
(strained)  product  in  a  new  earthen  jar. 

It  should  then  be  taken,  mixing  it  with  boiled  ‘Shashtika’  rice 
made  cold  and  enriched  with  ghee. 

After  taking  such  rice  so  mixed,  one  should  take,  of  the  measure 
prescribed,  the  preparation  called  ‘Rasala.’* 

One  who  takes  this  preparation  followed  by  a  proper  dose  of 
Rasala,  becomes  endued  with  brightness  of  complexion,  a  good  voice, 
and  strength,  and  his  sexual  power  also  is  increased.  24-26 
APHRODISIAC  MILK. 

The  person  who  takes  ‘Shashtika’  rice,  that  is  as  white  as  the  rays 
of  the  moon,  and  that  is  enriched  with  milk  and  ghee ,  and  that  has 
sugar  and  honey  mixed  with  it,  feels  strong  for  sexual  congress.  27 
APHRODISIAC  PREPARATION  WITH  ALLIGATORS’  EGGS. 

Take  some  eggs  of  alligators,  as  also  some  eggs  of  hens.  Fry 
them  in  hot  ghee.  Mix  them  then  with  the  pulv  of  ‘Shastika’  rice 
and  new  ghee. 

*  By ‘Rasalst’ is  meant  a  preparation  of  curds,  sometimes  called  ‘(Jikharini',  the  ingre¬ 
dients  being  ‘Krishnajiraka’  ( Nigella  sativa),  treacle,  ginger,  the  bulbous  root-stock  of 
Cypervi  fartenuis,  camphor,  sandal-paste,  musk,  and  diverse  spices. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1083 


Make  eakes  of  the  product.  These  cakes  may  be  taken  by  the 
person  desirous  of  using  an  aphrodisiac. 

After  taking  the  cakes,  drink  a  glass  of  ‘Varuni’  wine. 

Through  the  virtue  of  these  cakes,  one  can  approach  a  woman 
like  a  stallion  and  discharge  his  seed  like  an  elephant.  28-29 
Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary. 

The  eight  preparations  which  have  been  spoken  of  in  this  Section 
called  ‘Asikta-kshirika’,  should  be  taken  by  those  who  are  desirous  of 
acquiring  energy  of  manliness  as  also  a  numerous  progeny.  3° 

Through  the  virtues  of  these  various  preparations  one  becomes 
endued  with  a  handsome  and  oily  body.  One  also  becomes  possessed 
of  strength  and  fairness  of  complexion  and  the  cheerfulness  of  mind. 

The  effects  of  the  medicines  enable  one  to  indulge,  like  a  stallion, 
in  sexual  congress  with  beautiful  women  for  a  period  of  eight  years 
(without  repeating  their  use  during  the  interim.)  31 

Whatever  things  may  be  agreeable  to  one’s  mind,  such  as  delight¬ 
ful  woods  and  gardens,  banks  of  rivers  and  lakes,  hills  and  mountains, 
agreeable  and  beloved  women,  ornaments  and  perfumes  and  floral 
garlands,  and  beloved  friends  and  companions,  should  all  be  regarded 
as  aids  to  aphrodisiac  combinations.*  32 

Thus  ends  the  second  Section,  called  ‘Asikta-kshirika’,  of  Lesson  II 
on  ‘VSjikarana.’ 

§  3.  MASHAPARNA-VAJIKARANA. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  3rd  Section,  called  ‘Mashaparna- 
Vajikarana,’ (of  Lesson  II).f 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  1 

The  milk  of  a  cow  that  is  fed  with  the  leaves  of  Masha  ( Phaseolus 
radiatus),  that  has  calved  for  the  first  time,  that  .is  healthy  and  plump, 
that  has  four  teats  in  her  udders,  that  has  her  calf  living  and  of  the 
same  colour  with  her,  that  is  either  red  or  white  or  black  in  colour, 
that  has  horns  rising  perpendicularly,  that  is  mild  of  temper,  that 


*  Gangadhara  rightly  explains  that  the  things  mentioned  in  verse  32  are,  instead  of  being 
aphrodisiacs,  aids  to  aphrodisiacs.  Everything  that  contributes  to  cheerfulness  of  mind  must 
necessarily  be  so. — T. 

t  .MSshaparna- VSjikarana’  implies  aphrodisiacs  with  the  help  of  ‘MSshaparna’  or  the 
seeds  of  Phaseolus  radiatus. — T. 


1084 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SA  MHITA . 


eats  sugarcanes  as  also  leaves  of  Arjuna  ( Pentaptna  Arjuna ),  and 
that  yields  thick  milk,  should  be  drunk  by  an  intelligent  person. 

The  milk  should  be  drunk,  raw  or  boiled,  with  sugar,  and  honey, 
and  ghee  mixed  with  it. 

Such  milk  should  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  foremost  of 
aphrodisiacs.  2-4 

A  person  who  desires  an  inexhaustible  stock  of  semen,  should 
drink  milk  boiled  with  drugs  which,  increase  the  measure  of  semen, 
also  milk  boiled  with  drugs  which  prolong  life,  also  milk  boiled  with 
drugs  which  promote  nutrition  and  increase  corpulency,  also  milk 
boiled  with  drugs  which  increase  the  milk  of  the  body. 

Each  of  these  preparations  of  milk  should  be  mixed  with  wheat- 
flour  and  ghee  and  honey  and  sugar.*  5-6 

Take  2  tolas  of  each  of  the  following  drugs,  viz.,  Meda  (not  iden¬ 
tifiable,  Agwagandha  or  ( Physalis  flexuosa  being  used  as  a  substitute), 
Payasya  (otherwise  called  Kshirakakoli),  Jivanti  ( Ccelogyne  ovalis), 
Vidari  ( Batatus  paniculatus),  Kantakari  ( Solarium  Xanthocarpuni), 
Masha  (seeds  of  Phaseolus  radiatus),  £wadangshtra  (otherwise  called 
Gokshura  or  Tribulus  lanuginosus),  Kshirika  (otherwise  called  Raja- 
dani  or  Mimusops  hexandra),  Godhuma  (wheat),  Qali  (a  variety  of 
rice),  and  Shastika  (a  variety  of  rice). 

Boil  these  in  8  seers  of  milk  with  8  seers  of  water. 

The  boiling  should  be  regarded  as  over  when  only  the  measure 
of  the  milk  remains  in  the  vessel. 

It  should  then  be  strained,  and'  mixed  with  honey,  ghee,  and  sugar. 

If  this  preparation  is  drunk  by  an  old  man  of  even  seventy  years 
of  age,  he  gets  a  large  progeny,  and  enjoys  the  pleasure  of  sexual 
congress  like  a  young  man  in  full  vigour  of  health.  7-9 

The  milk  of  such  a  cow,  boiled  with  circular  leaves  of  pure  gold, 
and  mixed  with  ghee,  honey,  and  sugar,  is  another  aphrodisiac  which 
enables  a  person  to  beget  many  children. 10 

Take  thirty  fruits  of  Piper  longum.  Pound  them  properly.  The 
powder  should  be  fried  in  a  ‘Prakuncha’  of  oil  and  ghee.\ 


*  Milk  boiled  with  glactiphorous  drugs  is  prescribed  for  even  male  persons  because  the 
milk  generated  in  a  male  person  is  conducive  to  an  increase  of  oiliness  of  the  body  as 
also  of  semen. — T. 


t  A  ‘Prakuncha’  is 


‘pala’  or  8  tolas. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1085 


It  should  then  be  mixed  with  sugar  and  honey. 

The  product  should  be  placed  in  a  vessel. 

Into  this  vessel  the  milk  should  be  drawn  from  the  udders  of  a 
cow  of  the  description  given  above. 

The  milk  thus  drawn  should  be  taken  by  one  desirous  of  using 
aphrodisiacs. 

The  measure  should  be  according  to  one’s  appetite. 

After  the  milk  has  been  digested,  one  should  take  ‘Shastika’  rice, 
with  a  copious  measure  of  milk  and  ghee. 

By  this  the  turgidity  is  continuously  maintained  of  one’s  organ, 
and  one’s  power  is  greatly  increased  of  retaining  the  vital  seed.*  n-12 

Take  a  certain  measure  of  Masha  (the  seeds  of  Phaseolus  radiatus) 
and  ‘Shastika’  rice. 

Take  an  equal  measure  of  £wadangshtra  (Tribulus  lanuginosus) 
and  Vidari  ( Batatus paniculatus).  With  the  expressed  juice  of  these, 
to  which  should  be  added  four  times  as  much  milk,  the  former  should 
be  cooked  into  a  frumenty. 

Enriched  with  ghee,  this  frumenty  proves  to  be  a  good  aphro- 
disjac.  13 

Take  a  ‘Kudava’  (half  a  seer)  of  the  powder  of  the  fruits  of  the 
group  of  drugs  called  Jivanya. 

Also  the  powder,  of  the  same  measure,  of  the  fruits  of  the  group 
of  drugs  classed  as  ‘Snigdha’  or  emollients. 

Also  the  powder,  of  the  same  measure,  of  the  fruits  of  the  group 
t>f  drugs  classed  as  ‘Ruchikari’  (capable  of  creating  a  relish  for  food). 

Also  the  powder,  of  the  same  measure,  of  the  fruits  of  Atmagupta 
(Mucuna  pruriens). 

Also  the  powder,  of  the  same  measure,  of  the  seeds  of  Masha 
(. Phaseolus  radiatus). 

Take  also  the  powder,  half  a  seer  each,  of  sesame  seeds  and  the 
seeds  of  Mudga  ( Phaseolus  Mungo). 

Also  half  a  seer  of  wheat-flour,  and  half  a  seer  of  powdered 
‘<£ali’  rice. 

Take  half  a  seer  of  ghee. 

Boil  all  these  together  in  a  proper  measure  of  milk. 

Make  cakes  of  the  paste  that  will  result  from  the  boiling. 


‘N5’,  in  the  last  line,  is  the 


1.  sing,  of  ‘nri’  meaning 


1.— T. 


io86 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


These  cakes,  owing  to  their  aphrodisiac  virtues,  should  be  taken 
by  a  person  who  has  many  wives.*  14-16 

Take  (new)  ghee  (of  cow’s  milk),  measuring  4  seers,  mixing  the 
decoction,  measuring  x  seer,  of  ^atavari  (Asparagus  racemosus )  with  it. 

It  should  be  boiled  with  milk  of  ten  times  that  measure  (i.  e., 
40  seers). 

The  product  should  be  strained  and  then  mixed  with  sugar,  the 
pulv  of  the  fruit  of  Piper  longum ,  and  honey. 

This  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  best  aphrodisiacs.f  *7 

Take  the  pulv  of  liquorice,  of  the  measure  of  a  ‘Karsha’  ( i.  e., 
2  tolas). 

Add  ghee  and  honey,  each  of  the  same  measure. 

One  who  takes  this,  and  drinks  milk  afterwards,  becomes  pos¬ 
sessed  of  great  energy.  18 

A  young  man  who  eats  and  drinks  ghee  and  milk  everyday,  who 
is  fearless  and  free  from  ailments  of  every  kind,  who  indulges  in 
sexual  pleasure  every  day,  and  who  cherishes  voluptuous  thoughts, 
succeeds  in  approaching  his  wives  like  a  bovine  bull.  l9 

They  that  are  of  the  same  occupation,  they  that  are  crowned  with 
success  in  respect  of  their  purposes,  they  that  follow  one  another 
(t.  e.,  cherish  the  same  opinions),  they  that  are  skilled  in  music  and 
pastimes  of  diverse  kinds,  they  that  are  of  equal  minds  and  age,  they 
that  are  possessed  of  respectability  of  birth,  liberality,  good  behaviour, 
and  purity  of  conduct  (external),  they  that  are  endued  with  desire  for 
women,  they  that  are  always  cheerful,  they  that  are  free  from  sorrow 
of  every  kind,  they  that  are  free  from  anxiety  of  every  kind,  they  that 
are  of  equal  conduct,  they  that  are  attached  to  one  another,  they  that 
are  beloved,  they  that  are  sweet-speeched,  with  such  companions  if 


*  The  drags  called  ‘Jivaniya’  are  ten  in  number.  They  are  I.  Jivaka,  2.  Rishabhaka, 
3.  Meda,  4.  Mahameda,  5.  Kakoli,  6.  Kshirakakoli,  Mudgaparni,  8.  Mashaparni,  9.  Jivanti, 
and  10.  Madhuka, 

The  drugs  called  ‘Snigdha’  or  emollients  are  ten.  They  are  I.  Mridvilca,  2.  Madhuka, 

3.  Maduparni,  4.  Meda,  5.  Vidari,  6.  Kakoli,  7.  Kshirakakoli,  8.  Jivaka,  9.  Jivanti,  and 
■10.  (Jalaparni. 

The  drugs  called  ‘RuchikSri’  are  ten.  They  are  I.  Amra,  2.  Amrataka,  3.  Nichula, 

4.  Karamarddaka,  3.  Vrikshamla,  6.  Amlavetasa,  7.  Kuvala,  8.  Vadara,  9.  Dadima,  and 
so.  Matulanga. — T. 

t  When  no  measure  is  stated,  I  ‘prastha’  or  two  seers  is  the  measure  to  be  taken. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1087 


<©ne  associates  freely,  one  becomes  endued  with  energy  for  sexual 
•congress.* * * §  2°-22 

Through  these,  viz.,  rubbing  the  body  with  oils,  cleansing  the 
body  (with  turmeric  paste,  &c.),  washing  the  body,  use  of  fragrant 
unguents,  wearing  of  floral  garlands  and  ornaments,  comfortable 
chambers  and  beds  and  seats,  untorn  and  agreeable  garments,  melo¬ 
dious  warble  of  winged  songsters,  the  sounds  of  ornaments  worn  by 
women,  and  champooing  of  the  body  by  beloved  women,  one  obtains 
•energy  for  sexual  congress.  23-24 

Receptacles  of  water  adorned  with  lotuses  and  haunted  by  excited 
bees,  chambers  perfumed  with  flowers  of  Jasminum  grandiflorum  and 
those  of  Nilumbium  speciosum,  and  rendered  cool  by  means  of  sandal- 
paste,  and  springs  of  fragrant  water,  rivers  with  foaming  water,  hills 
and  mountains  having  blue  valleys  and  tabl e-lands, f  the  rise  of  blue' 
■clouds,  nights  rendered  delightful  -by  moon-rise,  soft  breezes  charged 
with  the  perfumes  of  a  hundred  lotuses,  nights  especially  adapted  to 
indulgence  in  sexual  pleasure,  spots  reft  of  preceptors  and  seniors, 
•diverse  aids  to  cheerfulness,  blossoming  woods  and  groves  resounding 
with  the  notes  of  the  Kokila%  abounding  with  choice  edibles  and 
drinks,  mellifluous  with  strains  of  music  (both  instrumental  and 
vocal),  and  fragrant  with  floral  wreaths,  a  heart  elated  (with  joy)  and 
utterly  free  from  anxiety  of  every  kind,  accomplishment  of  all  purposes 
■cherished,  ungratified  desire,  and  beautiful  women, — all  these  are  the 
weapons  of  the  deity  of  Desire.  § 

All  these,  as  also  youth,  and  that  season  of  the  year  which  is 
•exciting  (viz.,  spring),  are  the  highest  sources  of  pleasure  open  to 
men.  25-29 


*  The  fact  is,  such  companions  are  regarded  as  a  sort  of  aphrodisiac.— T. 

t  ‘Sanu’  implies  level  land  either  at  the  foot  of  mountains  or  on  their  tops,  or  between 
4 wo  heights.— T. 

J.  Kokilas  lay  their  eggs  in  the  nest  of  crows  which  hatch  them  as.if  they  are  their  own 
•eggs.  Hence  the  former  are  called  Tarapushta.’ — T. 

§  The  Hindu  Cupid,  called  Kandarpa,  or  Kama,  or  Atmabhu,  or  Manobhu,  &c.,  is 
represented  as  an  exceedingly  handsome  youth  having  a  bow  made  of  flowers,  and  shafts  also 
made  of  flowers.  He  has,  for  his  troops,  Spring  and  all  his  attendants  such  as  the 
Kokila,  &c. — T. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


{Here  occurs  a  verse  containing  a  summary .) 

In  this,  the  third  Section,  called ‘Mashaparna,’  (of  Lesson  II  on 
‘Vajikarana)’  have  been  explained  the  five  and  ten  preparations  that 
are  contributors  of  pleasure  and  imparters  of  nutrition  and  strength.  1 
Thus  ends  the  third  Section,  called  ‘Mashaparna-Vajikarana’,  of 
Lesson  II,  on  ‘Vajikarana,’  of  the  Division,  called  ‘Chikitsa,  of 
Agnivega’s  work  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


§  4.  PUMAN  JATAVALADIKAM. 

We  shall,  after  this,  expound  the  fourth  Section,  on.  ‘Vajikarana’, 
called  ‘Puman  Jatavaladikam.’ 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.*  1 

The  methods  by  which  a  man,  having  acquired  strength,  may  be 
able  to  approach  women  as  often  as  he  may  wish,  and  soon  get  a 
numerous  progeny,  shall  now  be  explained.  2 

All  men  endued  with  strength  are  not  necessarily  fathers  of  many 
children. 

Then,  again,  men  with  ample  proportions  of  limbs  and  great 
strength  are  seldom  able  to  show  their  strength  in  approaching 
women. 

It  is  seen,  again,  that  men  of  weak  or  unenduring  constitutions 
are  strong  in  approaching  women  and  possessed  of  many  children. 

Some,  again,  are  by  nature  weak  (in  the  matter  of  sexual  indul¬ 
gence).  Some  also  become  weak  (in  this  respect)  owing  to  ailments.3-4 

Some  men  are  seen  to  approach  many  women  with  the  energy  of 
the  Chataka  (sparrow). 

Some,  again,  are  to  be  seen  who,  without  being  able  to  approach 
many  women,  inject  their  semen  into  the  women  of  their  choice  like 
an  elephant. 

Some,  in  consequence  of  circumstances  that  excite  desire,  are 
able  to  approach  women. 


*  This  Section  is  called  ‘Puman  JStavaladikam’,  owing  to  the  drugs  mentioned  in  it 
that  increase  the  strength  or  energy  of  a  man.— T. 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA. 


io8g 

Some,  in  consequence  of  strength-giving  food  and  drink,  are  able 
to  approach  women.* 

Some  are  able  to  approach  women  in  consequence  of  especial 
efforts  (such  as  kissing  and  embracing,  &c.) 

Some  have  the  power  naturally. 

Hence  we  shall  expound  some  preparations  which  impart  strength 
to  the  weak,  which  contribute  to  the  happiness  of  those  that  are  even 
strong,  and  which  are,  besides,  efficient  aids  to  strength.  5-7 

Unto  people  whose  bodies  have  been  first  cleansed  by  the  admi¬ 
nistration  of  proper  correctives,  the  physician,  observant  of  their 
bearing  capacity,  should  administer  enemata,  both  dry  and  oily, 
consisting  of  such  drugs  as  increase  the  semen  and  progeny. 

For  people  who  are  accustomed  to  milk  and  meat-juice,  the 
enemeta  prescribable  are  those  made  of  ghees,  and  oils  and  meat-juice 
and  milk  and  sugar  and  honey. f8-9 

APHRODISIAC  FLESH-BOLUSES. 

Take  a  quantity  of  pork. 

Pound  or  grind  it  (in  a  pestle  with  the  aid  of  a  mortar). 

Add  to  it  ‘Saindhava’  salt  and  the  pulv  of  pepper,  (of  proper 
measure). 

Make  boluses,  of  the  size  of  jujubes,  of  the  flesh  thus  prepared. 

Fry  those  boluses  in  hot  or  boiling  ghee. 

Cast  those  boluses,  hardened  by  frying,  into  the  meat-juice  of 
fowl,  which  has  been  enriched  by  the  addition  of  ghee ,  rendered 
fragrant  by  perfumes,  and  boiled  with  curds  and  the  juice  of  the  fruit 
of  Punicum  granatum. 

The  meat-juice  should  then  be  so  boiled  that  the  boluses  of  flesh 
in  it  may  not  break. 

By  drinking  the  meat-juice  and  eating  the  boluses  of  flesh,  one 
obtains  an  inexhaustible  supply  of  semen.  to-12 


*  Some  texts  read  ‘Avyasanadhrubah’.  The  meaning  is,  ‘are  able  to  approach  women 
when  they  are  free  from  griefs,  &c.’  Others  read  ‘Abhyasanadhrubah’,  the  sense  being — 
‘are  able  to  approach  women  in  consequence  of  habit  or  practice.’ — T. 

t  Enemeta  are  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  dry  and  oily.  It  seems  that  when  enemeta  are 
prescribed  for  even  men  whose  bodies  have  been  sufficiently  cleansed  by  emetics  and  pur¬ 
gatives,  they  are  regarded  as  possessed  of  aphrodisiac  virtues. — T. 


jfogo 


CHA  RA  K A- SAM  HIT  A., 


The -physician-' should',  after'  the  same  manner,  cause  to  be  pre¬ 
pared  boluses  and  juices  of  other  kinds  of  clean  meat. 

The  administration  of  these  promotes  the  supply  of  semen  in. 
one’s  body.*  r3 

APHRODISIAC  MEAT-JUICE  OF  BUFFELO. 

Take  a  quantity  of  the  seeds  of  Masha  ( Phaseolus  radiatus),. 

Drench  them  in  water  till  sprouts  come  forth. 

These  should  be  carefully  separated  from,  other  articles  that  may 
have  been  mixed  with  them; 

The  seeds,  thus  separated,  should  be  husked. 

With  them-  should’  be  mixed  a  quantity  of  the  seeds  (of  the  same- 
measure)  of  Mucuna  prurietis. 

They  should  then  be  thrown  into  meat-juice  made  of  buffalo-flesh',, 
that  has  been  enriched  with  ghee  and  dressed  with  curds  and  the 
juice  of  pomegranates. 

Into  it  should  then  be  thrown  coriander  seeds,  cumin  seeds,  and’ 
dry  ginger,  each  of  proper  measure; 

By  eating  and  drinkfng  this  preparation,  one  obtains  an  abundant 
supply  of  semen.  M-15 

APHRODISIAC  FISH  AND  FLESH. 

He  who  eats  fresh  fish  and  flesh,  as  also  (^aphari,  fried  in  ghee,. 
obtains  an  inexhaustible  supply  of  semen.f  16 

COPTCEPTION-INDUCING  PREPARATION. 

One  desirous  of  progeny  should  eat  ‘Rohita’  fish  fried  in  ghee  and 
boiled  in  such  meat-juice  of  goat’s  flesh  as  has  been  dressed  with  the 
juice  of  fruits,  and  then  drink  the  remnant  (that  is  left  in  the  pot)  of 
the  meat-juice  itselfif 


*  The  use  of  the  word  ‘medhya’,  meaning  clean,  evidently  proves  that  pork  was  regarded 
unclean,  by  the  people  of  India  at  the  time  of  Agnivega’s  work  or  even  at  the- time  of  its- 
revision  by  Charaka.  In  the  Mahabharata  occur  many  passages  which  prove  that  pork, 
was  not  regarded  as  forbidden- food. — T. 

t  tArdrani’,  literally  wet,  that  is,  not  dry,  implies  fresh. 

‘Qaphari’  is  a  sort  of  carp  ( Cyprinus  sophore).  The  mention  of  ‘gaphari  after  ‘matsya’ 
shows  that  by  the  latter  the  larger  variety  of  fish  are  implied. — T. 

.  t  To  the  meat-juice  should  first  be  added  the  expressed  juice  of  such  fruits  as  pome¬ 
granates,  &c.,  and  curds.  Pieces  of ‘Rohita’ fish-  should  be  fried  in  ghee  and  then  boiled 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1091 


TWO  PREPARATIONS  OF  CAKE  HAVING  APHRODISIAC 
VIRTUES. 

Take  some  fish  and  fowl,  and  cut  them  into  pieces. 

Pound  these  pieces  with  assafoedita,  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  and  cor- 
riander  seeds. 

Add  wheat  flour. 

Make  cakes  of  the  product,  with  the  aid  of  ghee.  18 

Take  some  fish,  and  cut  them  into  pieces. 

Mix  with  them  ghee ,  the  expressed  juice  of  pomegranates  and 
other  fruits  of  the  same  kind,  and  salt. 

Boil  the  pieces,  thus  mixed,  in  the  meat-juice  of  buffalo  flesh. 

When  the  meat-juice  enters  the  fish,  the  fish  should  then  be 
pounded.  The  bones  should  all  be  extracted.) 

To  the  pounded  fish  should  then  be  added  pepper,  cumin  seeds, 
eorriander  seeds,  a  little  assafoedita,  and  new  ghee. 

The  paste  that  results  should  be  used  as  core  or  kernel  of  cakes-: 
made  of  the  seeds  of  Phaseolus  radiatus.  19-20 

These  two  preparations  of  cakes  possess  nutritive  virtues.  They 
increase  one’s  strength.  They  promote  cheerfulness  and  bring  good- 
luck. 

Capable  of  increasing  the  semen,  these  prove  beneficial  in  the 
matter  of  the  birth  of  progeny.*  21 

MASHA  CAKES  OF  APHRODISIAC  VIRTUES. 

Take  some  seeds  of  Masha  ( Phaseolus  radiatus ),  Atmagupta 
{Mucuna pruriens),  wheat-flour,  ‘£ali’  rice,  and  ‘Shastika’  rice,  and 
reduce  them  into  a  paste. 

Take  also  sugar,  Vidari  (Batatus  paniculatus),  Ikshuraka  ( Ruellia 
longifolia ),  and  reduce  them  to  pulv. 

Mix  the  paste  and  the  pulv  with  pure  milk. 

Make  cakes  of  the  product  and  fry  them  in  ghee. 


in  such  meat-juice.  One  should  first  take  the  fish,  and  then  the  remnant  of  the  meat-juice 
in  which  these  have  been  boiled. 

It  is  the  father  who  has  been  directed  to  take  this  preparation. — T. 

*  ‘Tadgarbhamupakalpayet’  implies  that  the  core  or  kernel  of  the  cakes  should  consist  of 
the  fish-paste  ;  the  coatings  only  should  be  made  of  the  pounded  seeds  of  Phaseolus 

radiatus — T.  .  -  -  .  . 


1092 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SA  MHITA . 


Take  the  cakes  first,  and  then  drink  milk. 

Thus  taken,  the  cakes  soon  strengthen  the  virile  power.*  22-23 

ANOTHER  APHRODISIAC  PREPARATION. 

Of  sugar  take  one  Tula  (twelve  seers  and  a  half)  ; 

Of  the  ghee  of  cow’s  milk  take  also  one  Tula  (twelve  seers  and 
a  half) ; 

Of  the  pulv  of  Vid&ri  ( Batatus  paniculatus)  take  a  ‘prastha’ 
(two  seers) ; 

Of  the  pulv  of  the  fruit  of  Piper  longum  take  also  a  ‘prastha’ 
(two  seers) ; 

Of  Tugakshiri  (bambu  manna)  take  half  an  ‘adhaka’  (four  seers) ; 

Of  new  honey,  take  half  an  ‘adhaka’  (eight  seers,  because  double 
the  stated  measure  of  a  liquid  should  be  taken) ; 

Mixing  all  these  together  (by  stirring  them  with  a  stick),  keep  the 
product  in  an  earthen  jar  that  has  been  allowed  to  absorb  as  much 
ghee  as  possible. 

The  dose  should  be  agreeable  to  the  measure  of  one’s  appetite. 

It  should  be  administered  every  morning. 

This  preparation  is  one  of  the  foremost  of  aphrodisiacs.  It  in¬ 
creases  strength  also,  and  promotes  nutrition .24-26 

GHEE  CAPABLE  OF  INDUCING  BIRTH. 

Of  (the  infusion  of)  £atSvari  ( Asparagus  racemosus ),  take  a 
‘Lalwana’  (or  ‘Drona’  =  32  seers,  but  64  seers  are  implied,  the  infusion 
being  indicated) ; 

Of  (the  infusion)  of  Vidfiri  ( Batatus  paniculatus)  take  also  the 
same  measure  ; 

Of  each  of  these,  viz.,  (the  decoction  of)  Masha  ( Phaseolus  radi- 
atus ),  that  of  the  seeds  of  Atmagupta  (Mucuna  pruriens ),  and  that  of 
(^wadangshtara  ( Tribulus  lanuginosus ),  take  a ‘Lalwana’  (32  seers) ; 

In  these  (mixed  together)  cook  ghee  of  the  measure  of  a  ‘prastha’ 
(2  seers  =  4  seers  in  consequence  of  its  being  a  liquid)  ; 

When  only  4  seers  remain,  it  should  again  be  boiled  with  milk  of 


*  The  grammatical  construction  is  this  :  ‘Pishtakam’  (paste),  and  ‘churnani’  (pulv), 
‘kshire  samyojya,  pupalikah  ghrite'pachet.’ — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1093 


8  times  the  measure  (i.  e.,  8  x  4=  32  seers  =  64  seers  because  of  its 
being  a  liquid).* 

Mix  with  the  product  sugar  and  honey  (each  of  the  measure  of 
half  a  seer). 

One  desirous  of  getting  children  should  take  the  ghee  thus 
prepared.  27-28 

APHRODISIAC  BOLUSES. 

Ghee ,  of  the  measure .  of  a  ‘patra’,  should  be  boiled  with  the 
expressed  juice,  of  hundred  times  that  measure,  of  Vidfiri  (Batatus 
paniculatus). 

When  the  measure  of  the  ghee  alone  remains,  it  should  again  be 
boiled  with  cow’s  milk  of  hundred  times  that  measure. 

When  the  measure  of  the  milk  evaporates,  the  product  should  be 
mixed  with  sugar,  Tugakshiri  (bamboo  manna),  honey,  the  expressed 
juice  of  the  sugarcane,  the  pulv  of  the  fruit  of  Piper  long-urn  and  the 
pulv  of  the  seeds  of  Ajada  ( Mucuna  pruriens),  of  one-fourth  the 
measure,  in  the  aggregate. 

The  physician  should  cause  boluses  to  be  made  of  the  product 
thus  arrived  at.  Each  bolus  should  be  of  the  size  of  a  fruit  of 
Udumvara  {Ficus  glamerata ). 

By  using  these  boluses,  a  person  may  be  able  to  indulge  in  sexual 
pleasure  like  a  sparrow.f  29-3i 

APHRODISIAC  PUDDING. 

Of  pure  sugar  take  a  hundred  ‘palas’ ;  of  new  ghee  (of  cow’s  milk) 
take  half  that  measure  (50  palas)  ; 

Mix  these  with  honey  of  one-fourth  the  measure  (i,  e.,  25  palas)  ; 

Boil  all  these  in  water  of  one-fourth  the  measure  (i.  e.,  25  palas) ; 

Make  the  product  thick  by  mixing  it  with  wheat-flour  of  one-fourth 
the  measure  (*.  e.,  25  palas). 

Spreading  it  out  on  an  extended  vessel  of  stone  that  is  smooth 
and  clean,  it  should  be  kneaded  (with  the  hand),  observing  all  condi- 


*  The  boiling  should  go  on  till  only  4  seers,  that  is,  the  measure  of  the  ghee ,  remain.— T 
t  A  ‘patra  is  otherwise  called  an  ‘adhaka’,  that  is,  8  seers.  The  measure  of  the  ghee 
should,  therefore,  be  double  the  quantity  stated,  that  is,  16  seers.  The  expressed  juice  of 
Vidari  should,  therefore,  be  1600  seers.  The  measure  of  the  milk  also  should  be  1600  seers. 
That  of  the  6  other  ingredients  should  be  4  seers  in  the  aggregate. — T. 


1094 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


tions  of  cleanliness,  into  a  ‘Lapsika’  (pudding)  of  the  whiteness  of  the 
lunar  disc. 

By  taking  this  ‘Lapsika’,  a  person  is  able  to  approach  a  woman 
with  the  energy  of  an  elephant*  32-34 

All  that  is  sweet,  oily,  capable  of  promoting  longevity,  nutritive, 
heavy,  and  conducive  to  cheerfulness  of  mind,  is  said  to  be  an 
aphrodisiac. 

:  Hence,  strengthened  by  such  articles,  excited  by  one’s  own 
impulse,  and  cheered  by  the  qualifications  of  the  woman  herself, 
should  one  approach  her. 

After  indulging  in  the  act  of  congress,  one  should  take  a  bath,  and 
then  drink  a  measure  of  milk,  and  then  go  to  sleep. 

By  doing  this,  one  acquires  an  accession  of  semen  and  strength 
{without  feeling  exhausted).  35-37 

Verily,  as  the  fragrance  of  a  flower  is  not  perceived  during  its 
stage  of  a  bud  but  becomes  perceivable  only  when  it  blooms,  even  so 
is  the  case  with  the  semen  of  embodied  creatures,  (that  is,  it  is  not 
seen  when  one  is  of  immature  age  but  is  seen  when  one  arrives  . at 
maturity).  38 

One  should  not,  before  one  is  of  sixteen  years  of  age,  approach 
a  woman  for  sexual  congress.  Nor  should  one  indulge  in  such 
congress  when  one  is  past  seventy  years  of  age.  39 

A  person  of  immature  age  and,  therefore,  of  ‘dhatus’  or  ingredients 
not  all  complete,  by  indulging  in  sexual  congress,  soon  becomes  dry 
<even  as  a  lake  with  little  water  soon  becomes  dry.  4° 

An  old  man  also,  by  indulging  in  sexual  congress,  soon  breaks 
-down  even  as  a  piece  of  wood  that  is  dry,  and  without  sap,  and 
worm-eaten,  and  ricketty,  breaks  at  the  first  touch.  41 

The  semen  becomes  exhausted  in  consequence  of  decrepitude, 
■of  anxiety,  of  diseases,  of  the  fatigue  which  toil  brings,  of  fasts  or 
absence  of  food,  and  of  excessixe  indulgence.  42 

'through  loss  (or  waste  of  the  ‘dhatus’),  through  fear,  through 
modesty,  through  grief,  through  disgust  for  the  faults  (or  deficiencies) 


■  *  Qillbala’  would  mean  a  piece  of  level  stone.  The  adjective  ‘sfirna’  implies  extended. 
•If  would  seem,  however,  that  a  flat  and  large  ‘khalwi’  is  meant.  Spreading  the  materials 
•thely  should  be  kneaded  or  pressed  into  what  is  called  a  ‘Lapsika’,  j.  ‘utkarikS’,  meaning 
*  pudding  or  paste.  In  Bengali,  it  is  called  ‘mohanbhoga. , — T. 


CHAR  A  KA -SAM HIT  A .  109$ 

of  the  woman,  through  absence,  on  the  part  of  the  woman,  of  proper 
accomplishments,  through  incantations,  through  continued  abstention 
from  sexual  congress,  and  through  the  satiety  of  over-indulgence, 
one’s  ability  for  sexual  congress  disappears. 

Cheerfulness  is  dependent  upon  strength  of  both  body  and 
mind.  The  power  of  sexual  intercourse  is,  again,  dependent  upon 
cheerfulness.  43-44 

As  juice  in  the  sugarcane,  ghee  in  curds,  and  oil  in  sesame  seeds, 
even  so  does  the  semen  reside  everywhere  in  the  body,  in  the  sense 
of  touch.  45 

Like  water  issuing  from  a  piece  of  wet  cloth  (when  the  latter  is 
pressed),  the  semen  issues' out  of  its  seat,  in  consequence  of  sexual 
congress  with  woman,  owing  to  exertion,  desire,  and  pressure.*  46 

Through  gladness,  through  desire,  in  consequence  of  its  being  a 
fluid,  in  consequence  also  of  its  sliminess,  of  its  heaviness,  of  its 
downward  motion,  and  of  its  subtility,  and  owing  also  to  the  quick¬ 
ness  of  motion  which  wind  is  endued  with,  for  these  eight  reasons,  the 
semen  escapes  from  the  body. 

Of  Him  of  universe-form  who  moves  about  in  the  body,  the  semen 
is  said  to  be  the  material  form.f  47-48 

That  semen  which  is  thick,  and  sweet,  and  oily,  which  has  not 
the  scent  of  raw  meat  or  fish,  which  is  heavy,  and  slimy,  which  is 
white,  and  copious  in  quantity,  is,  without  doubt,  fruitful.  49 

That  by  which  a  man  acquires  the  power  of  sexual  congress  like 
a  stallion,  as  also  that  by  which  one  succeeds  in  indulging  repeatedly 
in  sexual  pleasure,  is  said  to  be  an  aphrodisiac.  5° 


*  ‘CheshtasankalpapidanSr  is  a  ‘dwanda’  compound.  The  causes  of  the  escape  are 
‘chesta’,  implying  exertion  or  motion  of  the  body  ;  2.  ‘sanlcalpa’,  meaning  desire  or  imma- 
gination ;  and  3.  ‘pidana’  or  pressure  (on  the  organ).  The  occasion  is  the  union  with  a 
female. 

Gangadhara  explains  the  first  line  in  this  way.  It  may  also  mean  that  the  causes  are  four, 
viz.,  1.  sexual  union  ;  2.  exertion,  meaning  motion  communicated  by  the  hand  ;  3.  ‘sanklpa’ 
or  imagination,  meaning  the  thought  of  sexual  union,  and  4.  pressure  on  the  organ  of 
congress  or  the  entire  orgaa  of  touch,  as  in  the  case  of  persons  who  die  by  hanging. — T. 

t  Gangadhara’s  reading  is  certainly  incorrect,  for  he  gives  seven  insterd  of  eight  reasons 
of  the  escape  of  the  semen.  The  correct  reading  is  ‘harshat-tarshat  &c.’  What  is  said  in  the 
last  line  of  the  verse  is  this  :  the  semen  is  the  visible  form  of  the  Supreme  Being  who 
pervades  the  body.  This  idea  is  in  accordance  with  what  is  declared  in  the  (Jrutis.— T. 

139 


1096 


CH  AR  A  K  A-  SA  MHl  TA . 


( Here  are  two  verses  containing  a  summary .) 

The  reason  of  instructions  in  respect  of  aphrodisiac  preparations, 
the  two  and  ten  superior  combinations  possessed  of  aphrodisiac 
virtues,  that  which  should  be  taken  before  indulgence  in  sexual  con¬ 
gress,  that  to  which  one  should  have  recourse  after  sexual  congress, 
the  time  (in  respect  of  age)  when  sexual  congress  may  be  indulged 
(without  injury),  the  ascertainment  of  (the  nature  and  the  seat  of) 
the  vital  seed,  and  the  meaning  of  the  word  ‘Vajikarana’  (aphro¬ 
disiac),  have  all  been  expounded  here  in  this  Section  called  ‘Pum&n- 
jfitaval&dika.’ 

Thus  ends  the  fourth  Section,  called  ‘PumSn-j&taval&dika,’  in 
Lesson  II,  called  ‘Vfijikarana’,  of  the  Division  called  ChikitsitS. 

Thus  ends  the  second  Lesson,  called  ‘Vajikarana,’  in  the  Division 
called  ‘Chikitsita’,  of  Agnivega’s  treatise  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  III. 

FEVER. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  treatment  of  Fever. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  1 

With  joined  hands,  Agnivega  asked  Punarvasu,  when  the  latter 
was  seated  at  his  ease  in  a  solitary  place  with  a  tranquil  mind,  free 
from  fever  of  every  kind,  for  an  explanation  of  his  doubts  in  respect 
of  Fever.  2 

Thy  holy  self  said  unto  us  that  Fever  is  the  foremost  of  all 
diseases,  that  it  affects  the  body,  the  senses,  and  the  mind,  that  it  is 
the  first-born  among  all  diseases,  and  that  its  strength  is  very  great.*3 

It  behoveth  thee,  O  holy  one,  for  the  good  of  the  world,  to  tell 
us  the  origin  of  Fever  which  is  the  greatest  enemy  of  all  creatures 
and  which  is  certain  to  appear  at  the  birth  and  the  death  of  all 
creatures,  and  what  are  its  manifestations,  and  results,  and  causes, 
and  incubatory  symptoms,  and  seat,  and  time  of  intensity,  and  dis¬ 
tinctive  symptoms, ;  as  also  the  varieties,  in  full,  according  to  different 


*  This  has  been  said  in  the  Division  called  ‘Nidana.’ — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


io  97 


principles  of  classification,  and  the  aspects  of  each  variety,  the  symp¬ 
toms  also  of  acute  and  mature  fevers,  as  also  the  medicines  that  are 
prescribable,  and  the  course  of  treatment ;  also  the  different  symp¬ 
toms  of  this  disease  when  it  is  about  to  leave  a  person,  and  the 
symptoms  also  when  it  has  been  allayed- ;  what  those  things  are  from 
which  one  should  be  protected  whom  fever  has  already  left  and  for 
what  time ;  what  those  causes  are  through  which  fever  that  has 
already  been  allayed  comes  back  to  afflict  a  person,  and  what  are 
those  operations  which  allay  the  fever  that  has  returned.  4-8 
Hearing  these  words  of  Agnivega,  the  preceptor  said, — 

O  amiable  one,  listen  to  all  that  should  be  said  upon  the  subject 
of  Fever !  9 

‘Jwara’,  ‘VikHra’,  ‘Roga’,  ‘Vyfidhi’,  and ‘Atanka’, — these  are  the 
several  words  of  the  same  import  by  which  disease  is  designated.  i° 
The  origin  of  fever  is  the  faults  of  body  and  mind,  for  fever  never 
seizes  a, person  whose  body  is  faultless.*  ” 

Because  men,  afflicted  by  their  own  acts,  meet  with  death,  there¬ 
fore,  one  of  the  names  of  fever  (which  brings  on  death)  is  ‘atmaja’ 
(that  which  is  born  of  one’s  own  acts).  It  has  other  names  which  are 
‘Kshaya’  (waste),  ‘Tamas’  (darkness),  ‘Jwara’  (that  which  rots  the  body), 
‘PSmpan’  (sin),  and  ‘Mrityu’  (death).  12 

Thus  has  the  ‘Prakriti’  (origin)  of  fever  been  explained.  Its 
‘Pravritti’  or  first  manifestation,  as  has  been  explained  previously,  in 
the  Division  called  ‘Nidana’,  is  from  the  excessive  wrath  of  Rudra.  13 
In  the  second  Yuga  (called  Treta),  the  deity,  Mahadeva,  adopted 
the  vow  of  wrathlessness  for  a  thousand  years  as  measured  by  the 
deities.  (Taking  advantage  of  this)  the  Asuras  began  to  afflict  him.  14 
That  lord  of  creatures,  viz.,  Rudra,  although  fully  competent  to 
put  down  the  obstacles  to  his  own  penances  as  also  the  obstacles 
to  the  penances  of  high-souled  Rishis,  merely  looked  on  with 
indifference.  r5 

Then,  again,  the  lord  of  creatures,  Daksha,  instigated  thereto  by 
the  very  deities,  did  not  verily  keep  for  Mahegwara  a  share  of  the 
sacrificial  offerings.  16 


*  ‘Prakriti’  generally  implies  ‘nature.’  Here  it  is  used  in  the  sense  of  ‘source,’  or  ‘root,’ 
or  ‘origin.’ — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1098 

Indeed,  disregarding  those  Richs  which  appertain  to  Pa?upati, 
as  also  those  libations  on  the  sacred  fire  which  appertain  to  £iva, 
both  of  which  are  necessary  to'  the  success  (or  due  accomplishment)  of 
a  sacrifice,  Daksha  performed  the  sacrificial  rites. 

Then  the  illustrious  Rudra,  conversant  with  Self,  having  passed 
the  period  of  his  vow,  beheld  the  transgression  of  Daksha.  Putting 
forth  his  terror-inspiring  aspect,  he  caused  an  eye  to  open  in  his  fore¬ 
head.  The  puissant  lord,  consuming  the  Asuras  (by  the  fiery  flames 
that  issued  from  that  eye),  created  a  child  who  seemed  to  blaze  with 
the  fire  of  wrath,  and  who  was  fully  competent  to  slay  all  foes.  l8‘I9 
At  this,  Sacrifice  (in  his  embodied  form)  became  overwhelmed 
with  disaster  ;  the  denizens  of  heaven  were  greatly  afflicted  :  other 
creatures,  blasted  and  confounded,  fled  away  in  all  directions,  20 

Then  the  deities,  with  the  seven  (great)  Rishis,  began  to  praise 
that  puissant  Lord  of  all  with  Richs  till  £iva  was  restored  to  his 
auspicious  frame  of  mind.  21 

Beholding  £iva  restored  to  his  mood  of  beneficence  towards  all 
creatures,  the  embodied  fire  of  his  wrath  (in  the  form  of  the  Being  he 
had  created  (asked  him  with  folded  hands, — What  shall  I  do  for  thee !  22 
The  Lord  of.  all  said  unto  his  (embodied)  Wrath, — “Thou  shalt 
take  the  form  of  Fever  in  the  world  !  Thou  shalt  show  thyself  at 
the  birth  of  all  creatures,  as  also  at  their  death,  and  as  well  in  the 
period  interveuing  between  birth  and  death  !  23 

Burning  (or  heat  of  body),  disgugt  for  food,  thirst,  langour  of 
body,  pains  in  the  chest, — these  are  the  ‘Prabhava’  (results)  of  Fever, 
as  also  a  great  darkness  at  the  time  of  birth  and  of  death.*  24 

Thus  the  ‘Prakriti’,  and  ‘Pravritti’,  and  ‘Prabhava’  of  Fever  have 
been  explained. 

Before  this,  in  the  Division  called  ‘Nidana’,  the  eight  causes  of 
fever  have  been  enumerated  agreeably  to  their  divisions.  25 

[The  eight  causes,  as  enumerated  in  NidSna,  are  1.  wind,  2.  bile, 
3.  phlegm,  4.  wind  and  bile,  5.  wind  and  phlegm,  6.  bile  and  phlegm, 


*  Having  explained  the  ‘Prakriti’  and  the  ‘Pravritti’  of  fever,  the  Rishi  takes  up  its 
‘Prabhava.’  The  ‘mahat’  or  great  ‘tamas’  or  darkness  which  fever  brings  in  its  train,  and 
which  overwhelms  one  at  the  time  of  birth  and  of  death,  makes  one  forget  everything.  The 
incidents  of  the  previous  life  are  forgotten  owing  to  this  darkness  just  after  birth.  Complete 
forgetfulness  also  is  brought  about  by  fever  (or  the  darkness  it  causes)  at'  the  time  of 
death. — T. 


CHAR  A  K A-S AM  HI  TA. 


1099 


7.  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  and  8.  Accidental,  such  as  wounds,  the 
ire  of  the  deities,  &c.] 

The  incubatory  symptoms  of  fever  are  inactivity  (or  slothfulness), 
tearful  eyes,  yawns,  heavines  of  the  body,  sense  of  fatigue,  uncertain 
like  or  dislike  for  the  heat  of  fire  or  of  the  sun,  for  air,  and  for  water, 
indigestion,  tastelessness  of  the  mouth,  loss  of  strength  and  com¬ 
plexion,  and  a  slight  change  of  disposition  (or  conduct).  26-27 

As  regards  the  ‘Adhishth&na’  (or  seat)  of  fever,  it  is  only  the  body 
with  the  mind. 

Its  ‘Valakfila  (time  of  intensity)  has  been  indicated  in  the  Divi¬ 
sion  called  Nid&na.  28 

The  distinctive  symptoms  of  Fever  are  both  bodily  and  mental 
burning  (i.  e.,  pain). 

There  is  no  creature  who,  when  assailed  by  fever,  does  not  burn 
(or  feel  pain).  29 

Of  two  kinds  is  fever,  according  to  different  principles  of  classi¬ 
fication. 

First,  it  is  bodily  and  mental. 

Then,  again,  it  is  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  Saumya  (pertaining  to  Soma 
or  phlegm),  and  Agneya  (pertaining  to  fire  or  the  bile),  according  to 
another  principle  of  classification.  30 

It  is,  again,  of  two  kinds  (classified  according  to  the  kind  of  ‘vega’ 
or  excitement  that  characterises  it),  viz.,  of  internal  excitement,  and 
of  external  excitement. 

It  is  also  of  two  kinds,  viz..  Normal  and  Abnormal. 

It  -is  also  classed  under  two  heads,  according  to  curability  or 
otherwise,  viz.,  Curable  and  Incurable.  31 

Then,  again,  Fever  is  seen  to  be  of  five  varieties,  considered 
according  to  the  strength  or  weakness  of  the  fault  or  faults  excited 
as  also  of  the  season  (including  the  time  of  the  day  and  the  age  of 
the  patient).  '  These  are  I.  Remittent,  2.  Double  quotidian,  3.  Quoti¬ 
dian,  4.  Tertian,  and  5.  Quartan.  32 

Then,  again,  classified  according  to  the  particular  ‘dh£tu’  it  affects, 
Fever  is  of  seven  varieties,  (viz.,  1.  that  which  affects  the  ‘Rasa’,  2.  that 
which  affects  the  blood,  3.  that  which  affects  the  flesh,  4.  that  which 
affects  the  adeps,  5.  that  which  affects  the  bones,  6.  that  which  affects 
the  marrow,  and  7.  that  which  affects  the  vital  seed). 

Fever  is,  again,  classed  under  eight  heads  according,  to  the 


IIOO 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA 


(immediate)  cause  which  generates  it ;  (viz.,  i.  that  born  of  wind, 
2.  that  born  of  bile,  3.  that  born  of  phlegm,  4.  that  born  of  wind 
and  bile,  5.  that  born  of  wind  and  phlegm,  6.  that  born  of  bile  and 
phlegm,  7.  that  born  of  all  the  three  excited  together,  and  8.  that 
which  is  accidental,  i.  e.,  born  of  wounds  and  other  accidents).  33 

Bodily  fever  appears  first  in  the  body  ;  Mental  fever  appears  first 
in  the  mind. 

The  indications  of  Mental  fever  are  cheerlessness,  absence  of 
satisfaction,  and  grief  or  pain. 

The  indications  of  bodily  fever  are  a  derangement  of  the  functions 
of  the  senses.  34 

One  afflicted  with  fever  characterised  by  excitement  of  wind  and 
bile  craves  for  things  that  are  cooling. 

One  afflicted  with  fever  characterised  by  excitement  of  wind  and 
phlegm  craves  for  things  that  are  hot. 

One  afflicted  with  fever  characterised  by  excitement  of  the  faults 
in  a  mixed  state  craves  for  both  kinds  of  things  (i.  e.,  those  that  are 
cooling  as  also  those  that  are  hot.  35 

Wind  is  highly  a  co-operative  agent  (i.  e.,  it  assumes  or  adds  to 
the  virtues  of  that  fault  with  which  it  is  associated  for  the  time  being). 
In  consequence  of  association,  it  generates  a  craving  for  both  cold 
and  heat.  When  associated  with  fire  (bile),  it  causes  burning  ;  when 
associated  with  ‘Soma’  (phlegm),  it  causes  a  sensation  of  cold.  36 

Of  fever  characterised  by  internal  excitement  the  symptoms 
noticeable  are  excessive  inward  burning,  thirst,  delirium,  hard  breath¬ 
ing,  vertigo,  pains  in  the  joints  and  bones,  the  absence  of  perspiration, 
constipation  of  the  faults  and  of  the  stools.  37 

The  symptoms  of  fever  characterised  by  external  excitement  are 
more  excessive  external  burning,  and  mildness  of  thirst  and  the  other 
symptoms.  This  variety  of  fever  is  easily  curable.  38 

That  Normal  fever  which  appears  in  spring  or  autumn  is  easily 
curable. 

Fever  is  said  to  be  Normal  according  to  its  correspondence  with 
the  varieties  of  the  season  in  which  it  appears.*  39 


*  Spring  is  the  season  when  the  phlegm  is  generally  excited.  In  autumn  it  is  the  bile 
that  is  excited.  In  the  season  of  rains,  the  wind  is  excited.  If  fever  characterised  by  excite¬ 
ment  of  phlegm  appears  in  spring,  it  is  regarded  as  Normal  to  the  season.  Similarly*. 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SAM  HIT  A . 


IIOI 

The  bile,  which  is  hot,  increases  in  intensity  when  it  is  combined 
with  heat.  It  is,  therefore,  provoked  in  autumn. 

The  phlegm,  accumulating  in  winter,  becomes  greatly  excited 
in  the  season  of  spring  (coming  after  winter).  40 

In  the  season  of  rains,  plants  and  herbs  and  water  become  charac¬ 
terised  by  acidity  in  course  of  digestion.  These  lead  to  the  accumu¬ 
lation  of  the  bile. 

The  accumulated  bile  becomes  provoked  in  the  season  of  autumn 
through  the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  quickly  generates  fever  (that  is 
characterised  by  excited  bile). 

In  such  fever  the  phlegm  becomes  a  concommitant,  being  excited 
in  a  lesser  degree. 

In  consequence  of  the  very  nature  of  the  bile  and  the  phlegm 
(both  of  which  are  liquid),  and  owing,  again,  to  the  very  nature  of 
autumn  which  is  the  season  of  Giving,  no  evil  results  can  arise  from 
fasting  (in  such  fever).*  41-42 

In  autumn  the  phlegm  is  accumulated  in  consequence  of  both  the 
water  and  plants  and  herbs  becoming  sweet  in  taste  as  also  in 
digestion. 

The  sun  being  weak  in  spring,  it  is  not  dried  up.  Hence  in  the 
season  of  spring,  it  becomes  provoked. 

Hence,  the  fever  that  appears  in  spring  is  characterised  by  excited 
phlegm.  43 

Spring  falls  within  the  season  of  Taking.  Of  fever  characterised  by- 
excited  phlegm  that  appears  in  spring,  wind  and  bile  are  concom- 
mitants  (excited  in  a  lesser  degree). 

Noting  when  the  fever  has  appeared,  that  is,  whether  it  is  the  end, 
or  the  middle,  or  the  beginning  of  autumn  and  spring,  and  ascertain¬ 
ing  the  strength  and  weakness  of  the  faults  excited,  the  physician 
possessed  of  learning  should  treat  the  disease.  44 

Fever  is  regarded  as  Normal  when  it  is  correspondent  with  the 
virtues  of  the  season  in  which  it  appears. 


if  fever  characterised  by  excited  bile  appears  in  autumn,  it  is  regarded  as  Normal.  Similarly, 
fever  characterised  by  excited  wind,  appearing  in  the  rainy  season,  is  regarded  as  Normal  to 
that  season. — T. 

*  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  the  ‘prakriti’  or  nature  of  both  the  bile  and  the  phlegm  is 
liquidity.  The  autumn,  again,  is  the  season  of  Giving,  and  not  of  Taking.  (Vide  Lesson  VI, 
SutrasthSna,  in  which  the  characteristics  of  the  seasons  of  Taking  and  Giving  have  been  fully 


ro2 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


That  fever  which  is  born  of  excited  wind  is  generally  difficult 
of  cure. 

Fever  is  regarded  as  Abnormal  when  it  is  not  correspondent  with 
the  virtues  of  the  season  in  which  it  appears.  Such  fever  is  also 
difficult  of  cure,  45 

The  diverse  causes  from  which  fever  is  born  have  been  explained 
in  that  Division  of  this  treatise  which  has  been  named  Nidana.  If 
the  patient’s  strength  is  not  impaired,  if  the  faults  have  not  been 
excited  greatly,  and  if  the  fever  is  not  accompanied  by  supervening 
symptoms,  it  is  easily  curable.  46 

That  fever  which  is  born  of  many  causes  of  great  strength  and 
which  is  characterised  by  many  symptoms,  leads  to  the  death  of  the 
person  afflicted  by  it. 

That  fever  also  which  quickly  destroys  the  senses  leads  to 
dissolution.  47 

Fever  characterised  by  great  intensity  and  delirium,  vertigo, 
and  hard  breathing,  kills  the  patient  on  the  seventh,  the  tenth, 
or  the  twelfth  day.  48 

The  fever  of  a  person  who  has  been  weakened  and  whose  limbs 
have  become  swollen,  if  it  affects  any  of  the  internal  ‘dhatus’  and  if  it 
lasts  for  the  whole  night,  is  incurable. 

That  fever  also  which  is  vident  and  in  which  the  hair  of  the  head 
becomes  parted  in  lines,  is  incurable.  49 

Faults  which  have  been  excited  intensely,  which  spread  through 
those  ducts  that  bear  the  ‘dhatu’  called  ‘Rasa’  (or  juice  into  which 
the  food  taken  is  first  converted),  which  pervade  through  the 
entire  body,  and  which  are  motionless,  generate  fever  that  is  called 
Remittent.  5° 

In  consequence  of  the  quickness  of  its  action,  such  fever,  which 
is  difficult  to  cure,  becomes  quickly  alleviated  before  seven  days,  or 
ten  days,  or  twelve  days,  or  terminates  the  life  of  the  patient.  5* 

When  the  nature  of  the  fault  excited  is  correspondent  with  that 
of  the  season,  the  ‘dhatus’  affected,  and  the  constitution  of  the  patient, 
it  generates  fever  that  is  called  Remittent. 


explained).  In  consequence  of  the  liquidity  of  the  bile  and  the  phlegm,  as  also  of  the  virti 
of  the  season  of  Giving,  when  all  creatures  become  stronger,  fasting  is  not  detrimental.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1103 

This  fever  is  difficult  to  treat.  Hence  it  should  be  known  to  be 
very  painful.*  S2 

Verily,  the  wind  and  the  other  faults  (t.  e.,  bile  and  phlegm),  being 
.excited,  simultaniously  affect  the  ‘dhatus’,  as  also  the  urine  and  the 
stools,  in  Remittent  fever.  53 

Through  the  correction  or  the  reverse  (by  administration  of  proper 
remedies)  of  the  ‘dhatus’  beginning  with  ‘Rasa’,  and  the  rest,  this 
fever  is  either  alleviated  or  terminates  in  death  within  seven,  ten,  or 
twelve  days.-]-  54 

If  the  twelve  (i.  e.,  the  seven  ‘dhatus’,  the  three  faults,  and  the 
urine  and  the  stools)  are  not  thoroughly  corrected  (by  proper  re¬ 
medies),  or,  if  all  of  them  are  not  corrected,  they  become  the  refuge  of 
Remittent  fever.J  55 

In  some  Remittent  fevers  intermission  takes  place  on  the  twelfth 
day.  The  symptoms,  however,  remain  without  outward  manifesta¬ 
tion.  Their  cure  is  difficult.  Indeed,  such  fevers  last  for  a  long 
time.  56 

Taking  note  of  these  facts,  the  physician  skilled  in  the  ordinances 
about  the  successive  steps  of  treatment,  should  take  up  the  treatment 
of  Remittent  fever  by  means  of  fasts  at  the  outset.  57 

A  particular  fault,  generally  making  blood  as  its  refuge,  generates 
fever  called  Double  Quotidian. 

This  variety  of  fever  is  capable  of  cure  by  treatment. 

The  excited  fault  that  causes  this  fever  increases  or  decreases  (in 
intensity)  in  course  of  its  continuance.  58 


*  ‘Suduhsahah’  is,  literally,  ‘very  difficult  or  painful  to  endure.’ .  What  is  stated  in  this 
verse  is  this  :  a  particular  fault  is  excited.  It  happens  to  be  correspondent  with  the  season, 
as  also  with  the  particular  ‘dhatu’  that  is  affected,  and  also  with  the  constitution  of  the 
patient.  The  result  is  the  appearance  of  Remittent  fever.  Thus  if  it  is  the  phlegm  that  is 
excited,  and  if  the  season  be  spring,  and  if  the  ‘dh5tu’  affected  be  ‘Rasa’  (i.  the  juice  into 
which  the  food  taken  is  first  converted),  and  lastly  if  the  constitution  of  the  patient  be  such 
that  the  phlegm  is  preponderant  over  the  other  two  faults,  the  result  is  the  appearance  of 
remittent  fever.  Such  fever  is  not  only  difficult  of  treatment  but  is  very  painful. — T. 

t  ‘A?eshatah’  implies  ‘of  Rasa  and  the  other  dhatus,  as  also  of  the  rest  that  are 
affected.’ — T. 

X  ‘Na  atiQudhyanti’  implies  ‘are  not  thoroughly  corrected.  ‘Na  v5  Qudhyanti  sarvaQah’ 
means  ‘or  are  not  all  corrected.’  The  latter  implies  ‘if  any  are  left  uncorrected.’ 

Some  of  the  Bengali  translators  take  the  words  ‘the  twelve’  as  meaning  ‘twelve  days’,  this 
is  ap  error.— T. 

14O 


104 


CHAR  A  KA  -SAM HIT  A. 


Double  Quotidian  fever  has  two  paroxysms  in  course  of  a  day  and 
night  (viz.,  four  and  twenty  hours),  receiving  strength  from  one  or 
another  of  these,  viz.,  time,  the  nature  of  the  patient’s  constitution, 
and  the  ‘dhatu’  or  ‘dhatus’  affected.  59 

A  particular  fault,  obstructing  those  ducts  that  bear  the  adeps, 
causes  fever  that  is  called  Quotidian. 

This  fever  is  capable  of  cure  by  treatment.  Its  paroxysms  appear 
once  in  course  of  a  day  and  night.  60 

When  a  fault  affects  the  bohe  or  the  marrow,  it  causes  either 
Tertian  or  Quartan  fever,  respectively. 

Quartan  fever  appears  at  intervals  of  two  days  ;  Tertian  at  inter¬ 
vals  of  one  day  ;  and  Quotidian  fever  appears  once  every  day..  6l* 

The  predominant  fault,  taking  refuge  in  blood,  may  also  cause 
the  variety  of  fever  called  ‘Anyedushka’  (Quotidian). 

The  (excited)  fault,  obstructing  the  adeps-bearing  ducts,  generates 
this  kind  of  fever  which  continues  for  a  whole  day  and  night  and  of 
which  there  are  remedies. 

As  regards  the  fever  called  ‘Anyedushka,’  it  occurs  every  day. 

The  fever  which  appears  every  alternate  day  is  called  ‘Tritiyaka’ 
(Tertian).  62-63 

Any  of  the  three  faults,  without  being  very  much  excited,  and 
taking  refuge  in  those  ducts  which  nourish  the  flesh,  generate  the 
fever  which  is  called  ‘Tritiyaka’  (or  tertian)  and  which  appears  once 
in  course  of  a  day  and  night.  64 

When  the  excited  fault  takes  refuge  in  the  adeps-bearing  ducts, 
it  generates  the  fever  called  ‘Chaturthaka’  (or  quartan). 

That  fever  is  called  ‘Chaturthaka’  (or  quartan)  which  appears  after 
intervals  of  two  days.f  65 


*  ‘Satataka,’  or  double  quotidian,  manifests  itself  twice  in  course  of  twenty-four  hours  ; 
that  is,  it  has  two  exacerbations  in  course  of  a  day  and  night.  It  derives  its  strength  from 
any  of  these  three,  via.,  season  or  the  hour  of  the  day/  the  nature  of  the  patient’s  consti¬ 
tution  ;  and  the  ‘dhatu’,  viz.,  blood,  that  is  vitiated.  Thus,  if  it  is  the  phlegm  that  is  predomi¬ 
nant,  it  becomes  more  excited  in  the  season  of  spring,  or  during  the  night.  If,  again,  the 
constitution  be  such  as  to  be  'under  the  control  of  phlegm,  the  excited  phlegm  gains  in 
intensity.  Then  if  the  vitiated  ‘dhatu’  be  subject  to  particular  influences,  it  may,  irrespective 
of  the  other  two,  aggravate  the  predominantly  excited  fault — T. 

t  Verses  62  to  65  are  differently  read.  I  follow  the  reading  of  Gangidhara.— T. 


CHA  RAKA  -  SA  MH/TA. 


tips 

Even  as  seeds  lie  in  the  soil  and  sprout  forth  after  sometime,  the 
faults  lie  in  the  ‘dhatus’  and  become  excited  after  a  time.*  66 

The  excited  fault,  when  it  meets  with  the  season  or  hour  of  its 
strength  and  becomes  aggravated,  makes  both  the  ‘tritiyaka’  and 
the  ‘chaturthaka’  fever  hostile  (to  life,  i.  e.,  fatal)  when  the  strength  of 
the  patient  fails.  67 

Having  put  forth  their  Intensity,  the  faults  lose  their  strength,  and 
coming ‘back  to” the  place  of  phlegm  they  become  once  more  aggra¬ 
vated  when  the  time  of  their  aggravation  comes,  and  cause  a  man  to 
have  fever  (of  the  varieties  called  ‘tritiyaka’  and  ‘chaturthaka’).  68 

‘Tritiyaka’  (or  tertian)  fever  is  of  three  varieties  :  when  phlegm 
and  bile  are  excited,  it  is  the  lower  part  of  the  spine  that  becomes 
afflicted  (with  pain)  ;  when  wind ;  and  phlegm  are  excited,  it  is  the 
back  that  is  afflicted  ;  if  it  is  the  wind  and  the  bile  that  are  excited, 
it  is  the  head  that  is  afflicted.  69 

‘Chaturthaka’  (or  quartan)  fever  shows  two  kinds  of  effects.  If  it  is 
the  calves  that  are  afflicted  (with  pain),  the  phlegm  should  be  known 
to  be  preponderant ;  if  it  is  the  head  that  is  afflicted,  the  fever  should 
be  known  to  be  born  of  wind.  7° 

There  is  another  variety  of  ‘Chaturthaka’  (or  quartan)  fever,  which 
is  called  ‘Vishama’  fever. 

It  is  of  three  kinds. 

Each  of  the  faults,  seizing  two  only  of  the  ‘dhatus’  (ingredients) 
of  the  body,  causes  this  fever.  +  71 

It  is  generally  seen  that  the  five  varieties  of  fever  mentioned 
before  are  the  result  of  all  the  three  faults  excited  together. 


*  The  sense  is  this :  a  seed  cast  into  the  soil  remains  there  without  putting  forth  its 
sprout  till  all  the  circumstances  combine  which  help  it  to  do  so.  After  the  same  manner, 
a  fault  lies  in  a  particular  ‘dh5tu’  without  being  excited,  till,  of  course,  the  causes  combine 
which  help  it  to  become  excited. — T. 

+  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  ‘ekaikah  dhStuh’,  i.  e.,  each  of  the  faults,  acting  sepa¬ 
rately,  ‘dwidhatusthah  san’,  i.  e.,  seizing  two  only  of  the  ‘dhfitus’,  viz. ,  bone  and  marrow, 
cause  this  fever  which  is  called  ‘Vishama.’  Thus,  the  wind,  seizing  bone  and  marrow,  causes 
it ;  the  bile,  seizing  the  same,  causes  it ;  and  the  phlegm,  seizing  the  same,  causes  it.  The 
faults  never  combine  to  produce  this  fever.  It  is  called  ‘Vishama’  or  abnormal  because  it  is 
npt  like  the  five  other  fevers  spoken  of  before,  in  which  the  faults  seize  all  the  five  ‘dhStus’ 
viz.,  ‘rasa’,  ‘rakta’,  “mangsa’,  ‘asthi’  and  ‘majja’  (juice,  blood,  flesh,  bone,  and  marrow). — T. 


J  506 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  fact  is,  that  particular  fault  which  predominates  over  the 
other  two  gives  its  name  to  the  fever.*  72 

In  consequence  of  the  strength  or  weakness  of  season,  of  day  and 
night,  of  the  faults,  and  of  the  mind,  as  also  of  wealth  (2.  e.,  the  acts  of 
previous  lives),  fever  obtains  its  character  as  said  before  in  respect  of 
time.f  73 

If  fever  seizes  and  dwells  in  the  ‘Rasa’  or  juices  only  (among  the 
‘dhatus’)  the  following  symptoms  manifest  themselves  ; 

Heaviness  of  the  body  ; 

Sensation  of  cold  ; 

Anxiety  and  restlessness  of  mind  ; 

Cheerlessness  of  disposition  ; 

Vomiting  and  nausea  ; 

Disgust  for  food  ; 

External  heat  of  the  body  ; 

Yawns  accompanied  by  langour  of  limbs  and  body.  74 

When  fever  seizes  and  dwells  in  the  blood,  the  symptoms  mani¬ 
fested  are  the  following : 

Pimples  having  their  origin  in  vitiated  blood  ; 

Thirst  that  is  scarcely  allayed  by  repeated  draughts  of  cold  water ; 

Frequent  retching  and  spitting  of  matter  mixed  with  blood  ; 

A  burning  sensation  all  over  the  body  ; 

Redness  of  complexion  ;  and 


*  Each  of  the  five  varieties  of  fever  is  caused  by  all  the  three  faults  excited  together. 
The  degree  of  excitement,  however,  may  differ.  Thus  the  wind  may  be  more  excited  than 
the  bile  and  the  phlegm  ;  the  bile  may  be  more  excited  than  the  wind  and  the  phlegm  ;  or 
the  phlegm  may  be  more  excited  than  the  wind  and  the  bile.  That  particular  fault  which 
predominates  over  the  other  two  gives  its  name  to  the  fever. 

In  ‘Vrshama7  fever,  only  one  fault  is  excited  and  not  the  other  two. — T. 
f  ‘ArthavajSt’  implies  ‘through  the  influence  of  wealth',  that  is,  of  the  acts  of  previous 
lives,  since  it  is  these  acts  which  determine  the  presence  or  absence  of  wealth. 

What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  fever  attains  its  character  in  respect  of  time,  that  is,  becomes 
remittent  or  intermittent,  or  quotidian  or  tertian  or  quartan,  or  ‘Vishama’,  according  to  the 
strength  or  weakness  of  season,  of  day  and  night,  of  the  faults,  of  mind,  &c.  Of  the  five 
fevers  the  first  is  more  violent  than  the  second  ;  the  second,  more  violent  than  the  third  ;  the 
third  than  the  fourth,  and  so  on.  When  the  season,  &c.,  are  strong,  quartan  fever  becomes 
tertian  ;  and  so  on.  So  when  season,  &c.,  are  weak,  remittent  fever  becomes  intermittent ; 
intermittent  fever  becomes  quotidian,  and  so  on. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


no  7 


A  sense  of  inebriation,  as  if  the  patient  has  taken  some  alcoholic 
drink  or  other  intoxicant,  accompanied  by  delirious  raving.  75 
If  fever  seizes  and  dwells  in  the  flesh,  the  following  symptoms 
manifest  themselves  : 

The  presence  of  internal  heat ; 

Excessive  thirst  (that  is  not  slaked  by  repeated  draughts  of 
cold  water) ; 

Cheerlessness  of  mind  and  pain  of  body  ; 

Constant  evacuation  of  stools  ; 

The  presence  of  a  foetid  smell  all  over  the  body  ;  and 
Repeated  tossing  of  the  limbs.  76 

When  fever  seizes  and  dwells  in  the  adeps,  the  symptoms  mani¬ 
fested  are  the  following  : 

Excessive  perspiration  all  over  the  body,  with  thirst  ;* 

Delirious  ravings ; 

Excesive  restlessness  (of  both  body  and  mind)  ; 

A  foetid  smell  in  the  mouth  ; 

Excessive  impatience  ;  and 
Pain  all  over  the  body,  and  disgust  for  food.  77 
When  fever  seizes  and  dwells  in  the  bones,  the  spmptoms  mani¬ 
fested  are  : 

Both  purging  and  vomiting  ; 

Severe  pain  in  the  bones  (as  if  they  are  breaking),  accompanied 
by  groans  of  straining  ;  and 

Constant  tossing  of  limbs ;  and  difficulty  or  heaviness  of 
breathing.  78 

When  fever  seizes  and  dwells  in  the  marrow,  the  symptoms  are  : 
Hiccup  and  difficulty  of  breathing  as  also  bronchites  (with 
cough  ; 

The  sight  of  darkness  all  around  ; 

Severe  pain  in  the  vital  parts  of  the  body  as  if  these  are  being 
torn  asunder ;  and 

A  sensation  of  cold  in  the  exterior,  with  that  of  burning  in  the 
interior.  79 

When  the  fever  seizes  and  dwells  in  the  semen,  the  symptoms 
manifested  are  these : 


*  'GangSdhara  reads  ‘swedastivrah’,  making  ‘tivrah’  an  adjective  of  ‘sweda.’  Other 
editions  read  ‘tivra  pipSsS.’  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  GangSdhara  is  correct. — T. 


CH A  RA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


1108 

The  Jiva-soul,  having  emitted  (a  copious  measure  of)  semen  and 
having  caused  a  suspension  of  the  life-breaths,  goes  out  of  the  body, 
accompanied  by  wind,  heat,  and  Soma.*  So 

„  That  fever  which  has  its  refuge  in  ‘Rasa’  (or  the  juice),  as  also 
that  which  has  its  refuge  in  the  blood,  is  curable. 

That  also  which  has  its  refuge  in  the  flesh,  and  that  which  has  its 
refuge  in  the  adeps,  are  equally  so. 

The  fever  which  has  its  refuge  in  the  bones,  as  also  that  which 
has  its  refuge  in  the  marrow,  is  difficult  to  cure. 

The  fever  which  dwells  in  the  semen  is  not  amenable  to  treatment 
(/.  e.y  is  incurable).  81 

Fever,  which  is  of  eight  kinds,  has  been  spoken  of  (in  the  Division 
called  Nidana)  with  reference  to  both  its  causes  and  symptoms. 

Explained  in  brief  before,  listen  now  to  the  symptoms  explained 
with  copiousness.f  82 

Of  fever  born  of  wind  and  bile  the  manifestations  are, — 

Horripilation,  and  burning  sensation  of  the  body,  breaking  of  the 
joints,  head-ache,  dryness  of  the  mouth  and  the  throat,  vomiting, 
thirst,  loss  of  consciousness,  vertigo,  cheerlessness  of  the  mind,  loss  of 
sleep,  excessive  loquacity,  and  yawning. 

Of  fever  born  of  wind  and  phlegm  the  manifestations  are, — 

A  sensation  of  cold,  heaviness  of  the  body,  drowsiness,  stupefac¬ 
tion  of  the  body  (accompanied  by  a  sensation  of  the  body  being 
wrapped  round  with  a  piece  of  wet  cloth  or  blanket),  pain  in  the 
■  joints,  head-ache,  catarrh  or  cold  in  nose,  bronchites  (with  cough), 
exeessive  perspiration,  heat  of  body,  and  middling  intensity  of  the 
fever.  83-84 


*  GangSdhara  explains  that  ‘gukra-sthSnam’  does  not  mean  the  place  of  ‘guk'ra’,  for, 
according  to  Hindu  physiologists,  the  ‘gukra’  or  semen  has  no  fixed  place  or  locality  [of  its 
own.  Quoting  Sugruta,  Gangadhara  explains  that  ‘gukra’  or  semen  resides  in  the  whole 
body,  as  ghee  in  milk,  or  sugar  in  the  juice  of  the  sugarcane.  Intensity  of  desire  causes  its 
appearance. 

‘Pranam’  here  stands  for  all  the  life-breaths,  viz.,  Pr5na,  Apana,  SamSna,  UdSna,  and 
VySna.  ‘Asau  vibhuh’  literally  means  ‘this  puissant  one’,  i.  e.,  the  Self  invested  with  a 
material  case  ;  in  other  words,  the  Jiva-soul.  He  goes  out  ‘with  wind,  heat,  Soma.’  This 
is  explained  by  the  commentators  as  implying  that  the  Jiva-soul  goes  out  without  being 
manifested.  He  does  not  become  dissociated  from  the  ‘tanmatras’  or  subtile  forms  of  th 
five  primordial  elements.  ‘Soma’  implies  water.  The  three  stand  for  all  the  five. — T. 
t  Fever  has  been  briefly  explained  in  Lesson  I,  Nidanasthana.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1109 


Of  fever  which  is  born  of  the  excitement  of  the  phlegm  and  the 
bile,  the  symptoms  are 

Constant  burning  of  the  body,  constant  sensation  of  cold,  frequent 
perspiration  and  frequent  stoppage  of  perspiration,  stupefaction  of 
of  mind,  bronchites  with  cough,  disgust  for  food,  thirst,  secretion  of 
phlegm  and  bile,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  stickiness  of  the  mouth, 
and  drowsiness. 

Thus  have  been  explained  the  symptoms  of  fevers  which  are  born 
of  two  faults.  Those  of  fevers  which  are  born  of  all  the  three  faults 
are  set  forth  below.  85-86 

SYMPTOMS  OF  SANNIPATA  FEVER. 

I  shall  now  lay  down  the  symptoms,  separately,  of  the  three  and 
ten  varieties  of  fever  caused  by  the  three  faults  joined  together,  which 
have  already  been  spoken  of.  87 

In  that  fever  in  which  the  wind  and  the  bile  are  predominant  and 
the  phlegm  is  excited  mildly,  the  symptoms  are  vertigo  (or  swimming 
of  the  head),  thirst,  burning  of  the  body,  heaviness  of  the  body,  and 
violent  headache.  88 

In  that  fever  in  which  the  wind  and  the  phlegm  predominate  and 
the  bile  is  excited  mildly,  the  symptoms,  it  should  be  known,  are  a 
sensation  of  coldness,  bronchites  with  cough,  disgust  for-food,  drowsi¬ 
ness,  thirst,  burning  of  the  body,  pains  all  over  the  body,  and  intense 
pain  in  the  chest.  89 

In  that  fever  in  which  the  bile  and  phlegm  predominate  and  the 
wind  is  excited  mildly,  the  following  symptoms  are  ascertained  to 
occur  :  vomiting,  a  sensation  of  cold,  frequent  burning  of  the  body, 
thirst,  stupefaction  of  the  mind,  and  pains  in  the  bones.  9° 

In  that  fever  in  which  the  wind  is  predominant  (and  the  bile  and 
the  phlegm  are  mildly  excited),  the  symtoms  are  severe  pains  in  the 
joints,  the  bones,  and  the  head,  delirious  ravings,  heaviness  of  the 
body,  vertigo,  thirst,  and  dryness  of  throat  and  mouth.  91 

In  that  fever  which  is  caused  by  the  three  faults  but  in  which  the 
bile  only  predominates,  the  symtoms  are  bloody  stools,  bloody  urine, 
burning  of  the  body,  perspiration,  thirst,  loss  of  strength,  and  swoons 
or  loss  of  consciousness.  92 

In  fever  which  is  caused  by  the  three  faults  but  in  which  the 
phlegm  predominates,  the  symptoms  are  inactivity  (or  prostration), 


10 


CHA  RA  KA -SA  MHITA . 


disgust  for  food,  nausea,  vomiting,  burning  of  the  body,  thirst,  vertigo, 
drowsiness,  and  bronchites  with  cough.  93 

In  that  fever  in  which  the  phlegm  predominates,  the  bile  is  excited 
in  a  lower  degree,  and  the  wind  in  a  degree  that  is  still  less,  the 
symptoms  are  catarrh  in  the  nose,  vomiting,  inactivity  (or  prostration) 
drowsiness,  disgust  for  food,  and  mildness  of  the  digestive  fire.  94 

In  that  fever  in  which  the  bile  predominates,  the  phlegm  is  excited 
in  a  lower  degree,  and  the  wind  in  a  degree  that  is  still  less,  the  symp¬ 
toms  that  manifest  themselves  are  yellowness  of  the  urine  as  also  of 
the  eyes,  burning  of  the  body,  thirst,  vertigo,  and  disgust  for  food.  95 

In  that  fever  in  which  the  wind  predominates,  the  phlegm  is 
excited  in  a  lower  degree,  and  the  bile  in  a  degree  that  is  still  less, 
the  symptoms  that  manifest  themselves  are  said  to  be  headache, 
shivering,  difficulty  of  breathing,  delirious  ravings,  vomiting,  and 
disgust  for  food.  96 

In  that  fever  in  which  the  phlegm  predominates,  the  wind  is 
excited  in  a  lower  degree,  and  the  bile  in  a  degree  that  is  still  less, 
the  symptoms,  it  should  be  known,  are  a  sensation  of  cold,  heaviness 
of  the  body,  drowsiness,  delirious  ravings,  and  intense  pain  in  the 
bones,  and  severe  headaches.  97 

In  that  fever  in  which  the  bile  predominates,  the  wind  is  excited 
in  a  lower  degree,  and  the  phlegm  in  a  degree  that  is  still  less,  the 
symptoms,  it  should  be  known,  are  a  sensation  of  the  breaking  of  the 
joints,  loss  of  appetite,  thirst,  burning  of  the  body,  disgust  for  food, 
and  vertigo.  9& 

In  that  fever  in  which  the  wind  predominates,  the  bile  is  excited 
in  a  lower  degree,  and  the  phlegm  in  a  degree  that  is  still  less,  the 
symptoms  that  manifest  themselves  are  difficulty  of  breathing,  bron¬ 
chites  with  cough,  catarrh  in  the  nose,  dryness  of  the  mouth,  and 
excessive  pain  in  the  ribs.  99 

We  shall  now  lay  down  the  symptoms  of  that  fever  in  which  the 
three  faults  are  equally  excited. 

At  one  time  burning  of  the  body  ;  at  another,  a  sensation  of  cold  ; 
pains  in  the  bones,  the  joints,  and  the  head.  The  eyes  become  tearful, 
turbid,  and  blood-red.  They  also  seem  as  if  they  are  ready  to 
start  out.  100 

The  ears  become  afflicted  with  pain  ;  one  continually  hears  subjec¬ 
tive  noises  within  them.  One  feels  one’s  throat  pierced  with  prickles. 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland,  U.  S.  A.  .-—You  have  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past '  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco ,  California : — . As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greatet  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent.  ...  ...  ... 
there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn. . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A , : — You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite ^-a  journal  under  my  editorial  management— will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Ohio,  U.  S.  A.  The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  liyely  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge  /—A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  Jt  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York ; — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me, 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  Amet  ican Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia: — Thank  you  for  this  erudite-  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  jt  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia  .’—I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  oj  Cashmere  .--—No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka ;  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-Western 
University,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition  : — I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to  ' 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U  S.  A.  : — Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  19,  East  38th  Street,  New  York  .-—Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Praise,  Dramstadt The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  put  the  translation  I  folly  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist : — I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising'our  readers  to'subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere ,  174,  Boulevatse,  Saint  Germain  Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  I 
arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop 
from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients 
according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and 
fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of 
the  work,  for  X  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street ,  Calcutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
[about- drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after. — 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector ,  Mymensing: — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector : — Your  patriotic, 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  A.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  : — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hypocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gya : — It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  1  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  (Yales  : — The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  fa  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the'treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  ho  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It 
a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji,— The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


PART  XXXVI. 


k  7357 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


(TRANSLA TED  INTO  ENGLISH). 


PUBLISHED  BY 

AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  Original)  WITH  COMMENT¬ 
ARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 
journal  in  Bengali)  ;  PRACTITIONER  OF  THE  HINDU 
SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C.,  &C.  ■ 


CALCUTTA: 

200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N.  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRATNA  PRESS, 
12,  SIMLA  STREET,  BYE-LANE. 

1905- 

(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved. ) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters.) 

Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — .  I  am 

surprised  thht  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention. 

.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

in  it. 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office — .  Vour 

excellent  translation  . -  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciatedffn  the  West . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  td  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

. Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Srvcden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A. — I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing,  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  ah  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St  Hailaire,  Paris : — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  UnivA-sity,  Germany : — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka.  ...... 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prineenstram  Konigsbureh,  Germany  .'—English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal  .'—I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as.  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  'to  life,, 
cannot  be  other  than,  valuable. 


ABSTRACT  OF  THE  CONTENTS 

OF 

PART  XXXVI. 

The  whole  of  this  part  deals  with  Fever  and  the  several 
methods  of  treatment. 

The  observations  of  the  Rishi  are  fraught  with  great  interest. 

The  drugs  and  their  combinations  may  be  dry  to  the  general 
reader.  But  here  and  there  the  general  reader  will  find  observa¬ 
tions  of  great  wisdom. 

Considering  that  Fever  is  a  disease  which  every  person  may 
get  at  any  time,  even  the  general  reader  should  peruse  these  pages. 

To  the  student  of  the  medicine  and  the  medical  practitioner, 
these  pages  are  simply  invaluable. 

Enshrined  in  these  aphorisms  are  many  valuable  truths  bearing 
upon  the  treatment  of  Fever. 


CH A  li  A  K A  -S' A  M til T A .  mi 

Drowsiness,  stupefaction  of  the  mind,  delirious  raving,  bronchites 
with  cough,  difficulty  of  breathing,  disgust  for  food,  and  vertigo  (also 
manifest'  themselves),  ioi 

The  tongue  becomes  as  black  as  if  it  were  charred.  It  becomes 
rough  to  the  touch.  The  body  becomes  very  slack  (that  is,  the  limbs 
lose  their  compactness).  Bilious  blood  is  vomited,  phlegmonous 
matter  being  mixed  with  it.  102 

Tossing  of  the  head,  thirst,  insomnia  (or  loss  of  sleep),  pain  in  the 
chest,  and  the  appearance,  at  long  intervals,  and  in  small  measure, 
of  perspiration,  urine,  and  stools.  103 

Absence  of  emaciation,  continuous  cooing  of  the  throat,  the 
appearance  on  the  body  of  circular  eruptions  that  are  either  dark 
or  red  in  colour,  and  that  are  like  those  called  urticaria  evanida.  i°4 

Dumbness  (or  the  absence  of  a  disposition  to  speak),  inflammation 
and  sores  in  the  outlets  of  the  bod/  (such  as  the  mouth,  the  nose,  &c.) 
enlargement  and  heaviness  of  the  abdomen,  delay  in  the  digestion  of 
the  faults, — even  these  are  the  indications  of  fever  caused  by  all  the 
three  faults  excited  equally.  i°5 

That  fever  caused  by  the  three  equally  excited  faults  is  incurable 
in  which  the  faults  become  intensely  excited,  in  which  the  digestive- 
fire  is  quenched,  and  in  which  all  the  symptoms  (as  laid  down  above) 
are  fully  manifested. 

Other  varieties  of  this  fever  are  curable  with  difficulty.  106 

In  the  Divison  called  ‘Nidana’  the  symptoms  have  been  laid 
down  of  the  three  varieties  of  fever  born  separately  (of  the  three 
faults). 

In  the  verses  above  have  been  laid  down  the  symptoms  of  those 
other  varieties  of  fever  which  are  born  of  two  faults  combined,  as  also 
of  those  which  afe  born  of  all  the  three  faults.  107 

Accidental  Fever,  which  is  the  eighth  in  the  enumeration,  (vide 
verse  ante  33),  is  of  four  varieties,  viz.,  i.  that  born  of  wounds,  2.  that 
born  of  lust  and  other  passions  as  also  of  the  contact  of  evil  spirits, 
3.  that  born  of  incantations,  and  4.  that  born  of  curses  (of  Rishis  and 
Brahmans  of  puissance).  108 

Fever  born  of  wounds  inflicted  on  the  body  by  means  of  weapons, 
brickbats  or  stones,  whips,  wooden  clubs  and  sticks,  fists,  palms 
(slaps),  teeth  (and  nails),  and  other  means  of  a  similar  nature,  is 
called  ‘Abhighataja’  or  wound-born  fevers.  109 
141 


1 1 12 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  wind,  becoming  excited  in  consequence  of  the  wound  in¬ 
flicted,  generally  vitiates  the  blood  and  generates  this  fever  that 
is  accompanied  by  pains,  swelling,  discoloration,  and  burning  of 
the  body.  110 

The  fever  that  a  person  gets  who  is  afflicted  by  lust,  or  grief,  or 
panic,  or  wrath,  as  also  that  which  arises  from  the  contact  of  evil 
spirits,  should  be  known  as  ‘Abhisangaja’  (or  contact-born).  99 

Through  lust  and  grief,  the  wind  becomes  provoked ;  through 
wrath,  the  bile  becomes  provoked  ;  and  through  contact  of  evil  spirits, 
all  the  three  faults  {viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm)  become  provoked. 

The  common  symptoms  of  fever  born  of  supernatural  spirits,  &c., 
have  been  explained  in  the  Lesson  on  Supernatural  Spirits.  &c., 
(called  ‘Unmada-Nidana’)  numbered  VII,  in  the  Division  called 
‘Nidana). 

Such  fever  is  of  eight  varieties. 

Some  are  of  opinion  that  even  the  fever  which  a  person  catches 
from  contact  with  the  air  blowing  from  a  poisonous  tree,  like  the 
fever  that  assails  a  person  already  afflicted  by  other  effects  born  of 
poison,  is  called  ‘Abhisangaja’  (or  contact-born). 

It  is  alleviated  by  treatment  directed  towards  the  neutralisation 
of  the  poison  (which  has  caused  it).  112-114 

That  violent  fever  born  of  (the  excitement  of)  all  the  three  faults, 
which  sets  in  through  incantations  and  curses  of  persons  crowned 
with  success  of  penances,  should  be  known  as  exceedingly  unbearable 
(i.  e..  fatal).  irS 

It  has  been  said  that  all  the  symptoms  which  have  been  laid  down 
of  fever  born  of  the  three  (excited)  faults  manifest  themselves  also  in 
this  fever  (viz.,  that  caused  by  incantations  as  also  that  caused  by 
curses  denounced). 

Besides  these  symptoms,  many  other  ailments  of  mind,  the  senses, 
and  the  body,  occur  in  these  two  varieties  of  fever.  116 

The  symptoms  of  these  fevers  (viz.,  that  born  of  incantations,  and 
that  born  of  curses),  are  determinable  by  knowledge  of  the  kind  of 
incantation  applied  or  of  the  kind  of  curse  denounced,  derived  from 
sight,  hearing,  inference,  or  method  of  alleviation*  IJ7 


*  The  question  is — how  are  the  symptoms  to  be  understood  or  explained  of  fevers  due 
to  incantations  and  curses.  The  answer  is  that  the  sympt  oms  correspond  with  the  kind 
of  incantations  applied  and  the  kind  of  curse  denounced.  If  one  actually  sees  ..the  particular 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1 1 13 

In  consequence  of  the  diversity  of  incantations,  as  also  of  curses 
(that  may  be  denounced),  the  symptoms  of  fever  born  of  incantations, 
as  also  of  that  born  of  curses,  vary  according  to  the  kind  of  incan¬ 
tation  that  is  applied,  or  the  kind  of  curse  that  is  denounced.  118 

The  symptom  of  fever  born  of  Lust,  it  has  been  said,  is  thought¬ 
fulness  accompanied  by  frequency  of  deep  sighs. 

In  fever  born  of  Grief,  the  symptom  is  plenitude  of  tears. 

Excess  of  fear  is  the  symptom  of  fever  born  of  Fear. 

In  fever  born  of  Wrath,  the  symptom  is  the  manifestation  of 
excessive  violence. 

In  fever  induced  by  possession  by  deities,  &c.,  the  symptoms  are 
the  exhibition  of  traits  that  are  superhuman. 

In  fever  born  of  poisons,  the  symptoms  are  excess  of  swoons, 
heedlessness,  and  pain.  119-120 

In  these  fevers  that  are  born  of  lust  and  the  rest,  in  some  men 
heat  Manifests  itself  before  (the  appearance  of)  those  symptoms,  (viz., 
thoughtfulness  and  the  rest) ;  in  some,  heat  manifests  itself  after  (the 
appearance  of)  those  symptoms  ;  and  in  some,  heat  manifests  itself 
simultaneously  (with  their  appearance).*  121 

All  those  characteristics  which  have  been  mentioned  as  belonging 
to  fevers  born  of  lust  and  the  rest,  are  said  to  be  the  characteristics 
also  of  other  diseases  born  of  lust  and  the  rest.  I22 

When  the  mind  is,  at  first,  only  assailed  by  lust  and  the  rest,  the 
fever  that  is  induced  (by  those  emotions)  does  not  acquire  that 
intensity  which  it  does  when  the  mind  is  vitiated  by  lust  and  the 
rest.f  123 

These  fevers  (which  are  born  of  lust  and  the  rest),  at  the  outset 


rites  of  incantation  that  are  gone  through,  or  the  manner  in  which  one  is  cursed,  or  if  one 
derives  a  knowledge  of  the  same  through  one’s  ears  or  through  exercise  of  the  power  of 
inference,  one  may  at  once  understand  the  kind  of  symptoms  which  are  manifested  or  which 
would  be  manifested.  Thus  the  curse  may  be— ‘Thou  shalt  be  afflicted  with  phthisis-’ 
Forthwith  the  cursed  man  gets  fever  in  which  the  symptoms  of  phthisis  appear.  The 
knowledge  of  this  curse  may  be  derived  from  hearing  or  from  inference. 

The  method  employed  for  alleviation  may  also  furnish  a  knowledge  of  the  curse. _ T. 

*  ‘Kesham’  implies  ‘of  some  men,’  ‘Esham  linganam’  has  reference  to  thoughtfulness, 
frequency  of  deep  sighs,  &c.,  as  mentioned  in  verses  119  and  120.— T. 

+  The  sense  of  this  Verse  depends  upon  the  meaning  of  *abhidruta’  and  ‘dushyati.’  The 
former  implies  a  mere  attack  ;  ‘dushyati’  implies  downright  vitiation. — T. 


1114 


CHAR  AKA -SA  MHITA 


(that  is,  before  the  vitiation  of  the  mind  takes  place),  assume  the  form 
of  only  Accidental  fevers.  But  after  the  mind  becomes  vitiated, 
the  symptoms  of  these  fevers  present  a  mixed  appearance,  correspond¬ 
ing  as  they  do  with  the  symptoms  of  the  particular  faults  that  are 
excited.  As  regards  Accidental  fevers,  they  differ  from  one  another 
in  respect  of  the  causes  from  which  they  spring,  and  of  the  medi¬ 
cines  (that  cure  them).  124 

When  the  faults  [viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm),  become  excited 
separately,  or  in  combinations  of  two,  or  all  together,; and,  overtaking 
the  dhatu  called  ‘Rasa’  (food-juice),  displace  the  digestive  fire  from 
its  place,  and  cause  an  increase  of  the  heat  of  the  body  by  mingling 
together  the  natural  heat  of  the  body  and  the  heat  of  the  digestive 
fire,  and  obstructing  all  the  ducts  of  the  body  (which  bear  the  urine, 
the  stools,  the  sweat,  and  other  impurities),  and  becoming  more 
excited  still,  seize  the  whole  body  and  generate  more  heat  in  it  (than 
before),  then  the  entire  body  of  the  person  becomes  heated  and  *  he  is 
said  to  be  assailed  by  Fever.  125-126 

Very  generally,  in  the  acute  stage  of  fever,  in  consequence  of  the 
obstruction  of  the  ducts  (which  bear  urine,  stools,  sweat  and  other 
impurities),  and  of  the  digestive  fire  being  forced  out  of  its  place,  a 
person  does  not  get  much  sweat.  127 

Disgust  for  food,  incapacity  to  digest,  heaviness  of  the  stomach, 
impurities  in  the  chest,  drowsiness,  sloth,  intensity  and  absence  of 
intermission  of  fever,  non-escape  of  the  faults,  discharge  of  salivary 
secretions,  nausea,  loss  of  appetite,  filthiness  of  the  mouth,  stupefac¬ 
tion  and  loss  of  touch  and  heaviness  of  the  body,  copiousness  of  urine, 
presence  of  undigested  matter  in  the  stools,  and  cheerlessness  (of  both 
mind  and  body), — these  are  the  symptoms  of  immature  fever.  128-129 

Hunger,  weakness,  lightness  of  the  limbs,  mildness  of  the  fever, 
escape  of  the  faults,  and  the  eighth  day, — these  are  the  symptoms  of 
fever  that  is  mature.*  :3° 

In  acute  fever  one  should  avoid  these,  viz.,  sleep  at  day  time, 
baths,  rubbing  the  body  with  oils,  heavy  food,  sexual  congress, 
indulgence  in  wrath,  breezy  spots,  physical  exercises,  and  all  food 
and  drink  that  are  of  an  astringent  taste.  131 


*  The. eighth  day  is  one  of  the  symptoms  of  mature  fever,  for  before  that  day  the  fever 
is  not  regarded  as  having  become  mature. — T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


niS 

Fast  is  laid  down  as  observable  at  the  outset  in  fever  except  the 
the  following  kinds  of  fever,  viz.,  that  fever  which  is  born  of  the  loss 
of  some  ‘dhatus,’  that  fever  in  which  the  wind  is  predominant,  that 
fever  which  is  born  of  fear,  that  which  is  born  of  wrath,  that  which  is 
born  of  lust,  that  which  is  born  of  grief,  and  that  which  is  born  of 
labour  and  fatiguing  toil.  132 

When  the  fault  that  is  excited  is  attenuated  and  when  the  digest¬ 
ive  fire  is  stirred  up  by  fast,  the  disappearance  of  the  fever,  lightness 
of  the  body,  and  appetite  are  brought  about.  *33 

The  physician  should  treat  one  who  is  afflicted  with  fever  with 
such  fast  as  is  not  hostile  to  strength.  Cure,  for  (compassing)  which 
the  course  of  operations  (called  Treatment)  exists,  has  .  strength  for 
its  basis.*  *34 

Fast,  the  administration  of  diaphoretics,  time,  gruels  (of  barley 
and  other  grains),  and  things  with  a  bitter  taste, — these  are  the  means 
which  help  the  digestion  of  the  immature  (or  undigested)  faults  in 
acute  (or  immature)  fever.f  *35 

In  fever  caused  by  (excited)  wind  and  phlegm,  warm  water  should 
be  given  (for  drink)  unto  the  patient  when  he  feels  thirsty. 

In  fever  caused  by  drinking  alcohol,  as  also  in  that  caused  by 
(excited)  bile,  the  decoction  of  bitters,  when  cool,  should  be  given  to 
the  patient  when  thirsty  .J  :36 

Both  these  kinds  of  water  are  capable  of  kindling  the  digestive 
fire,  of  digesting  (the  undigested  faults),  of  alleviating  fever,  of  cleans¬ 
ing  the  ducts,  of  infusing  strength  (into  the  system),  of  causing  a 
relish  for  food,  and  of  producing  perspiration.  137 


*  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  the  physician,  in  prescribing  fasts  should  take  care  that  the 
strength  of  the  patient  is  not  undermined.  Of  strength  it  is  further  said  that  it  forms  the 
‘adhishthana’  or  basis  of  cure  ;  for  cure  is  nothing  else  than  the  renovation  of  strength. 

‘Kriya’  means  ‘operations’,  and  ‘krama’  is  course  or  successive  steps.  ‘Kriyakrama’ 
means  treatment. — T. 

t  ‘Pachanas’,  literally  digestives,  are  those  medicines  which  cause  the  digestion  of  the 
undigested  faults.  Among  ‘pachanas,’  time  is  an  efficacious  one.  The  influence  of  time 
on  cure,  it  will  be  seen,  was  known  to  Hindu  physicians  of  ancient  times.— T. 

I  As  mentioned  in  Verse  138  below,  the" bitters,  usually  used,  are  ‘Musta’  {Cyperus 
rotundus),  Kshetraparppati’  ( Oldenlandia  biflora),  ‘Bena-mul’  (roots  of  Andropogon  rnuri- 
calum),  ‘Ralctachandana’  ( Plerocarptis  santalinus),  Bala  {Pavonia  odorata),  and  the  pulv 
of  dry  ginger, — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMH1 TA. 


1 1 16 

Water  boiled  with  ‘Musta’,  ‘Parppataka’,  ‘Ushira’,  ‘Chandana’, 
‘Udichya’,  and  ‘Nagara’,  and  rendered  cool,  should  be  given  as  a 
drink  for  alleviating  thirst  and  fever.*  138 

When  the  fever-creating  faults  of  persons  who  deserve  to  be 
subjected  to  vomiting,  are  predominated  by  phlegm,  when  they  have 
their  seat  in  the  ‘amacaya’  and  are  propelled  upwards,  they  should  be 
alleviated  by  administering  emetics  at  the  proper  time.  J39 

In  acute  (or  immature)  fever,  the  expulsion  (by  emetics)  of  faults 
that  have  no  tendency  to  come  out,  verily  causes  heart-disease, 
asthma,  epistasis,  and  loss  of  consciousness.  140 

Faults,  when  they  pervade  the  entire  body,  when  they  are  imma¬ 
ture,  and  when  they  have  their  seat  in  the  ‘dhatu’  (called  ‘Rasa’)  are 
exceedingly  difficult  of  being  expelled  and  the  attempt  to  do  it  is 
fraught  with  diseases,  even  as  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  press  out 
the  juice  of  an  unripe  fruit,  j-  Hl 

A  person  that  has  been  purged  and  made  to  vomit  should 
be  treated  with  gruels  in  time,  boiled  with  medicines  suitable 
to  the  particular  fever  under  which  he  may  be  suffering.  It 
should  be  noted  that  ‘manda’  should  be  given  ;  (then  ‘peya’ ;  then 
‘vilepi.’)4  142 

The  experienced  physician  should  do  this  till  the  fever  becomes 
mild,  or  till  the  sixth  day. 

The  digestive  fire  of  such  a  patient  becomes  enkindled  by  such 
food  ( viz .,  gruels,  in  the  forms  of  ‘manda’,  ‘peya’,  and  ‘vilepi’),  like  fire 
by  fuel.  143 

Gruels,  in  consequence  of  being  mixed  with  (proper)  medicines, 
as  also  of  their  lightness,  enkindle  the  digestive  fire,  and  help  the 
escape  of  the  obstructed  wind,  urine,  and  stools.  144 

In  consequence  of  their  being  liquid  and  hot,  they  produce  perspi¬ 
ration.  In  consequence  of  their  liquidity,  they  assuage  thirst.  In 


*  Vide  foot-note  to  verse  136  of  this  Lesson,  ante.  ‘Ushira’  means  ‘Benamula.’ 
‘Chandana’  in  such  connection  means  ‘Rakta-chandana.’  ‘Udichya’  means  ‘Bala’,  and 
‘Nagara’,  dry  ginger. — T. 


t  ‘Samah’,  that  is,  existing  with  immaturities.  ‘Dhatustha’  implies  ‘Rasadhatustha.’— T. 


+  Gruels  are  of  three  kinds,  viz.,  ‘manda,’  ‘peya,’  and 


The  second  is  thicker 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


7 


consequence  of  their  quality  as  food,  they  uphold  strength.  In  conse¬ 
quence  of  their  mobility,  they  are  light.*  r45 

In  consequence  of  their  being  congenial  to  fever,  gruels  are  alle- 
viative  of  fever.  Hence,  the  physician  possessed  of  knowledge  should 
treat  fever  with  gruels  at  the  outset.  Those  fevers,  however,  which 
arise  from  alcohol  should  not  be  so  treated.  146 

In  fever  that  manifests  itself  with  diseases  brought  about  by 
excessive  use  of  alcohol,  or  that  manifests  itself  in  a  person  who  is 
addicted  to  alcohol,  or  that  arises  in  the  summer  season,  or  that  is 
characterised  by  excess  of  bile  or  excess  of  phlegm,  or  that  assails  a 
person  who  is  suffering  from  blood-bile  with  an  upward  course, 
gruels  are  not  beneficialf  W 

In  the  fevers  enumerated  above,  only  ‘Tarpana’  (liquids  that  are 
cooling  and  nourishing^,  mixed  with  the  flour  (puiv)  of  fried  paddy, 
as  also  with  the  juice  of  such  fruits  as  are  alleviative  of  fever,  as  also 
honey  and  sugar,  should  be  given  at  the  outset.J  J48 

Unto  persons,  who  deserve  the  administration  of  ‘Tarpanas’,  the 
‘Tarpana’  that  should  be  given  for  the  alleviation  of  fever  should  be 
mixed  with  (the  juice  of)  these  fruits,  viz.,  grapes,  pomegranates, 

■  dates,  those  of  Buchanania  latifolia,  and  of  Grewia  Asiatica.  H9 

The  physician,  carefully  noting  his  capacity  to  assimilate  as  also 
his  strength,  should  then  feed  the  patient  who  is  able  to  digest  the 
‘Tarpanas’  administered,  with  the  thiiTsoup  of  the  pulse  called  ‘Mudga’ 
(. Phaseolus  Mungo),  or  with  meat-juice  made  of  the  flesh  of  wild 
animals.  15° 


*  ‘Pranaya’  means  sustaining  the  life-breaths.  The  sense,  of  course,  is  that  of  upholding 
strength. 

‘PrSna’  is  very  often  used  for  ‘strength’. — T. 

f  ‘Madatyaya’,  literally,  means  disease  brought  about  by  alcohol.  It  includes  such 
ailments  as  delirium  tremens,  &c. 

‘Madyanitya’  is  one  who  takes  alcohol  daily.  Such  a  person  may  not  be  suffering  from 
‘Madatyaya.’ 

‘Raktapitta’  is  blood-bile  ;  the  name  given  to  that  disease  which  is  characterised  by  a 
flow,  upward  or  downward,  of  blood  owing  to  the  vitiated  state  of  the  bile. 

‘Urddhaga’  implies  that  variety  of  the  disease  in  which  the  blood  flows  upwards  or  is 
vomited. — T. 

t  ‘Tarpana’  is  a  liquid  that  is  cooling  and  nourishing.  The  particle  ‘eva’  implies  that 
only  such  liquids  should  be  given,  and  not  any  other  kind  of  food.  ‘Laja’  is  fried  paddy. 
‘Qaktu’  of  ‘15ja’  means  ‘laja’  reduced  to  pulv. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


When  the  time  comes  for  giving  food  to  such  a  patient,  it  is 
proper  that  he  should  cleanse  his  teeth. 

The  material  to  be  used  should  be  of  a  taste  that  is  the  reverse 
of  the  taste  he  feels  in  his  mouth.  It  should  also  be  agreeable.  rSi 

Such  material  restores  the  relish  of  the  mouth,  as  also  a  keen 
desire  for  food  and  drink. 

It  also  enables  the  patient  to  appreciate  particular  tastes.  152 

Having  caused  the  mouth  to  be  cleansed  and  its  relish  res¬ 
tored  by  the  use  of  twigs  of  (proper)  trees,  the  physician  should  give 
the  patient  food  mixed  with  the  cream  of  curds,  the  juice  of  sugar- 
canes,  wines,  & c.  1  S3 

The  physician  should,  after  six  days  have  elapsed,  and  after  the 
fever-stricken  patient  has  been  fed  with  light  food,  cause  him  to  drink 
astringent  ‘pSchanas’  and  astringent  alleviatives.*  J54 

In  (new-born)  fever  (*.  e.,  in  the  acute  stage  of  fever),  the  faults,  in 
consequence  of  the  administration  of  astringents,  become  paralysed 
and  obstructed. 

(Through  the  action  of  astringents)  they  become  paralysed  and 
are  not  digested.  (Thus  conditioned),  they  bring  about  obstinate 
chronic  fever.f  JSS 

(The  administration'  of)  ‘KashSyas’  is  prohibited  ;  the  prohibition 
does  not  apply  to  the  form  of  medicine  implied  by  that  word. 

What  is  said  here  is  that  any  thing  which  is  astringent  in  taste 
should  be  rejected  (z.  e.,  regarded  as  forbidden).J  l56 


*  ‘Kashayam’  qualifies  both  ‘Pachanam’  and  ‘Qamaniyam.’  ‘Panchanas’  are  medicines 
that  cause  the  digestion  of  undigested  food  and  humours,  &c., 

Some  texts  incorrectly  read  ‘pratibhojaet’  for  ‘pratibhojitam.’  Gangadhara  seems  to  have 
misunderstood  this  verse.  It  does  not  mean,  as  he  explains,  that  the  physician  is  to  give 
light  food  on  the  seventh  day  and  then  on  the  eighth  day  give  astringent  ‘pachanas’,  &c. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  means  that  having  fed  the  patient  on  gruels,  &c. ,  which  are  all  light 
food,  the  physician  should,  on  the  seventh  day,  administer  ‘pachanas’  &c. — T. 

t  The  mischief  of  administering  astringents  in  new  and  acute  fever  is  pointed  out  here. 
Hence  astringents  should  not  be  administered  in  such  fevers  for  at  least  six  days. — T. 

t  The  sense  of  this  verse  is  not  very  clear.  The  version  given  here  is  offered  tentatively. 
What  the  Rishi  says  seems  to  be  this  :  the  word  ‘Kashaya’  has  two  meanings:  1.  decoc¬ 
tion  or  infusion  in  general ;  and  2.  things  having  an  astringent  taste.  The  administration 
of ‘kashSyos’ in  acute  fever  is  prohibited:  the  prohibition  does  not  apply  to  the  form  of 
medicine  called  ‘lcashaya’,  viz.,  decoction  and  infusion,  &c.  but  to  astringents  as  such  ;  i.  e., 
anything  having  an  astringent  taste.  The  forms  in  which  ‘kashayas’,  meaning  astringents, 


CHAR  A  KA  -SAM HIT  A . 


1119 

For  the  alleviation  of  the  fever  the  physician  should  cause  the 
patient  to  take,  up  to  the  tenth  day,  light  food  mixed  with  beneficial 
soups  that  are  sour  or  not  sour,  or  with  the  meat-juice,  that  is  bene¬ 
ficial,  of  (the  flesh  of)  wild  animals.  *57 

After  this  (z.  e.,  after  the  tenth  day),  when  the  phlegm  has  become 
mild,  when  wind  and  bile  have  gained  forc£,  and  when  the  faults  have 
become  matured,  the  drinking  of  (medicated)  ghees  -  operates  like 
‘Amrita’  (nectar),  is8 

If  the  physician,  after  the  tenth  day  is  over,  finds  that  the  patient 
has  his  phlegm  still  excited  to  an  inordinate  degree  and  has  not 
derived  any  benefit  from  the  observance  of  fasts,  he  should  not  then 
give  him  ghee  to  drink  but  treat  him  with  ‘kashaya’  (i.  e„  decoctions 
and  infusions,  &c.,  falling  under  the  classes  called  ‘Pachana’  or  digest¬ 
ives,  ‘£amanas’  or  alleviatives,  See.).  lS9 

As  long  as  the  phlegm  does  not  become  light  (or  attenuated), 
the  physician  should  prescribe  some  (light)  food  mixed  with  meat- 
juice,  since  such  food  is,  quite  capable  of  checking  the  (excited)  faults 
and  is,  besides,  conducive  to  strength.*  160 

Of  one  who  is  greatly  afflicted  by  burning  (of  the  skin)  and  thirst, 
the  fever  which  is  characterised  by  predominance  of  wind  and  phlegm, 
as  also  by  constipation,  or,  the  free  escape  of  the  faults,  and  which  is 
mature,  should  be  checked  by  milk  (boiled  with  proper  drugs). 1 t6i 
When  the  fever  is  not  alleviated  by  these  methods,  it  should  then 
be  alleviated  by  (administering)  purgatives,  provided  the  patient’s 
strength  and  flesh  have  not  diminished.  162 

For  a  person  who  has  been  weakened  by  fever,  neither  purging 
nor  vomiting  is  beneficial. 


•are  administered  are  five  :  I.  ‘Swarasa’,  or  expressed  juice  ;  2.  ‘Kalka’  or  paste  (produced 
by  grinding  the  substance)  ;  3.  ‘Qrita’  or  decoction  (produced  by  boiling)  ;  4.  ‘Qita’  or 
infusion  in  cold  water  ;  and  5.  ‘Phanta’  or  infusion  in  hot  water.  These  are  not  referred  to 
'here,  for  these  are  the  very  forms  in  which  sweets,  &c.,  are  also  administered. — T, 

*  What  is  stated  in  verses  159  and  160  is  this  :  if  after  the  tenth  day  the  physician  finds 
that  the  patient’s  phlegm  has  not  been  lightened  or  attenuated,  he  should  not  give  him  ghee 
but  prescribe  ‘kashayas’,  i.  e.,  ‘pachanas’,  &c.  As  regards  food  again,  the  physician  should 
prescribe  some  light  food  mixed  with  meat-juice,  inasmuch  as  such  food  checks  the  phlegm 
(and  other  faults)  and  is,  besides,  conducive  to  strength. — T 

t  A  fever  is  said  to  be  ‘vaddhadesham’  when  the  faults  excited  are  all  constipated. 
Similarly,  a  fever  is  said  to  be  ‘pracchyutadosha’  when  the  excited  faults  all  escape  from 
the  body  in  the  form  of  urine  and  stools,  or  of  secretions  such  as  sweat,  &c. — T. 

142 


120 


CHAR  A  KA -SA  MHITA . 


Verily,  the  stools  of  such  a  person  should  be  purged  by  the 
administration  of  milk  (boiled  with  proper  drugs)  or  by  the  use  of 
enemata* * * §  i63 

If  enemata  be  applied  when  the  faults  are  matured,  they  very 
soon  bring  about  strength,  digestive  fire,  disappearance  of  the  fever, 
cheerfulness,  and  relish  for'food.  i64 

Enemata  possessed  of  purging  virtues  take  away  the  bile  lying 
in  its  own  place,  as  also  phlegm  and  bile  that  lie  there  ;  they  also 
take  away  all  the  three  faults  when  these  lie  in  the  ‘pakkagaya.’f  165 
When  the  fever  has  become  old,  and  when  both  phlegm  and  bile 
are  attenuated,  then  unto  one  whose  digestive  fire  has  become  strong 
and  whose  stools  have  become  constipated  and  dry,  oily  enemeta 
should  be  given.  166 

When  there  is  a  sense  of  heaviness  or  keen  pain  (called  ‘£ula’) 
in  the  head,  when  the  organs  of  sense  have  their  functions  suspended, 
when  the  fever  has  become  mature,  the  physician  should  administer 
cerebral  purgatives  that  are  not  disagreeable.  l67 

The  physician  should,  in  mature  fever,  prescribe  (medicinal)  oils 
(or  ointments),  plasters,  and  baths  (in  medicated  waters)  after  causing 
the  body  to  be  rubbed  with  oils,  carefully  distinguishing  those  that  are 
made  of  cooling  and  those  that  are  made  of  heating  ingredients.]:  168 
By  these  means  fevers  that  affect  only  the  outer  parts  of  the 
body  become  alleviated.  The  limbs  obtain  ease.  Strength  and  com¬ 
plexion  also  increase^  i69 


*  Enemata  are,  of  course,  mild  purgatives. — T. 

+  ‘Qrangsana  vasti’  means  enemata  made  of  such  drugs  as  are  possessed  of  purgative 
properties.  ‘Pitta’  that  is  ‘pittHgayagata’,  that  is,  bile  lying  in  its  own  place,  as  also  phlegm 
and  bile  lying  in  that  place,  are  removed  by  such  enemata.  All  the  faults,  again,  while  they 
lie  in  the  ‘pakkagaya’,  are  removed  by  the  same  kind  of  enemata.  Such  enemata,  therefore, 
act  upon  the  ‘pittagaya’  and  also  the  ‘pakkagaya.’ — T. 

J  In  mature  fevers,  oils,  plasters,  and  baths  may  be  prescribed. 

By  oil  is  meant  medicated  oils  (and  not  those  oils  with  which  people  ordinarily  rub  their 
bodies  before  bathing).  The  baths  prescribable  do  not  mean  ordinary  baths  in  water,  but 
baths  in  decoctions  or  infusions  of  drugs. 

Before  prescribing  these,  the  physician  should  consider  their  ingredients.  If  made  of 
cooling  things,  such  as  sandal-paste,  &c.,  they  may  be  prescribed  in  hot  fevers,  i.  e.,  those 
which  are  born  of  excited  bile.  If  made  of  heating  ingredients,  they  are  prescribable  in  cold 
fevers,  i.  e.,  those  born  of  phlegm. — T. 

§  Fevers  are  eitheir  ‘Vahirmargagata’  or  ‘Antarmargagata.’  The  former  are  those  which 
affect  the  skin,  the  ‘lasika’,  &c.  The  latter  are  those  which'affect  the  semen,  the  ‘ojas’,  Sic.—1 T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


1 1 21 


Mature  fevers  are  alleviated  by” the  administration  of  ‘Dhupanas’ 
or  medicines  whose  smoke  is  inhaled,  as  also  of  ‘Anjanas’  or  collyria. 

Of  mature  fevers  those  also  which  remain  only  in  the  skin,  as 
also  those  which  are  born  of  such  accidental  causes  as  the  influence 
of  deities  and  Asuras,  &c.,  are  alleviated  by  the  same  means.  *7° 

Thus  has  been  expounded  the  process  of  treatment,  of  well- tested 
results,  which  alleviates  fever.  After  this,  hear  of  those  articles  upon 
which  depends  this  process.* 

Old  red  ‘£&li’  rice  and  other  grains  of  the  kind,  along  with  ‘Shash- 
tika’,  are  recommended  for  ‘yav&gu’,  ‘odana’,  and  ‘laja’. 

These  are  alleviatives  of  the  fever  of  fever-stricken  persons.f  112 

A  person  stricken  with  fever  should,  at  the  outset,  when  he  feels 
a  little  hunger  and  when  his  digestive  fire  has  been  slightly  excited, 
drink  the  fever-alleviating  ‘peya’  made  of  ‘laja’  (or  fried  paddy), 
which  is  easily  digestible,  cooked  with  the  fruit  of  Piper  longum .  and 
dried  ginger.  *73 

If  the  person  becomes  desirous  of  taking  something  that  is  sour, 
he  should  take  the  ‘peya’  (spoken  of  above),  boiling  it  with  dry  ginger 
and  made  sour  by  adding  the  juice  of  pomegranates. 

If  there  has  been  purging,  or  if  the  patient’s  bile  has  been 
excited,  the  ‘peya’  (adverted  to  above)  should  then,  (after  having 
boiled  it  with  dry  ginger)  be  drunk,  when  cooled,  with  the  addition 
of  honey.  J74 

If  there  is  pain  in  the  sides,  the  rectum,  and  the  head,  the  patient 
should  then  drink  the  ‘peya’,  that  is  alleviative  of  fever,  of  red  ‘cali’ 
and  other  varieties  of  rice,  boiled  with  Tribulus  lanuginosus,  and 
Solannm  Xantliocarpum.  x75 

If  there  is  diarrhoea  with  fever,  the  patient  should  then  drink  the 
‘peya’  (adverted  to),  mixing  it  with  the  juice  of  pomegranates  and 
boiling  it  with  Desmodium  Gangeticum ,  Si  da  cordifolia ,  AEgle  mar- 
melos ,  dry  ginger,  Nymphcea  lotus,  and  Coriandrum  sativum.  176 

If  the  fever-stricken  one  be  afflicted  with  cough,  or  asthma,  or 


*  Having  laid  down  at  the  outset  that  gruels,  &c  ,  are  to  be  given,  the  Rishi  desires  to 
explain  what  those  articles  are  from  which  these  are  to  he  prepared. — T. 

t  ‘<*aii’ and ‘Shashtika’ are  varieties  of  rice.  The  latter  is  supposed  to  ripen  in  sixty 
days.  These  and  other  grains  should  be  used  for  preparing  ‘Yavagu’  (gruels),  ‘Odana’  (food), 
and  the  ‘Laja’  (the  white  product  obtained  by  frying  paddy  on  heated  sand. — T. 


1122 


CHA  RA  KA  -  SA  MHITA . 


hiccup,  he  should  then  drink  the  ‘peya’  (adverted  to  above),  boiled  with 
the  group  of  drugs  beginning  with  ‘Vidarigandha’  ( Hedysarum  Gange- 
ticuvi)  ;  this  is  capable  of  promoting  appetite  and  perspiration.  J77 
If  the  person  afflicted  with  fever  has  his  bowels  constipated,  he 
should  then  drink  the  ‘peya’  of  barley  (or  of  red  ‘£ali’  or  ‘Shashtika’ 
rice),  boiled  with  the  fruit  of  Piper  longuni  and  those  of  Phyllanthus 
Embliccty  and  fried  in  ghee.  This  drink  is  regarded  as  capable  of 
restoring  to  the  faults  their  normal  course.  178 

If  the  fever-stricken  person  has  his  bowels  constipated  and  if  there 
be  pain  in  the  bowels,  he  should  drink  the  ‘peya’  boiled  with  ‘Mridvika’ 
(dried  grapes),  ‘Pippalimula’  (the  roots  of  Piper  longuvi),  ‘Chavya’ 
( Piper  Chaba  ;  syn.  Piper  officinarum ),  ‘Amlaka’  ( Phyllanthus  Emblica ), 
and  ‘Nagara’  (dried  ginger).  *79 

In  fevers  accompanied  by  cutting  pains  in  the  rectum,  one  should 
drink  the  ‘peya’  (of  old  red  ‘£ali’  and  ‘Shashtika’,  and  barley,  and 
other  grains),  boiled  with  the  dried  fruit  of  PEgle  Marmelos  as  also 
with  ‘Bala’  [Sida  cordifolia),  ‘Vrikshamla’  ( Tamarindns  Indica), 
‘Kolamla  (dried  fruit  of  Zizyphus  jujuba ),  ‘Kalasi’  (otherwise  called 
‘^alaparni’,  i.  e.,  Desmodium  Gangeticuni ),  and  ‘Dhavani’  (otherwise 
called  ‘Prigniparni’,  i.  e.,  Doodia  lagopodioides).  180 

If  neither  perspiration,  nor  sleep,  visits  the  fever-stricken,  and  if 
he  is  afflicted  with  thirst,  he  should  drink  the  ‘peya’  (adverted  to 
above),  boiled  with  ‘Nagara’  (dried  ginger),  and  the  fruit  of  ‘Amlaka’ 
( Phyllanthus  Emblica ),  fried  in  ghee  and  mixed  with  sugar.  ‘PeyS’  so 
prepared  is  an  alleviative  of  fever.  181 

Unto  a  fever-sticken  person  who  is  capable  of  assimilating  soups, 
the  soups  of  the  following  pulses  should  be  given,  vis.,  ‘Mudgan’ 
(Phaseolus  Mungo),  ‘Masuran’  ( Cicer  lens),  ‘Chanakan’  ( Cicer  arieti- 
num ),  ‘Kulatthan’  ( Dolichos  biflorus '),  and  ‘MukushtakSn’  (a  wild 
variety  of  Phaseolos  Mungo ).  182 

Among  pot-herbs  the  following  are  regarded  as  beneficial  in  fever, 
vis.,  the  leaves  of  Trichosanthes  dioica  along  with  its  fruit  and  stem, 
‘Papachelika’  (otherwise  called  ‘Karavella’  or  Momordica  charantia  of 
the  larger  variety),  ‘Karkotaka  (. Alangium  hexapetalum ),  and  ‘Kathil- 
laka’  C Momordica  charantia  of  the  smaller  variety)1*  l83 


*  Two  varieties  of  this  plant  are  known  :  one  is  called  ‘Karaveli’  (Bengali — Uchcche) 
which  is  identified  with  Momordica  charantia.  The  other  or  larger  variety,  called  ‘KSravella* 
is  identified  with  Momordica  muricata. — T. 


CHAR  AKA -SAM HIT  A. 


123 


The  physician  possessed  of  wisdom  should  give,  in  proper  time, 
unto  a  fever-stricken  person  who  is  capable  of  readily  assimilating 
meat,  the  meat  of  the  following  animals  which  is  alleviative  of  fever  : 
‘Lava  ( Perdix  chinensis),  ‘Kapinjala’  (francoline  partridge),  ‘Ena’  (ante¬ 
lope  of  dark  hue,  beautiful  eyes,  and  short  legs),  ‘Chakora’  (Greek 
partridge  or  Perdix  rufa),  ‘Upachakraka’  (a  variety  of  the  ruddy 
goose),  ‘Kuranga’  (small  deer),  ‘Kalapuchccha’  (deer  with  black  tail), 
‘Harina’  (large  deer  with  dappled  body),  ‘Prishat’  (porcine  deer),  and 
‘£a?a’  (hare), 

The  meat  of  these  animals  should  be  given  with  or  without  the 
juice  of  something  sour  added  to  it.  184-185 

Some  physicians  do  not  recommend,  on  account  of  its  heaviness 
and  heating  virtues,  the  meat  of  the  following  fowl,  viz.,  ‘Kukkuta1 
(domestic  fowl),  ‘Mayura’  (peacock),  •Tittiri’  (francoline  partridge), 
‘Krauncha’  (a  variety  of  heron,  Ardea  jaculator),  and  ‘Vartaka’  (a 
variety  of  quail,  Perdix  olivacea).  186 

If  in  consequence  of  fasts  in  fever,  the  strength  becomes  great  of  the 
(excited)  wind,  then  the  physician  who  is  conversant  with  the  measures 
and  composition  of  medicine,  and  who  is  acquainted  also  with  the 
requirements  of  time,  should  prescribe  even  these  (kind's  of  meat).  187 
Unto  a  fever-stricken  person  who  is  thirsty,  warm  ^ater  should  be 
given  for  drink.  To  one,  again,  that  is  readily  capable  of  assimila¬ 
ting  wines,  wines  may  be  given,  considering  the  fault  or  faults  excited 
(and  the  measure  of  their  excitement),  as  also  the  measure  of  strength 
which  the  patient  has.*  188 

In  new  (i.  e.,  immature)  fever,  the  following  kinds  of  food  are 
generally  avoided,  in  order  to  permit  the  digestion  of  the  (excited) 
faults  :  food  that  is  heavy  ;  food  that  is  possessed'  of  heating  virtues  ; 
food  that  is  oily ;  food  that  is  sweet ;  as  also  decoctions  and 
infusions.  i89 

The  courses  in  respect  of  food  and  drink,  the  results  of  which  have 
been  well  tested,  and  which  are  alleviative  of  fever,  have  been 
expounded.  After  this  those  ‘Kashayas’  which  are  destructive  of  fever, 
are  laid  down.f  19° 


*  ‘Gharmambu’  is,  literally,  hot  water.  The  fact  is,  water  that  has  been  boiled  down  to 
half  its  measure,  and  that  is  still  hot,  is  so  called. — T. 

t  Some  texts  read  ‘Anup5nakrama’.  This  is,  of  course,  a  blunder  for  ‘AnnapSnakramah’ 
which  means  the  ‘Krama’  or  course  of  food  and  drink. 


124 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA. 


The  boiled  or  cold  ‘Kashaya’  of  ‘Musta’  (tubers  of  Cypsrus  rotun¬ 
dus ),  and  ‘Parpataka’  ( Oldenlandia  biflora),  should  be  drunk  ;* 

Or,  of  ‘Nagara’  (dry  ginger)  and  ‘Parpataka’  ( Oldenlandia  biflora ), 
and  ‘DuralabhS  ( Alhagi  Maurorum ),  should  be  drunk  ;  r9i 

Or,  of  ‘Kir&tatikta’  ( Ophelia  Chireyta),  ‘Musta’  (tubers  of  Cyperus 
rotundus),  ‘Guduchi’  ( Tinospora  cordifolia),  ‘Vigwabhesaja’  (ginger), 
‘Patha’  Cissampelos  hernandifolia),  ‘Ushira’ (the  roots  of  Andropogon 
muricatnm ),'  and  ‘Udichya’  ( Andropogon  Schcenanthus),  should  be 
drunk  for  the  alleviation  of  fever,  f  :92 

These  ‘Kashayas’  are  destructive  of  fever.  They  increase  the 
strength  of  the  digestive  fire. 

They  aid  the  digestion  of  the  faults.  They  alleviate  thirst,  and 
unwillingness  or  disgust  for  food  ;  and  remove  also  the  tastelessness 
of  the  mouth.  J93 

When  the  ‘kwatha’  (decoction)  of  these  is  to  be  given,  it  should 
be  given  cold. 

The  boiled  or  cold  ‘Kashaya’  of  ‘Vatsaka’  (the  seeds  of  Holarrhena 
antidysentrica ),  ‘Aragbadha’  ( Cassia  fistula),  ‘Patha’  ( Stephania  hernan¬ 
difolia  )  ‘Shadgrantha’  ( Acorus  Calamus  of  the  white  variety),  ‘Katu- 
rohini’  ( Picrorrhiza  kurroa ),  ‘Murva’  ( Sanseviera  Zeylanica ),  ‘Ativisha’ 
(Aconitum  heterophyllum),  ‘Nimba’  (Melia  Azadirachta),  ‘Patola’ 
{Trichosanthes  dioica),  ‘Dhannayasaka’  (Alhagi  Maurorum),  ‘Vacha’ 
( Acorus  Calamus  of  the  yellow  variety),  ‘Musta’  (tubers  of  Cyperus 
rotundus),  ‘Ushira’  (roots  of  Andropogon  muricatum),  ‘Madhuka’ 
(liquorice),  ‘Triphala’  (the  three  myrobalans,  viz.,  Chebulic,  Emblic, 
and  Belleric),  and  ‘Bala’  ( Sida  cordifolia ),  which  is  alleviative  of 
fever,  should  be  drunk  by  a  person  (that  is  afflicted  with  fever).  194-195 
The  ‘kwatha’  (decoction)  of  the  above  drugs  should  be  given 
cool. 

The  following  five  ‘KashSyas’  quickly  alleviate  the  five  varieties 
of  fever,  viz,  ‘Santata’  (Remittent),  ‘Satata’  (Double  quotidian), 


*  I  retain  the  word  Kashaya’  which  has  been  used  here  to  mean  decoctions  and  infusions 
and  other  liquid  preparations  of  drugs. — T. 

t  ‘PSkya’  is  the  result  of  boiling  ;  ‘Qita’,  the  result  of  infusion  in  cold  water.  The 
decoctions,  and  infusions  of  these  three  sets  of  drugs  are  recommended  as  alleviative  of 
fever.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


i 25 


‘Anyedyuh’  (Quotidian),  ‘Tritiyaka’  (Tertian),  and  ‘Chaturthaka’ 
(Quartan). 

The  ‘KashSyas’  are  made  of  the  five  sets  of  drugs  mentioned  in 
the  five  half-verses  below  : 

1.  ‘Kalingaka’  (Cisalpina  bonducella),  the  leaves  of- ‘Patola '  {Tri- 
chosantheS  dioica ),  ‘Katurohini’  {Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ) ; 

2.  ‘Patola’  ( Trichosantkes  dioica ),  ‘£ariba’  ( Hemidesmus  Indicus), 
‘Musta’  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  ‘Patha’  ( Stephania  hernandifolia ), 
‘Katurohini,  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ) ; 

3.  ‘Nimba’  ( Melia  Azadirachta),  ‘Patola’  ( Trichosantkes  dioica ), 
‘Triphala’  (the  three  myrobalans),  ‘Mridwika’  (dried  grapes),  ‘Musta’ 
(tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  ‘Vatsaka’  (seeds  pf  Holarrhena  antidy- 
centerica) ; 

4.  ‘Kiratatikta’  ( Ophelia  Chireyta ),  ‘Amrita’  {Tinospora  cordifolia ), 
‘Chandana’  ( Pterocarpus  santalina ),  ‘Vigwabhesaja’  (ginger) ; 

5.  ‘Guduchi’  ( Tinospora  cordifolia ),  ‘Amlaka’  ( Phyllanthus  Em- 
blica),  ‘Musta’  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus ). 

‘Kwatha’  (decoction)  should  be  administered  in  Intermittent 
fevers.  196-197 

By  drinking  the  infusion  of  these  drugs,  viz.,  ‘Madhuka’  ( Bassia 
latifolia ),  ‘Musta’  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  ,‘Mridwika’  (dried 
grapes),  Kagmarya  ( Melia  arborea ),  ‘Parushaka’  ( Grewia  Asiatica ), 
‘Trayamana’  ( Ficus  heterophyllum),  ‘Ushira’  (the  roots  of  Andropogon 
muricatuni),  ‘Triphala’  (the  three  myrobalans),  and  ‘Katurohini’ 
( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa),  in  cold  water  kept  in  an  exposed  place  for  a 
whole  night, i'one  is  promptly  relieved  of  fever.  198 

(This  cold  infusion  is  prescribable  in  Intermittent  fever.)* 

The  following  preparation,  consisting  of  the  decoction  of  the  drugs 
mentioned  below,  viz.,  the  two  Vrihatis  ( Solanum  Indicum  and  Sola¬ 
rium  Xanthocarpuin ),  Vatsaka  (the  seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica ), 
Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  Devadaru  (Cedrus  deodara ), 
Mahaushadha  (dry  ginger),  Kolavalwi  (otherwise  called  Gajapippali  or 
Pothos  officinalis),  is  alleviative  of  fever  caused  by  the  excitement  of 
all  the  three  faults.  l99 

(In  fever  caused  by  the  excitement  of  all  the  three  faults  the  form 
of  the  medicine  should  be  decoction.) 


This 


occurs  in  Gangadhara’s  text.  Other  texts 


.— T. 


1126 


CHAR  AKA  -  SA  MHITA . 


A  fever-stricken  person  having  his  faults  obstructed  should  drink 
the  ‘Kashaya’  (decoction)  of  JStyamalaka  (larger  variety  of  the  fruit 
of  Phyllanthus  E  mb  lie  a),  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus ),  and 
Dhannayavfisaka  (otherwise  called  Dur&labha  or  Hedysarum  Alhagi), 
mixed  with  treacle.  200 

The  ‘KashSya*  (decoction)  of  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans), 
Trayam&na  (Ficus  heterophylluni ),  Mridvika  (dried  grapes),  and  Katu- 
rohini  (Picrorrhiza  Kurroa),  is  alleviative  of  (excited)  bile  and  phlegm. 
It  is  at  the  same  time  capable  of  restoring  to  the  faults  their  normal 
course. 

The  above  decoction,  mixed  with  Trivit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethum) 
and  sugar  is  alleviative  of  fever  born  of  (excited)  bile  and  phlegm.*  2°l 

The  following,  viz.,  £ati  ( Circuma  Zermnbei),  Pushkaramula  (this 
root  not  being  available,  that  of  Aplotaxis  auriculata  is  substituted), 
Vyaghri  (Solatium  Xanthocarpum ),  £ringi  (Rhus  succedanecP,  Dura- 
labha  (Hedysarum  Alhagi ),  Guduchi  (Tinospora  cordifolia),  Nfigara 
(Cyperus  pertenuis ),  P&tha  ' Stephania  hernandifolid),  Kirata  (Ophelia 
ChireytcP,  and  Katurohini  (Picrorrhiza  Kurroa)  constitute  what  is 
called  the  group  beginning  with  £ati.  This  group  is  alleviative  of 
fever  born  of  three  faults.  2°2 

The  decoction  is  prescribable. 

(The  decoction  of)  this  group  is  highly  commendable  in  cough, 
or  bronchites,  pains  in  the  chest,  pains  in  the  sides,  asthma  and  hard- 
breathing,  and  drowsiness.  2°3 

The  two  Vrihatis  (Solatium  Indicum  and  Solatium  Xanthocarpum), 
Paushkara  (or  Pushkaramula  for  which  the  root  of  Aplotaxis  auri¬ 
culata  is  substituted),  Bb&rgi  (Clerodendron  siphonanthus),  £ati  (Cur¬ 
cuma  Zerumbet),  £ringi  (Rhus  succedanea ),  DuralabhS  (Hedysarum 
Alhagi),  Vatsaka  (the  seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica),  Patola 
(the  leaves  of  Trichosanthes  dioica)  and  Katurohini  (Picrorrhiza), 
Kurroa ), — these  are  called  the  ‘gana’  or  group  beginning  with  Vrihati. 
This  group  is  alleviative  of  fever  born  of  the  three  faults. 

It  should  be  administered  also  in  the  diseases  beginning  with 
cough  mentioned  above,  even  when  they  are  accompanied  with 
supervening  afflictions.  204-205 


*  Gangadhara  explains  tliat  the  decoction,  without  the  pulv  of  Trivrit  and  sugar,  is  not 
efficacious  in  alleviating  fever  barn  qf  bile  and  phlegm.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


127 


The  form  in  which  the  drugs  are  to  be  administered  is  decoction. 

The  physician  should  administer  those  ‘kashayas’  (decoctions  and 
infusions),  and  gruels  also  that  have  been  laid  down,  in  the  Lesson 
on  drugs,  as  alleviative  of  thirst  and  fever.*  206 

The  fevers  that  are  not  alleviated  of  a  person  who  has  been  dried 
by  the  administration  of  ‘kashayas’  (decoctions  and  infusions),  and 
emetics,  as  also  by  fasts  and  light  food,  have  (medicated)  ghees  for 
their  remedy.  2°7 

The  heat  that  causes  fever  is  dry.  Of  a  fever-stricken  person 
who  has  been  dried  by  heat,  that  constituent  ‘dhatu’  which 
strengthens  the  heat  is  the  wind.  The  wind  is  alleviated  by  oily 
substances.f  2°8 

All  the  ‘kashSyas’  (decoctions  and  infusions)  mentioned  above, 
mixed  with  ghee ,  should  be  administered  for  the  alleviation  of 
fever.  They  are  capable  of  stirring  up  the  digestive  fire  and  are 
beneficial.  2°9 

(In  mature  fevers,  ghees  made  of  the  group  of  drugs  beginning 
with  Pippali  are  prescribable.) 

Pippali  ( Piper  longuiri),  Chandana  ( Pterocarpns  santalinus),  Musta 
(tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus ),  Ushira  (roots  of  Andropogon  muricatum ), 
Katurohini  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ),  Kalingaka  (seeds  of  Holarrhena 
antidysenterica ),  TSmalaki  (Pkyllantkus  Niruri),  SarivS  ( Hemidesmus 
Indicus ),  AtivishS  ( Aconitum  heterophyllum ),  Sthira  ( Desmodium  Gan - 
geticum ),  Draksha  (Vitis  Vinifera),  Amlaka  [Phyllanthus  Rmblica ), 
Vilwa  (fruit  of.  AEgle  Marmelos ),  Trayamana  ( Ficus  heterophylla ), 
and  Nidigdha  (Solanum  Xanthocarpum) : 

Ghee  boiled  with  these  dispels  mature  fever  the  very  day. 

It  also  cures  consumption,  bronchities,  headaches,  severe  pains  in 


*  ‘The  Lesson  on  drags’  means  Lesson  IV,  Sutrasthana,  headed  ‘The  six  centuries  of 
purgatives,’  as  also  Lesson  II,  Sutrasthana,  headed  ‘Apamarga-Tunduliya.’  Numerous  kinds 
of ‘Kashayas’  and  gruels  have  been  mentioned  there  as  alleviatives.of  thirst  and  fever.  These 
are  directed  to  be  used  for  the  alleviation  of  fever. — T. 

t  The  object  of  this  verse  is  thus  explained  by  the  commentators  :  fever  is  bom  of  the 
wrath  of  Siva.  Wrath  corresponds  with  heat  which  is  one  of  the  five  primal  essences.  Hence, 
it  may  be  asked  how  oils  can  possibly  alleviate  the  fever  of  a  person  who  has  been  dried  by 
heat  ?  Oils  are  more  likely  to  provoke  that  heat  which  has  caused  the  fever.  The  answer 
is  that  although  fever-causing  heat  is  dry  and,  therefore,  dries  up  a  person,  yet  it  is  the  wind 
that  supplies  strength  to  that  heat.  The  wind  is  always  alleviated  by  oils.  Hence,  oils 
alleviate  heat  or  heat-born  fever. — T. 

143 


1128 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


the  sides,  malignant  jaundice,  pains  in  the  shoulders,  and  irregularities 
of  the  digestive  fire.*  210-212 

{Ghee  cooked  with  the  group  of  drugs  beginning  with  Vfisaka  ) 

VSsS  {Justicia  Adhatoda),  Guduchi  {Tinospora  cordifolia),  Triphala 
(the  three  myrobalans),  Tray  am  ana  (Ficus  heterophylla ),  and  YavS- 
saka  (Hedysarum  Alhagi), — these  should  be  boiled  for  obtaining  their 
decoction.  To  the  decoction  thus  obtained  should  be  added  twice 
the  measure  of  water. 

The  mixture  should  then  be  boiled  with  the  paste  of  Pippali 
{Piper  loriguin)  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  Mridvika  (dried 
grapes),  Chandana  (. Pterocarpus  santalinus ),  Utpala  {Nympheea  stellata) 
and  Nagara  (dry  ginger). 

The  product  should  then  be  boiled  with  ghee. 

The  ghee  thus  prepared  is  alleviative  of  mature  fever.  213-214 

[Ghee  cooked  with  the  group  of  drugs  beginning  with  Bala]. 

Bala  {Sida  cordifolia ),  (^wadangshtra  (Tribulus  terrestris),  Vrihati 
{Solatium  Indicum),  Kalasi  ( Desmodium  Gangeticum),  Dhavani  ( Uraria 
lagopodioides),  Sthira  (a  variety  of  Desmodium  Gangeticum),  Nimba 
{Melia  Azadirachta :),  Parppata  {Oldenlandia  biflora),  Musta  (tubers  of 
Cyperus  rotundus ),  Tr&yamaria  {Ficus  heterophylla ),  Duralabha  {Hedysa¬ 
rum  Alhagi) : 

These  should  be  boiled  for  obtaining  their  decoction.  Take  then 
the  following  for  making  a  paste  of  them,  viz.,  Tamalaka  {Phyllanthus 
Niruri),  £ati  {Curcuma  Zerumbet),  Draksha  (grapes),  Pushkaramula 
(not  being  obtainable,  the  substitute  used  is  Aplotaxis  auriculata ), 
Meda  (not  being  obtainable  the  substitute  used  is  Aswagandha  or 
Physallis  flexuosa ),  and  Amlaka  (. Phyllanthus  Emblica). 

Mix  the  decoction  and  the  paste  together,  and  add  (cow’s)  milk 
and  the  ghee  (of  cow’s  milk),  and  boil  them  together. 

The  ghee  thus  prepared  is  highly  efficacious  in  alleviating  fever. 

It  dispels,  at  the  same  time,  thirst,  cough  and  bronchites,  (severe) 
headache,  pains  in  the  sides  and  the  shoulders.  215-217 

Unto  those  fever-stricken  persons  whose  faults  have  been  greatly 
excited,  the  intelligent  physician  should  administer  at  the  proper 
time  such  correctives  as  cause  vomiting  and  purging  and  as  have 
been  laid  down  in  the  Division  called  ‘Kalpa.’  218 

*  The  measure  of  each  of  these  articles,  as  also  the  method  of  preparation,  is  explained 
by  the  commentators. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1129 


Amongst  emetics  that  are  alleviative  of  fever,  the  following  is  one  : 

Madana  (the  fruit  of  Randia  dumetormn),  mixed  with  Pippali 
(the  fruit  of  Piper  longum )  reduced  to  paste,  or  with  Kalingas  (seeds 
of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica),  reduced  to  paste,  or  with  Madhuka 
(liquorice),  reduced  to  paste,  and  then  mixed  with  hot  water,  should 
be  drunk.  This  is  an  emetic  that  alleviates  fever.  219 

The  same  fruit  (reduced  to  paste)  mixed  with  honey  and  water 
(heated),  or  with  the  juice  of  the  sugarcane  (heated),  or  with  ‘Sain- 
dhava’  salt  and  water  (heated),  or  with  wines  (heated),  or  with 
‘Tarpana’  (heated),  is  regarded  as  a  beneficial  emetic  in  fever.*  220 

Or,  the  decoction  of  Mridvika  (dried  grapes)  and  Amlaka  (fruit  of 
Phyllanthus  Emblica)  mixed  with  the  paste  of  Madana  (fruit  of 
Randia  dumetorum ),  should  be  drunk  inasmuch  as  it  is  an  emetic 
capable  of  alleviating  fever. 

Or,  the  decoction  of  Amlaka  (fruit  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica )  alone, 
mixed  with  the  paste  of  Madana  (fruit  of  Randia  dumetorum )  and 
fried  in  ghee,  should  be  drunk  inasmuch  as  this  also  is  capable  of 
alleviating  fever.  221 

Or,  the  pulv  of  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethum )  mixed  with  honey 
and  ghee,  should  be  licked. 

Or,  the  decoction  of  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  mixed  with 
ghee,  should  be  drunk,  throwing  into  it  honey. 

(These  operate  as  purgatives.)  222  .... 

Or,  Aragbadha  (exudation  of  the  fruit  of  Cassia  fistula ),  mixed 
with  (hot)  milk,  or  the  same  mixed  with  the  decoction  of  -Mridvika: 
(dried  grapes),  or  the  pulv  of  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  mixed 
with  (hot)  milk,  or  the  pulv  of  TrayamSna  (fruit  of  Ficus  hetero- 
phylla ),  should  be  drunk  by  the  fever-stricken. f 

These  also  operate  as  purgatives.  223 

A  person  obtains  relief  'from  fever  by  drinking  the  decoction  of 
Mridvika  (dried  grapes)  and  Abhaya  (chebulic  myrobalans),  followed 
by  a  drink  of  hot  milk  ;  or  by  drinking  the  decoction  of  DrakshS 
(dried  grapes),  (pllowed  by  a  drink  of  hot  milk. 

These  also  operate  as  purgatives.  224 


*  By  ‘Tarpana’  here,  as  explained  by  Gangadhara,  is  meant  a  decoction  of  drugs  capable 
of  alleviating  the  fault  or  faults  excited,  mixed  with  the  pulv  of  fried  paddy  or  the  flour 
of  barley.— T.  • 

t  Some  texts  read  ‘Trivritam’  for  ‘Triphala  m.’— T. 


1130 


CHAR  AKA -SAM HIT  A 


By  drinking  milk  boiled  with  the  five  roots  viz.,  Vilwa  (AEgle 
Marmelos),  SyonSka  ( Colosanthes  Indicdj,  GambhSri  ( Gmelina  arborea), 
PatalS  ( Stereospermum  suave-olens),  and  GanikSri  ( Premna  serratifolia', 
a  fever-stricken  person  obtains  relief  from  bronchites,  asthma,  head¬ 
ache,  pains  in  the  sides,  and  fever.  225 

By  drinking  milk  boiled  with  the  decoction  of  the  roots  of  Eranda 
( Ricinus  Communis ),  one  obtains  relief  from  fever  accompanied  by 
aching  pains  in  the  rectum. 

By  drinking  milk  boiled  with  pieces  of  the  raw  fruit  of  Vilwa 
( AEgle  Marmelos),  one  obtains  relief  from  the  same  ailment.  226 

Milk  boiled  with  Trikantaka  (otherwise  called  Gokshura,  i.  e., 
Tribulus  lanuginosus),  Bala  (Sida  cordifolid),  VySghri  ( Solanum 
Xanthocarpum ),  Guda  (old  treacle),  and  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  cures 
suppression  of  stools  and  urine,  and  is  alleviative  of  dropsical  swell¬ 
ings  and  fever.  227 

Milk  boiled  with  N&gara  (dry  ginger)  and  MridvikS  (dried  grapes) 
and  Kharjjura  (dates),  and  mixed  (when  cooled)  with  ghee ,  honey,  and 
sugar,  is  alleviative  of  fever  accompanied  by  thirst.  228 

Milk,  boiled  with  four  times  as  much  of  water  alone,  is  alleviative 
of  fever. 

Milk,  hot  from  the  udders,  promptly  subdues  fever  caused  by 
excitement  of  wind  and  bile.  229 

Of  all  varieties  of  mature  fevers,  milk  is  the  best  alleviative.  It 
should  be  drunk  either  hot  or  cold,  after  being  boiled  with  drugs 
suited  to  the  kind  of  fever  the  patient  has.  230 

When  the  (excited)  fault  or  faults  characterising  the  fever,  has  or 
have  found  a  place  in  the  ‘pakkSgaya’,  then  such  enemata,  oily  or  dry, 
as  is  alleviative  of  fever,  should  be  administered. 

Instructions  regarding  them  will  be  laid  down  in  the  Division 
called  ‘Siddhi’  of  this  work.*  231 

The  leaves  of  Patola  ( Ttichosanthes  dioica ),  those  of  Arishta 
(Melia  Azadirachta ),  the  roots  of  Ugira  ( Andropogon  muricatum), 
Chaturangula  (otherwise  called  Aragbadha,  Cassia  fistula),  Hrivera 
(otherwise  called  BalS,  Pavonia  odorata ),  Rohinitikta  ( Picrorrhiza 
Kurroa),  ^wadanshtra  (otherwise  called  Gokshura,  Tribulus  lanugi- 


*  The  stomach  is  divided  into  two  parts,  1.  ‘am3£aya’  and  2.  ‘pakkagaya,’  Food  taken 
first  goes  into  the  farmer.  In  the  latter,  digestion  goes  on. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1131 


nosus),  Madana  (fruit  of  Randia  dumetoruni),  Sthira  (otherwise  called 
(^alaparni,  Desmodium  Gangeticuni ),  Bala  (Sida  cordifolid), — all  these 
should  be  boiled  in  milk  mixed  with  half  Its  measure  of  water. 

When  the  whole  has  been  boiled  down  to  the  measure  of  the  milk, 
the  decoction  should  be  taken  down. 

Having  strained  it  (through  a  piece  of  cloth),  it  should  then  be 
mixed  with  honey  and  ghee.  232-233 

It  should  then  be  mixed  with  the  paste  of  these  drugs,  viz., 
Madana  (fruit  of  Randia  dumetoruni),  Musta  (tubers  of  Cypei  us 
rotudus),  Pippali  (Piper  longuni),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  and  Vatsaka 
(the  seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica ). 

The  following  product  forms  an  enemata  destructive  of  fever.  234 
The  bowels  having  been  cleared  by  the  administration  of  this 
enemata,  and  the  faults  removed,  and  the  ‘dhfitus’  restored  to  cheer¬ 
fulness,  and  the  pains  of  the  limbsjrelieved,  and  the  body  made  light, 
the  patient  becomes  speedily  freed  from  fever.  23s 

Aragbadha  (Cassia  fistula ),  Ushira  (roots  of  Andropogon  muri- 
catuni),  Madana  (fruit  of  Randia  dumetoruni),  the  four  varieties  of 
Parni,  viz.,  (^alaparni,  Prishniparni,  M&shaparni,  and  Mudgaparni,  (i.  e. 
Desmodium  Gangeticuni,  Doodia  lagopodioides,  Glycine  debilis,  and 
Phaseolus  trilobus),  and  Madhuka  (liquorice) :  the  decoction  of  these, 
should  be  taken.  236 

With  the  decoction  should  be  mixed  Priyangu  (Aglaia  Rox- 
burghiand),  Madana  (fruit  of  Randia  dumetoruni),  (^atahbha  (otherwise 
called  Sulpha,  dill  seeds),  Madhuyashtika  (liquorice),  reduced  to  paste. 
Ghee,  treacle  and  honey,  should  then  be  added.  This  preparation 
forms  an  excellent  enemata  alleviative  of  fever.  237 

Guduchi  (Tinospora  cordifolid),  TrSyamana  (Ficus  heterophylla ), 
Chandana  (Pterocarpus  santalinus),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Vrisha 
(Justicia  Adhatoda ),  Sthira  (otherwise  called  ^alaparni,  Desmodium 
Gangeticuni),  Bala  (Sida  cordifolid),  Prishniparni  (Doodia  lagopodi¬ 
oides),  Madana  (the  fruit  of  Randia  dumetoruni ),  should  be  boiled 
together.  238 

The  decoction  obtained  should  be  mixed  by  the  physician  with 
the  meat-juice  of  wild  animals. 

The  result  should  then  be  mixed  with  the  paste  of  Pippali  (Piper 
longum ),  Phala  (the  fruit  of  Randia  dumetoruni),  Musta  (the  tubers  of 
Cyperus  rotundas),  and  Madhuka  (liquorice).  239 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


H32 

Mixing  the  product  then  with  a  little  salt,  and  with  honey  and 
ghee  also,  the  physician  should  apply  it  as  an  enemata.  This  enemata 
is  alleviative  of  fever,  l£.  imparts  strength  also  to  the  patient,  and 
causes  perspiration  and  relish  for  food'.  240 

Jivanti  ( Ccelogyne  ovalis),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Meda  (not  identifi¬ 
able,  Agwagandha  or  Physalis  flexuosz.  being  used  as  a  substitute), 
Pippali  {Piper  longum),  Madana  (the  fruit  of  Randia  dumetorum ), 
VachS  ( Acorus  Calamus ),  Riddhi,  (not  identifiable,  BalS,  or  Pavonia 
odorata  being  used  as  a  substitute),  Rasns,  ( Vanda  Roxburghii ),  Bala 
(Sida  cordifolia ),  Vilwa  ( zEgle  Marmelos ),  £atapushpa  (dill  seeds)* 
(fatSvari  {Asparagus  racemosus')  :  24J 

These  should  be  pounded  into  a  paste.  With  the  paste  the  physi¬ 
cian  should  boil  milk,  water,  ghee,  and  oil. 

The  result  should  be  used  as  an  oily  enemata  alleviative  of 
fever.*  242 

Patola  (leaves  of  Trichosanthes  dioica),  Pichumardda  (leaves  of 
Melia  Azadirackta ),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  and  Madana  (fruit  of  Ran¬ 
dia  dumetorum)  : 

,  These  should  be  boiled  together  with  any  of  these,  viz.,  ghee,  or 
oil,  or  fat,  or  marrow,  and  water.  The  result  will  be  an  oily  product 
that  forms  an  enemata  destructive  of  fever).  243 

Chandana  {Pterocarpus  santalinus ),  Aguru  {Aquilaria  Agallocha), 
KSgmaryya  {Gmelina  arborea),  Patola  (leaves  of  Trichosanthes  dioica ), 
Madhuka  (liquorice),  Utpala  {Nymphcea  stellata )  :  these  should  be 
pounded  into  a  paste  and  then  boiled  (with  water  and  any  of  the  four 
oily  substances  mentioned  above). 

The  result  will  be  an  enemata  that  is  highly  spoken  of  as  an 
alleviative  of  fever.  244 

The  physician  conversant  with  the  methods  of  compounding 
should  cause  cerebral  purgatives  to  be  prepared  according  to  what 
has  been  laid  down  in  Lesson  II  (of  SutrasthSna)  called  ‘ApSmSrga- 
Tunduliya’,  and  in  Lesson  VIII,  of  the  Division  called  Vim&na, 
named  ‘Roga-Bhishakjitiya.’  These  cerebral  purgatives  are  alleviative 
of  fever.f  245 


*  Ghee,  which  should  be  old,  and  the  oil  of  sesame,  should  be  together  4  seers,  the  paste 
should  be  one  seer  ;  cow’s  milk  should  be  4  seers  ;  and  water  should  be  12  seers. — T. 

t  In  bot  the  Lessons' mentioned  here,  occur  instructions  about  cerebral  purgatives. — T. 


CHA  RA  KA  -  SA  MHITA . 


1133 


Those  oils  (for  snuffing)  and  those  sticks  whose  smoke  should  be 
inhaled,  mentioned  in  the  Lesson  called  ‘MstrSgitiya’  (viz.,  V  of 
SutrasthSna),  should  be  administered  in  fever  also  (for  their  beneficial 
effects  in  that  disease).  246 

Distributing  fever  into  two  classes,  viz.,  cold  and  hot,  the  physi¬ 
cian  should,  according  to  his  desire,  use  ‘Abhyangas’  (oils  for  rubbing 
the  body  with),  ‘Pradehas’  (plasters),  and  ‘Parishekas’  (baths).  247 

The  physician  should  administer,  for  the  alleviation  of  burning 
fevers,  ghee  that  has  been  washed  a  thousand  times,  or  oils  such  as 
‘Chandanadika’,  &c.*  248 

We  shall  now  lay  down  instructions  about  the  method  of  prepar¬ 
ing  the  oil  called  ‘Chandanadika.’ 

Chandana  (Pterocarpus  santalinus),  £aleya  (otherwise  called  Sulpha 
or  dill  seeds), f  Bhadragriya  (Santalum  albunp,  Kalanusaryya  (other¬ 
wise  called  £ailaja,  a  species  of  lichen),  Bhandi  (otherwise  called 
Bhandi,  Clerodendron  infortunatmn),  Kaliya  (a  variety  of  black  sandal 
wood),  Padma  (otherwise  called  Bhargi,  Clerodendron  siphomanthus ), 
Padmaka  (otherwise  called  Padmakashtha,  a  fragrant  wood  resem¬ 
bling  toon),  Ushira  ( Andropogon  muricatum ),  Sariva  ( Hemidesmus 
Indicus)  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Prapaundarika  (root-stock  of  Nymphoea 
lotus),  Nagapushpa  (otherwise  called  Nagakecara,  Mesua  fetreci), 
Udichya(or  Bala,  Pavonia  odorata ),  Balya  (the  group  called  Balya  or 
tonics,  viz.,  1.  Aindri,  2.  Rishabhi,  3.  Atirasa,  4.  Rishyaprokta, 
5.  Payasya,  6.  Acwagandha,  7.  Sthira,  8.  Rohini,  9.  Bala,  10.  Atibala, — 
vide  Sutrasthana,  Lesson  IV,  aphorism  13,  p.  32),  Padma  ( Nelumbium 
speciosum  of  the  white  variety),  (^atapatra  (a  variety  of  Nelumbium 
speciosum  having  a  hundred  petals),  Visa  (lotus  stalks),  Mrinala  (smaller 
stalks  of  the  lotus),  £aluka  (the  root-stock  of  Nelumbium  speciosum 
and  other  plants  of  the  same' genus),  £aivfila  ( Vallisneria  octandra ), 
Kaferuka  ( Scirpus  Kysoor ),  and  Ananta,  ((roots  of  Hemidesmus 
Indicus)  ;  249 

Ku?a  (Poa  cynosuroides),  Ka?a  ( Saccharum  spontaneum ),  Ikshu 
( Saccharum  officinaruni),  Darbha  ( Saccharum  cylindricum),  (^aramula 


*  How  ‘ChandanSdika’  oils  are  prepared  is  explained  in  the  following  aphorisms. — T. 
t  Some  commentators  take  <JaHeya  as  Sulpha  or  dill  seeds.  Generally,  Qaileya  is  known 
also  by  the  name  of  Qailaja,  which  means  a  species  of  lichen.  It  is  difficult  to  say  in  what 
sense  the  word  is  used  here. — T. 


134 


CH ARAK  A-SAMH I T A. 


(roots  of Saccharum  Sard),  Nalamula  (roots  of  At  undo  karka),  (^alimula 
(roots  of  paddy  of  the  red  variety),  Jamvu  ( Eugenia  Jambolana ),  Vetra 
( Calamus  rotang ),  Vetasa  (otherwise  called  Paniamlaka,  Flacourtia 
cataphracta ),  Vanira  (a  variety  of  Calamus  rotang),  Gundra  ( Panicum 
uliginosum),*  Kukubha  (otherwise  called  Arjuna,  Pentaptera  Arjunci), 
Asana  (otherwise  called  Pitagala,  Pentaptera  tomentosd),  Acwakarna 
(a  variety  of  Shorea  robusta \  Syandana  (otherwise  called  Nemivriksha, 
not  identifiable),  Vatapotha  (otherwise  called  Kingguka,  Butea  fton- 
dosd,  (jlala  ( Shorea  robusta ),  Tala  ( Borassus  jlabelliformis ),  Dhava 
( Canocarpus  latifolid ,  Tinisa  ( Ougenia  Dalbergioides ),  Khadira  ( Acacia 
Catechu),  Kadara  (a  white  variety  of  Khadira  or  Acacia  Catechu), 
Kadamva  ( Nauclea  Cadamba ),  Kacmaryya  ( Gmelina  arborea),  Phala 
(Madanaphala,  fruit  of  Randia  durnetoruni),  Swarja  (Shorea  robusta  of 
the  larger  variety),  Plaksha  ( Ficus  infectorid),  Vata  ( Ficus  Indicd,\ 
Kapitana  (otherwise  called  Amrataka,  Spondias  mangifera,  the  hog- 
plum),  Udumvara  ( Ficus  glomerata),  Agwattha  {Ficus  religiose i),  Nya- 
grodha  (Ficus  Indicd,  Lodhra  {Symplocos  racemose t),  Dhataki  {Wood- 
fordia  floribunda,  syn.,  Grislea  tomentosd ),  Durva  {Panicum  Dactylori), 
Itkata  (called  Ikre  in  Bengali),  (^ringataka  {Trapa  bispinosd),  Manjistha 
{Rubia  cordifolid,  Jyotishmati  {Cardiospermum  Halicacabum) :  2S° 
Pushkaravija  (seeds  (5f  Nelumbium  speciosum),  Kraunchadana 
(otherwise  called  Ghanchulaka,  an  esculent  root  resembling  Colocasia 
antiquorum),  Vadavi  (otherwise  called  Kola,  Zizyphus  Jujuba),  Kovi- 
dara  (otherwise  called  Rakta-kanchana,  Bauhinia  variegata ),  Kadali 
{Musa  sapientum ),  Samvartaka  (otherwise  called  Mustaka,  Cyperus 
rotundus },  Arishtaka  (otherwise  called  Nimva,  Melia  Azadirachtd, 
£ataparva  (a  variety  of  Panicum  Dactylori),  £itakumbhika  (an  aquatic 
plant),  (^atavari  {Asparagus  racemosus ),  ^riparni  (otherwise  called 
Gambhari,  Gmelina  arborea),  Rohini'  {Picrorrhiza  Kutroa),  ^ravani 
(otherwise  called  Rakta-munderi,  Sphceranthus  hittus),  Mahagravani 
(otherwise  called  £weta-munderi,  a  variety  of  Sphceranthus  hirtus), 
(^aitapaki  (otherwise  called  Berela,  Sida  cordifolid,,  Odanpaki  (other¬ 
wise  called  Nilajhinti,  Barleria  cristata,  of  the  blue  variety),  Kala 


*  Gangadhara  explains  that  Gundra  may  stand  for  Guduchi,  i.  e„  Tinospora  cordifolia, 
or  what  he  calls  Gudarochan5.  If  this  is  the  same  plant  as  ‘Gondpater’  in  Hindi,  it  is 
identifiable  with  Panicum  uliginosum. — T. 

+  Some  texts,  such  as  Gangadhara’s,  omit  it, — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


*i3S 

(commonly  called  Nili,  Indigofera  tbtctoria :),  Bala  (stands  for  Pitabala, 
Si  da  rhombifolia  or  rhomboidea ),  Payasya  (otherwise  called  Kshira- 
kakoli,  a  bulbous  root  of  the  onion  tribe  brought  from  the  Himalayas), 
Vidari  (Batatus  paniculata ),  Jivaka  (not  identifiable,  Gu^uchi  or 
Ttnospora  cordifolia  is  used  as  a  substitute),  Rishabhaka  (not  identifi¬ 
able,  Vangalochana  or  bambu  manna  is  used  as  a  substitute),  Kshu- 
drasaha  (otherwise  called  Mudgaparni,  i.  e.,  Phaseolus  trilobus)  ;  25l 

Meda  (not  identifiable,  Agwagandha  or  Withania  somniferum,  syn. 
Physalis  ftexuosa  is  used  as  a  substitute),  Mahameda  (not  identifiable, 
Sfiriva  or  Echites  frutescens  is  used  as  a  substitute),  Madhurasi 
(otherwise  called  Murva,  Sanseviera  Zeylanica ),  Rishyaprokta  (imply¬ 
ing  either  Pitabala,  otherwise  called  MahabalS  or  Atibala,  or  £uka- 
gimbi,  i.  e.,  Mucuna  pruriens),  Trinagunya  (otherwise  called  MallikS, 
Jasminum  Sambac),  Mocharasa  (gum  of  Bombax  Malabaricum), 
Atarushaka  (otherwise  called  Vasaka,  Justicia  Adkatoda),  Vakula 
( Mimusops  Elengi ),  Kutaja  ( Holarrhena  antidysenterica ),  Patola 
(Trichosanthes  dioica ),  Nimva  (Melia  Azadirachta),  ^almali  ( Bambax 
Malabaricum),  Narikela  ( Cocos  nucifera),  Kharjjura  {Phcenix  sylvestris, 
wild  date),  Mridvika  (Vitus  vinif era,  raisins),  Piyala  (Buchanania 
latifolia ),  Priyangu  ( Aglaia  Roxburghiana),  Dhanwana  ( Grewia  elas- 
tica ),  Atmagupta  ( Mucuna  pruriens ),  and  Madhuka  ( Bassia  latifolia') ; 

Of  these  and  other  vegetable  drugs  that  may  be  obtained,  possess¬ 
ing  cooling  virtues,  the  physician  should  cause  a  decoction  to  be 
made.  25* 

With  that  decoction,  and  twice  its  measure  of  (cow’s)  milk,  and 
the  paste  of  these  very  drugs,  should  be  cooked,  on  a  slow  fire,  the  oil 
of  Tila  (sesame)  seeds,  measuring  half  the  quantity  of  the  decoction. 

This  oil,  being  only  rubbed  (on  the  patient’s  body)  promptly  alle¬ 
viates  fever  accompanied  by  a  burning  sensation  of  the  skin.*  253 

With  these  very  drugs  which  are  cooling,  reduced  to  fine  powder, 
the  physician  should  cause  plasters  to  be  made  (for  application  on  the 
patient’s  body). 

With  these  very  drugs,  again,  ‘£rita’  should  be  made.  When 
cooled,  it  should  be  used  for  sprinkling  it  over  the  patient’s  body,  as 

*  The  measure  of  the  ‘Kalka’  or  paste  should  be  a  fourth  of  the  oil.  Simply  stated, 
the  measures  are  these  :  i  part  decoction,  2  parts  cow’s  niilk,:  paste  measuring  an  eighth  of 
the  decoction  (and,  therefore,  a  fourth  part  of  the  oil),  and  oil  of  sesame  seeds  measuring 
half  of  the  decoction.  These  are  boiled  together. — T. 


144 


1136 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


also  for  causing  the  patient  to  bathe  in  it,  (‘£rita’  is  made  by  only 
boiling  drugs  in  water). 

Thus  is  prepared  the  oil  of  the  group  of  drugs  beginning  with 
Chandana  (Pterocarpus  santalinus).  254 

By  sprinkling  the  patient’s  body  with,  and  causing  him  to  bathe 
in,  water  mixed  with  wine,  Aranala  (kanji  prepared  from  raw  wheat 
properly  husked),  cow’s  milk,  Sauvira  (a  variety  of  wine  prepared 
from  paddy),  ghee ,  and  curds,  fever  accompanied  by  a  burning  sensa¬ 
tion  of  the  skin  is  promptly  relieved  in  consequence  of  the  cooling 
effects  of  the  preparation.  2ss 

( Here  are  some  verses ). 

One  that  is  afflicted  by  a  burning  sensation  (in  fever)  should  be 
made  to  lie  down  at  his  ease  on  the  cool  leaves  of  Pushkara,*  or  the 
petals  of  Padma  (Nelumbium  speciosum),or  those  of  Utpala  ( Nymphcea 
stellata),  or  the  leaves  of  Kadali  {Musa  sapientum),  textures  of  silk 
drenched  in  the  cool  water  of  sandal  paste,  or  in  houses  in  which 
fountains  of  cool  water  are  made  to  play,  or  cooling  showers  of  water 
are  made  to  fallf  256-257 

A  person  (that  is  afflicted  by  a  burning  sensation  of  the  skin) 
should  enjoy  the  touch  of  gold,  conch-shells,  corals,  gems,  and  pearls, 
as  also  things  rendered  coql  by  being  drenched  in,  or  sprinkled  over 
with,  water  in  which  has  been  dissolved  the  paste  of  white  sandal.  258 

A  person  (afflicted  by  a  burning  sensation  in  fever)  should  be 
fanned  with  wreaths  of  (the  flowers  of)  Nilotpala  ( Nymphcea  stellata) 
and  Padma  (Nelumbium  speciosum ),  or  with  diverse  kinds  of  fanning 
appliances  that  produce  cool  air  and  that  scatter  particles  of  sandal- 
water.!  259 

Rivers,  large  tanks,  pools  (with  lotuses  growing  in  them),  and 
lakes,  with  clear  water,  are  beneficial  for  baths, — and  such  baths 
alleviate  burning,  thirst,  cheerlessness,  and  fever.  2&> 

Beloved  women,  smeared  with  sandal-paste,  decked  with  gems 


*  ‘Pushkara’  generally  means  ‘Padma’  or  some  variety  of  lotus.  GangSdhara  speaks  of 
-it  as  some  kind  of  ‘Vriksha’  or  tree.  It  is  said  to  come  from  the  country  called ‘Pushkara’ 
which  is  probably  the  region  about  the  lake  known  by  that  name  in  Rajputana.— T. 
t  ‘Dhara-griha’  is  a  room  in  which  showers  of  water  fall,  or  fountains  play.— T. 
t  Fans  are  made  of  flowers  wreathed  together.  These  always  produce  cool  air.  Palm- 
leaf  fans  are  dipped  in  cool  water  in  which  sandal  paste  has  been  dissolved. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  1x37 

and  pearls,  and  inclined  to  serve  every  wish,  are  capable  of  alleviating 
the  burning  sensation  in  fever,  by  attractive  bearing.  261 

Cooling  food  and  drink,  cooling  groves,  and  cooling  breezes,  and 
rays  of  the  moon,  alleviate  fever  with  burning  sensation.  262 

Of  persons  afflicted  with  fever  in  which  things  hot  are  desired, 
we  shall  expound  the  needful  ‘Abhyangas’  and  other  processes  of 
treatment.*  263 

Aguru  (Aquilaria  Agallocha),  Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis  auriculata), 
Tagara  ( Taberncemontana  coronaria),  Nalada  (Andropogon  muricatum), 
Patra  (leaves  of  Cinnamomum  Tatriala ),  Saileyaka  (a  variety  of  lichen),. 
Dhyfimaka  {Hetnionites  cordifolia),  Harenuka  ( Piper  aurantiacum), 
Sthauneyaka  (otherwise  called  Granthiparni,  a  sort  of  gall  caused 
by  insects  on  a  tree),  Kshemaka  (otherwise  called  Haridra,  Cur- 
.  cuma  longa),\  Ela  (cardamoms  of  the  large  variety),  Varfingadala 
(leaves  Of  Priyangu  or  Aglaia  Roxburghiana ),  Pusha  (the  exudation  Of 
Balsamodendron  Mukul ),  Tamalapatra  (leaves  of  Cinnamomum 
T'dmala ),  Bhutika:  (otherwise  called  Yamani,  Ptyehotis  Ajowan ), 
Rauhisha  (a  variety  of  Kattrina,  Hemionites  cordifolia ),  Sarala  ( Pinus 
longi/olia),  <£alwaki  (otherwise  called  £ilarasa,  Liquidamber  orientalis ), 
Devadaru  ( Pinus  deodara ),  Agnimantha  ( Premna  serrati/olia),  Vilwa 
{AEgle  Marmelos),  £yonaka  {Bignonia  Indica ),  Kagmaryya  (otherwise 
called  Gambhari,  Gmelina  arborea),  Patala  ( Bignonia  suaveolens), 
Punarnav5  {Boerhavia  diffusa ),  Vrihati  {Solanum  Indicum),  Kantakari 
( Solanum  Xanthocarpum),  Vrischira  ( Boerhavia  of  the  white  variety), 
£alaparni  (Desmodium  Gangeticum),  Prisniparni  {Doodia  lagopodioides), 
MSshaparni  ( Teramnus  iabiaiis,  s'yn.  Glycine  debilis),  Mudgaparni 
{Phaseolus  trilobus ) ;  264 

Gokshura  ( Tribulus  lanuginosus),'  Eranda  ( Ricinus  Communis), 
£obhanjana  ( Moringa  pterygosperma),  Varuna  ( Capparis  trifoliata), 
Arka  ( Calatropis  gigantea),  Chiravilwa  (otherwise  called  Naktamfila, 
(Pongamia  glabra ),  Tilwaka  (otherwise  called  Lodhra,  Symplocos 
racemosd),  £ati  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet),  Pushkaramula  (not  identifiable, 


*'  ‘Jwarita’  is  a  person  afflicted  with  fever.  ‘(JitabhiprSya’  is  one  who,  feeling  a  sensa¬ 
tion  of  burning  heat,  wishes  for  cool  things.  So ‘Ushnabhipraya’ is  one  who,  feeling  cold, 
wishes  for  hot  things. 

‘Abhyangas’  are  oils  Sc.,  which  are  used' for  rubbing' the  body  With.— T. 
t  Others  identify  it  with ‘CborakSshtha’,  or ‘Ghoraka’,  or  ‘ChorapUsbpi’,  f.  Antra- 

pogcit  acicularis.—T. 


1138 


CHARAKA-SAMHJTA 


the  root  of  Aplotaxis  auriculala  is  substituted  for  it),  Gandira  (other¬ 
wise  called  Durva,  Paniculum  Dactylon ),  Uruvaka  (the  roots  of 
Ricinus  communis  of  the  red  variety),  Pattura  (called  ‘Vakam’  in 
Bengali ;  it  is  regarded  as  a  kind  of  sandal  wood),  Ccesalpina 
Sappan,  syn.  Swietenia  febrifuga),  Akshira  (a  variety .  of  Sappan  or 
red  sandal  wood),  Agmahtaka  (powdered  iron),  £igru  ( Moringa  ptery- 
gaspetma  of  the  red  variety),  M&tulanga  ( Citrus  medico),  Mushkaparni 
(otherwise  called  Danti,  Batiospermum  montanuw ),  Tilaparni  (Ptero- 
carpus  santalinus),  Piluparni  (called  ‘Morata’  in  Bengali ;  probably, 
Carey  a  arbored),  MSshagririgi  ( Asclepias  geminata ),  Hinggra  (otherwise 
called  Kakfidani ;  in  Bengali,  KaliyakarS  ;  Capparis  sepiaria ),  Danta- 
gatha  (i Citrus  acida ),  Bhallat'aka  ( Semecarpus  Anacardium ),  Aira.vatS.ka 
(otherwise  called  Hastisundi,  Heliotropium  Indicum),  Ashphotaka 
(otherwise  called  Vigalyakrit ;  in  Bengali,  Haparmali  or  AkaramSlwi ; 
Echites  dichotoma),  Kandira  ( Panicum  Dactylon  of  the  white  variety),* 
Atmagupti  ( Mucunq,  pruriens ),  Kakanda  (probably  Kakatinduka ; 
in  Bengali,  ,‘Makra-gab ;  Diospyros  tomentosa) ;  Aishika  (the'  roots  of 
(Saccharum  Sara),  Karanja  ( Pongamia  glabra),  Dhanyaka  {Corian- 
drum  sativuni),  Ajamoda  (Pimpinella  involucrata,  syn.  Apium  involu- 
ctatum),  Prithwika  (otherwise  called  ElSsukshraa,  Elettaria  cardamo- 
mum) ;  2fi5 

Sumukha  (otherwise  called  Sitarjjaka  or  Vanabarbbarlka,  a 
variety  of  Ocimum  Sanctum),  Surasa  (a  variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum ), 
Karaka  (a  variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum),  Kandira  (a  variety  of  Ocimum 
sanctum),  Kutheraka  (a  variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum),  Kalamalaka"  (a 
variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum),  Parnasa  (a  variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum ), 
Kshavaka  ( Dregea  volubilis),  Phanijjhaka  (a  variety  of  Ocimum 
sanctum),  Bhustrina  ( Andropogonschcenanthus ),  ^ringavera  (dry  ginger), 
Pippali  ( Piper  longuvi ),  Sarshapa  (mustard  seeds),  Agwagandha. 
( Physalis  flexuosa ),  RasnS  (. Vanda  Roxburghii),  Ruha  (otherwise 
called  NiladurvS ;  a  blue  variety  of  Panicum  Dactylon),  Avaroha 
(otherwise  called  Vatavaroha,  hanging  roots  of  the  banian),  Bala  ( Sida 
cordifolia ),  Atibala  (Sida  rhombifqlia),  Vacha  (A corns  Calamus),  Gugluchi 
(Tinospora  cordifolia),  £atapushpa  (Pucedanum  sozva),  ^itavalwi  (not 
identifiable),  Nskuli  (a  variety  of  Rasna  or  Vanda  Roxburghii), 


*  'this  is  obtained  by  making  the  common  ‘DurvS.’  grow  under  the  cover  of  a  tub  or  some 
other  substance.— T. 


CHAR  AK A-S  A  MHITA. 


ii39 


Gandha-Nakuli  (a  variety  of  Nakuli,  having  a  strong  scent),  £weta 
(a  white  variety  of  Clitoria  Ternatea ),  Jyotishmati  ( Cardiospermunt 
Halicdcabum ),  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  Adhyanda  (otherwise 
called  £ukacimbi,  Mucuna  pruriens),  Amla-chfingeri  {Oxalis  cotni- 
culata ),  Tila  (sesame  seeds),  Vadara  (Zizyphus  Jujuba),  Kulattha 
( Dolichos  biflorus) ;  266 

The  physician  should  cause  a  decoction  to  be  made  of  these  drugs 
and  others  of  the  kind,  which  are  of  heating  virtues.  Indeed,  he  may 
take  as  many  of  these  as  are  available.  267 

With  that  decoction,  and  the  paste  also  of  these  very  drugs,  and 
the  following  added  thereto,  viz.,  ‘Sura’,  ‘Sauvira’,  ‘Tushodaka’, 
‘Maireya’  ‘Medaka’,  ‘Dadhimanda’,  ‘Aranala’,  and  ‘Katfara’,  (sesame) 
oil  of  the  measure  of  a  ‘patra’  (8  seers)  should  be  boiled.*  268 

With  that  oil,  while  lukewarm,  the  fever-stricken  person  that  is 
desirous  of  hot  things  should  be  rubbed. 

This  medicine  relieves  cold  fevers  (that  is,  those  in  which  the 
patient  feels  a  sensation  of.  cold  and,  therefore,  wishes  for  hot 
things).  269 

With  these  very  drugs,  pounded  into  a  grainless  paste  and  slightly 
heated,  plasters  should  be  made.  Boiling  these  very  drugs  in  water, 
the  water,  while  lukewarm,  should  be  used  for  bathing  the  patient  as 
also  for  sprinkling  the  patient’s  body  with. 

This  relieves  cold  fever.  270 

(Thus  ends  the  oil  of  the  group  of  drugs  beginning  with  ‘Aguru’, 
used  in  cold  fevers). 

In  this  connection  are  three  and  ten  kinds  of  ‘sweda.’  These  have 
been  mentioned  in  the  Lesson  on  ‘Sweda,  (XIV,  pp.  153 — 166, 
Sutrasth&na,  ante). 

Administered  by  a  physician  that  is  conversant  with  Measure  and 
Time,  ‘sweda’  is  alleviative  of  cold  fever.f  271 

That  kind  of  chamber,  that  kind  of  bed,  and  that  kind  of 


*  ‘SnrS’,  ‘Sauvira’,  ‘Tushodaka’,  ‘Maireya’,  and  ‘Medaka’  are  varieties  of  wine  or 
distilled  spirits.  These  are  all  manufactured  from  paddy.  Vide  p.  291,  Lesson  XXV, 
SutrasthSna,  ante. 

‘Dadhimanda’  is  whey.  ‘AranUla’  is  Kanji.  ‘Kattara’  is  a  kind.of  whey.  A ‘patra’  is 
of  the  measure  of  8  seers.  Being  liquid,  the  measure  actually  taken  is  16  seers, 
t  By  ‘Sweda’  is  meant  methods  adopted  for  bripging  about  perspiration.— T. 


HO 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA . 


covering,  (which  have  already  been  spoken  of)  speedily  alleviate 
cold  fever. 

Thick  sticks,  made  of  Aguru  ( Aquilaria  Agallocha )  do  the 

same.*  272 

Women  that  are  beautiful  and  of  full-grown  limbs,  and  that  are 
endued  with  youth,  speedily  alleviate,  by  the  heat  that  is  in  their 
bodies  in  consequence  of  their  youthfulness,  cold  fevers,  if  only  they 
embrace  the  person  that  is  afflicted  therewith.!  273 

‘Swedanas’,  as  also  those  kinds  of  food  and  drink  which  are  alle- 
viative  of  wind,  of  phlegm,  and  of  wind  and  phlegm,  speedily  conquer 
cold  fever,  by  such  drugs  being  administered  therewith  as  enhance 
their  strength  (or  efficacy)!  274 

In  fevers  born  of  wind,  or  those  born  of  toil,  or  those  that  are  old 
(chronic),  or  those  born  of  wounds,  fast,  it  should  be  known,  is  not 
beneficial.  These  fevers  should  be  treated  by  such  medicines  as  are 
called  ‘gamanas.’  275 

Since  the  faults  ( 'viz .,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm),  dispelling  the  heat 
of  the  Amagaya,  and  seizing  (next)  the  food-juices  of  men,  produce 
fever,  therefore,  the  digestive  fire  is  enfeebled  (by  the  fever  that  is 
thus  produced)  276 

As  a  blazing  fire,  even  when  fed  with  fuel,  does  not  properly  cook 
the  (raw)  food  in  the  pot,  when  its  flames  happen  to  be  blown  away 
by  the  wind,  277 

Even  so  the  digestive  fire  of  men,  blown  away  from  the  chamber 


*  Tbe  reference  is  to  Lesson  VI,  Sutrasthana,  ante.  Vide  pp.  68-69.  The  ‘Kuti’  or 
chamber  is  spoken  of  in  aphorism  7  ;  the  bed  is  mentioned  in  aphorism  8  ;  and  the  kinds 
of  covering  are  mentioned  in  aphorism  9.  . 

Some  are  of  opinion  that  the  reference  about  ‘Kuti’  is  to  Lesson  I,  called  ‘Rasayana’, 
of  Chikitsasthana.  Certainly,  the  instructions  about  'Kuti1  occurring  in  the  last  are  more 
elaborate. — T. 

t  The  reading  I  adopt  is  ‘CharupachitagStrSh’.  Some  editions  read  ‘Pavitra  charu- 
gStrah’.  ‘Upachitag5tra’  means  full-grown,  that  is,  of  deep  bosoms  and  symmetrical 
proportions. — T. 

t  ‘Vatagleshmahara’  means  alleviative  of  wind,  of  phlegm,  and  of  both  wind  and  phlegm 
excited  together. 

The  ‘Swedanas’  referred  to  are  other  than  the  three  and  tenS‘Swedanas’  [referred^  to 
in  verse  273  ante  of  this  Lesson.  These  are,  as  explained  by  Gangadhara,  exposure  to  fire 
and  sun,  stoppage  of  breath,  &o.,— T, 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA . 


1141 

of  digestion  by  the  (excited)  faults,  fails  to  cook  (digest)  the  food  that 
has  been  taken,  or  digests  with  difficulty  only  food  that  is  light.  278 

Hence,  for  preserving  the  strength  of  the  digestive  fire,,  such 
courses  of  treatment  as  fasts  and  the  rest  are  beneficial.  Verily,  the 
impurities  occurring  in  all  the  ‘dhatus’  (ingredients  of  the  body)  are 
cooked  in  course  of  a  week  (if  fasts,  &c.,  are  observed).*  279 

Generally,  fever,  it  is  said,  becomes  freed  from  ‘Ama’  or  immatu¬ 
rity  in  eight  days. 

One  whose  faults  have  been  greatly  excited,  and  whose  digestive 
fire  has  been  weakened,  by  eating  food  that  is  heavy,  becomes  sud¬ 
denly  deprived  of  life-breaths,  or  greatly  afflicted  (by  diverse- distress¬ 
ing  pains). 

For  this  reason,  O  learned  one,  in  fevers  characterised  by  excite¬ 
ment  of  the  wind,  the  physician  should  not  cause  the  patient  to  take, 
at  the  outset,  food  that  is  very  heavy  or  that  is  very  oily. 

In  fever  born  of  (excited)  wind,  the  physician,  without  regarding  the 
modes  of  treatment  (laid  down  above),  should,  at  the  outset,  cause 
the  operations  of  ‘Abhyanga’  (rubbing  the  body  with  oil)  and  others 
of  the  kind,  to  be  gone  through,  if  no  other  fault  be  excited  along 
with  the  wind. 

Further,  having  caused  the  patient  to  drink  ‘kashayas’  (decoctions), 
the  physician  should  give  him  meat-juice,  280-283 

The  physician  should  also  adopt  (in  the  case  of  such  a  patient) 
all  those  methods  which  are  alleviative  of  matured  fevers. 

Of  persons  in  whose  bodies  the  phlegm  predominates,  and  in 
which  the  wind  is  weak,  if  they  are  afflicted  by  fever  characterised  by 
excessive  excitement  of  phlegm  and  little  heat  of  body,  that  fever 
does  not  lose  its  intensity  in  course  of  even  a  week. 

The  physician  should  treat  such  a  person  with  '  fasts  and  light 
food,  as  already  laid  down,  for  ten  days,  and  with  also  decoctions  and 
other  medicines  of  the  kind. 

Those  persons  that  are  afflicted  by  fevers  characterised  by  imma¬ 
turity,  and  those  that  are  afflicted  by  fever  born  of  (excited)  phlegm, 
and  those  that  are  afflicted  by  fever  born  of  phlegm  and  bile,  the 
physician  should  treat  by  prescribing  every  kind  of  ‘Langhana’  that 


*  It  should  be  noted  that  ‘Malah’  or  impurities  include  the  excited  faults.  Vide  Lesson 
XXVIII,  p.  392,  aphorism  3,  SutrasthSna. 


1142 


CHARAKA-SAMH1 TA, 


has  been  spoken  of  in  the  Lesson  on  ‘Langhana’  ( vide  Lesson  XXII, 
Sutrasthana,  ante). 

Fevers  born  of  phlegm,  of  bile,  and  of  wind,  should  be  treated 
with  emetics,  purgatives,  and  enemata,  respectively,  by  a  physician 
possessed  of  intelligence. 

Understanding  (diagnosing\  by  their  characteristics  of  equality 
or  the  degrees  of  predominance  (in  respect  of  the  faults  excited),  fevers 
that  are  born  of  two  faults,  as  also  those  that  are  born  of  the  three 
faults,  the  physician  should  subjugate  them  by  means  of  the  aforesaid 
medicines,  administering  them  in  accordance  with  the  measure  in 
which  the  faults  have  been  excited.* 

One  of  the  excited  faults  should  be  checked  at  a  time.  That 
which  has  been  excited  more  than  the  other  or  the  others,  should  be 
quelled  first.  284-289 

As  regards  fever  that  has  been  caused  by  the  exciterqent  of  all 
the  three  faults,  it  should  be  subdued  by  checking  the  phlegm  first 
(and  taking  up  the  bile  next,  and  the  wind  last  of  all). 

If  towards  the  termination  of  a  fever  caused  by  the  excitement 
of  all  the  faults,  a  dreadful  inflammatory  swelling  sets  in  at  the  root 
of  any  of  the  ears,  one  scarcely  escapes  from  it. 

Such  swelling  should  be  subdued  by  speedily  letting  the  blood 
out ;  or  by  causing  the  patient  to  drink  (medicated)  ghees  ;  or  by  such 
plasters,  or  snuffs,  or  gargles,  as  are  alleviative  of  phlegm  and  bile. 

When  one’s  fever  does  not  abate  through  the  administration  of 
medicines  that  are  cooling,  of  heating,  or  oily,  or  dry,  &c.,  that  fever 
should  be  known  as  having  seized  one’s  blood-ducts.  Such  fever 
becomes  alleviated  upon  the  blood  being  let  out. 

In  fever  that  is  accompanied  by  erysipelas,  as  also  in  that  caused 
by  wounds,  also  in  that  caused  by  malignant  toils,  the  drinking  of 
(medicated)  ghee,  at  the  outset,  is  beneficial  if  neither  phlegm,  nor 
bile,  is  predominant. 


*  ‘Samaih’  and  ‘taratamaih’  imply  ‘equality’  and  ‘degrees  of  predominance’  of  the  faults. 
In  a  fever  caused  by  the  excitement  of  two  faults,  the  measure  of  excitement  may  be  equal, 
or  one  of  the  faults  may  be  more  excited  than  the  other.  So  also  in  fevers  caused  by  the 
excitement  of  all  the  three, faults,  the  measures  of  excitement  may  be  unequal.  One  may  be 
more  excited  than  the  other  two,  or  two  may  be  more  excited  than  the  other  one.  What  is 
said  here  is  that  the  degree  or  degrees  of  excitement  should  be  carefully  marked  by  the 
physician  in  treating  these  fevers. — T. 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland ;  U.  S.  A.  .-—‘You  have undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California: —  ...  „.  ...As  each- 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent.  ...  . 

there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  .-—You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Ohio,  U.  S.  A.  The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions' of 
interest;  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge  .-—A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York : — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  A  met  ican  fournal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia-. — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  oj  Cashmere: — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oideberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-Western 
University,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition  : — I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  It  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  .—Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  it),  East 38th  Street,  New  York : — Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselkofber  Traise,  Dramstadt : — The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Wheipley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist : — I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising'onr  readers  to"subseribe  for  St.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etramrere,  174,  Boulevatse,  Saint  Germain  Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  I 
arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this : — if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop 
from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modem  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients 
according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  fof  the  undertakers,  and 
fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  td  the  Completion  of 
-{he  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street ,  Caltutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
[about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after. — 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing : — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector Your  patriotic, 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  A.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  G.  S.  : — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hypocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the' 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gya : — -It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkyrtalt,  Bangor,  North  Wales  The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukeiji,  C.  I.  E.  Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  fa  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the'treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly,  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It 
a  work  that  should  be  in  -the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji, — The- work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


PART  XXXVII. 


TTckF? 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


(TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH). 


AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  Original)  WITH  COMME 
ARIES  J  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 

journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  the  Hindu 

SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C.,  &C. 


CALCUTTA : 

200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N.  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRATNA  PRESS, 
12,  SIMLA  STREET,  BYE-LANE. 

1905. 

( The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved .) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  front  their  Letters.) 

Professor  Max  Muller  I  have!  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  ah  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I 'shall 'be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — .  I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention. 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.'E.  I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office — . .  ...  Your 

excellent  translation  .  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . 

I  shall  draw  the  attentidn  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

. Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York,  V.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  td  you; 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson,,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A.— I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing,  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy, '  and  T  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris  .-^-1  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be- happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany: — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 

I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention:  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka.  , 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsfiurek,  Germany  .-—English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,*  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C’  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal .—I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  ftie  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life,  . 
cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


ABSTRACT  OF  CONTENTS 


PART  XXXVII. 

This  part  contains  much  that  is  highly  interesting  and  deserving 
of  close  study. 

‘Chikitsasthana’  (Treatment  of  Disease)  is  regarded  as  the  cream 
of  Charaka’s  great  treatise. 

The  part  presented  dwells  upon  the  treatment  of  Fever,  ‘Rakta- 
pitta’  (haemorrhage  caused  by  excess  of  bile\  and  ‘Gulma’  (abdominal 
tumours). 

Fever  is  a  disease  which  is  as  old  as  humanity.  It  has  been 
noticed  in  the  medical  treatises  of  every  age  and  every  country. 

It  is  really  wonderful  that  the  Rishis  of  ancient  India  found  out 
so  many  infallible  recepes  for  this  disease.  The  observations  on 
Fever  and  its  classifications  will  amply  repay  perusal.  The  charac¬ 
teristics  of  Fevers  that  prove  fatal  have  been  laid  down  accurately. 
The  days  on  which  death  takes  place,  as  indicated  by  the  Rishi,  will 
be  seen  to  coincide  with  modern  experience. 

‘Raktapitta’  is  a  disease  that  has  been  separately  noticed  in 
Ayurveda.  It  is  not  prominently  mentioned  by  the  medical  science 
of  the  west.  Its  claim  to  be  treated  separately  from  ordinary 
haemorrhage  has  been  fairly  established  by  the  Rishis.  The  remedies 
they  have  prescribed  are  very  generally  successful. 

‘Gulma’,  too,  is  a  disease  which  is  reserved  for  the  Kavirajes  of 
India  to  treat  successfully.  Western  therapeutics  leave  it  generally 
to  Surgery.  It  is  really  a  matter  of  which  the  Indians  ought  to  be 
proud  that  their  physicians  cure  it  by  compositions  discovered  thou¬ 
sands  of  years  ago. 


CHARAKA -SAM BIT  A. 


TTT43 


If,  notwithstanding  this  treatment,  the  fever,  in  consequence  of 
the  weakness  of  the  ‘dhatus’  of  the  body,  becomes  mature  (or  chronic) 
and  continues  (without  abating),  290-294 

The  physician  should  then  treat  the  stricken  person  with  such 
diet  as  is  strength-giving  and  nourishing. 

In  fevers  called  Tertian  and  Quartan,  treatment  that  is  ordinary 
should  be  followed.  It  is  very  generally  the  case  that  in  Intermittent 
fevers,  companionship  of  spirits,  &c.,  is  noticeable.* 

That  Intermittent  fever  in  which  the  wind  predominates  should 
be  conquered  by  means  of .  medicated  ghees ,  oily  enemata,  and  such 
food  and  drink  as  are  oily  and  heating.  -  n 

By  purgatives,  by  milk  (properly  medicated),  and  by  ghees  prqT 
perly  corrected  (by  the  addition  of  needful,  drugs),  295-297 
as  also  by  articles  that  are  bitter  and  cooling,  Intermittent  fever  hf’- 
which  the  bile  predominates  should  be  subjugated.  \ 

Emetics,  ‘pSchanas’,  food  and  drink  that  are  dry,  and  .  fasts,  and 
things  that  are  astringent  and  heating,  are  regarded  as  beneficial  In 
Intermittent  fevers  .characterised  by  a  predominance  of  phlegm. 

Some  combinations,  highly  beneficial,  I  shall  now  lay  down,  that 
are  alleviative  of  Intermittent  fevers.  298-299 

These  should  be  applied  by  the  intelligent  physician  after  duly 
ascertaining  the  faults  and  other  characteristics.  Wines  with  ‘.manda’ 
for  drink,  (the  meat  of)  fowl  for  eating,  and  also  (of)  partridges  and 
peacocks,  should  be  given  in  Intermittent  fever.f 

Or,  the  patient  should  drink  the  ghee  called  ‘Shatpala’ or,  he 
should  take  (the  decoction  of  ‘Abhaya,’  chebulic  myrobalans) ;  or,  the 
decoction  of  the  three  myrobalans  (viz.,  Chebulic,  Emblic,  and 
Belleric) ;  or,  the  decoction  of  Guduchi  ( Tinosfora  cordifolia).% 


*  The  sense  seems  to  be  this  :  there  are  two  methods  of  treatment,  viz.;  I.  that 
dependent  on  fche  propitiation  of  the  deities,  &C-,  and  2.  that  dependent  on  the  exercise  of 
reason.  These  are  called  ‘Daivavapagrayah’  and  ‘Yuktivapagrayah’-  Tertian  and  Quartan 
■fevers  fall  under  the  class  called  ‘Intermittent’.  In  such  fever,  ‘Agantu’  or  ‘Bhutabhisanga’, 
4.  e.,  companionship  of  evil  spirits,  &c.,  is  generally  seen.  Hence,  the  second  method  of 
treatment,  viz.,  that  dependant  on  reason,  will  not  do.  It  should  be  supplemented  by  the 
first,  viz. ,  that  dependant  on  propitiatory  rites  aaad  sacrifices,  &c., — T. 

+  ‘Manda’  generally  means  the  thick  portion  of  an  infusion.  The  fact  is,  infusions  are 
strained  through  a  piece  of  cloth.  The  watery  portion  goes  down,  while  the  thick  portion  is 
retained  in  the  cloth.  This  fast  is  called  •‘Manda’. 

t  ‘Rasam’  implies  juice.  Hence,  it  may  mean  either  ‘Swarasa’  or  decoction.  The 
former  is  the  expressed  juice  of  any  drug. — T. 

*45 


■1144 


’CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


On  the  day  of  approach  of  the  fever,  the  patient  should  drink, 
after  he  has  been  treated  considerately  with  oils  and  ‘swedana’,  the 
decoction  of  Nilini  ( Indigofera  tinctorial,  Ajagandha  ( Ocimum  gratissi~ 
mum,  syn.,  Seseli  Indicum).  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethum ),  and 
Katurohini  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa).* 

Or,  causing  him  to  drink  a  large  dose  of  ghee,  the  patient  should 
be  made  to  vomit.  Or,  causing  him  to  take  a  copious  quantity  of 
both  food  and  drink,  he  should  be  made  to  vomit. 

Or,  on  the  day  of  approach  of  the  fever,  the  patient  should  sleep 
after  taking  a  copious  measure  of  wine  along  with  food.  Or,  in 
Intermittent  fever,  the  physician  should  administer  enemata  (oily  or 
dry)  or  that  variety  of  it  which  is  called  ‘yapana.’ 

Or,  the  patient  should  drink,  on  the  day  of  approach  of  the  fever, 
the  excreta  of  the  cat,  mixed  with  milk.  Or,  the  excreta  of  the 
ox,  mixed  with  whey,  or  with  wine  and  Saindhava’  salt,  may  be 
taken.f 

The  administration,  in  Intermittent  fever,  is  beneficial,  of  Pippali 
(fruit  of  Piper  longuni),  of  the  three  myrobalans,  of  curds,  of  whey,  of 
the  ghee  called  ‘Panchagavya,’  and  of  milk. 

In  Intermittent  fevers,  the  eating  of  Laguna  (garlics)  with  (sesame) 
oil,  before  meals,  is  beneficial.  The  eating  is  also  beneficial  of  the 
meat,  that  is  of  heating  virtues,  of  all  kinds  of  animals  that  are  clean. 

The  fat  of  the  tiger,  mixed  with  an  equal  measure  of  Hingu 
(assafcetida)  and  of  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  should  be  used  as  an  errhine  ; 
•or,  old  ghee}  the  fat  of  the  lion,  and  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  (taken  in  equal 
measures  and  mixed  together),  should  be  used  in  the  same  way,  in 
Intermittent  fevers. 

‘Saindhava’  salt,  the  seeds  of  Pippali  (Pipe*  longuni),  and  Manah- 
gilfi  (realgar),  299-300 

reduced  to  paste  along  with  the  aid  of  (sesame)  oil,  is  beneficial 
In  Intermittent  fever,  if  used  as  collyrium  for  the  eye. 

PalankashS  (Balsamodandron  Agallocha ),  the  leaves  of  Nimva  ( Melia 
Azadirachta),  VachS  ( Acorus  Calamus ),  Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis  auriculata), 
Haritaki  (chebulic  myrobalans),  mustard  seeds  (of  the  white  variety), 


*  These  four  should  be  boiled  together  for  obtaining  their  decoction.— T. 
+  The  excreta,  in  both  cases,  should  be  dried  and  reduced  t«  powder. — T. 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA. 


1 14? 

Yava  (barley),  and  ghee,  reduced  to  paste  and  then  made  into  sticks, 
are  beneficial  in  Intermittent  fever,  if  their  smoke  is  inhaled. 

Those  kinds  of  smoke,  that  kind  of  fumigation,  that  kind  of 
errhine,  and  that  kind  of  collyrium,  3°°-3n 

which  have  been  laid  down  in  diseases  of  the  mind  ( viz ..  Insanity, 
epilepsy,  &c.,)  should  be  administered  in  Intermittent  fevers. 

The  wearing  of  such  gems  as  are  auspicious,  or  of  such  herbs  as 
are  so,  or  of  poisons,  as  also  the  use  of  such  medicines  as  have  been 
classed  as  ‘Agadas’  (destructive  of  poisons),  checks  Intermittent  fevers. 

By  worshipping,  with  devotion,  the  supreme  deity,  Mahadeva, 
with  (his  spouse)  Uma  and  his  attendants  (viz.,  Nandi  and  others) 
as  also  the  class  of  female  deities  called  the  Mstris  (or  mothers,  viz., 
Brahmi,  Mahejwari,  Vaishnavi,  Aindri,  Varahi,  Kaumari,  Kauveri, 
and  Charchika),  one  is  speedily  freed  from  Intermittent  fever. 

By  chanting  for  his  praise  the  thousand  names  of  Vishnu  who  is 
possessed  of  a  thousand  heads,  who  is  lord  of  all  creatures  mobile 
and  immobile,  and  who  is  endued  with  omnipotence,  all  kinds  of 
fever  become  alleviated. 

By  worshipping  Brahman  (the  Grandsire  of  the  universe),  the  twin 
Agwins,  Indra,  the  eater  of  sacrificial  libations  (viz.,  Agrii),  the  moun¬ 
tain  Himavat,  Ganga,  the  Maruts,  and  one’s  tutelary  deities,  one 
succeeds  in  subjugating  all  kinds  of  fever. 

Through  devotion  (reverence)  to  parents,  worship  of  seniors  and 
preceptors,  the  practice  of  ‘Brahmacharyya,’  austerities,  truthfulness 
of  speech,  observance  of  vows  and  religious  rites  involving  self-denial, 
silent  recitation  of  sacred  texts,  &c.,  performance  of  homa,  making  of 
gifts,  listening  to  the  recital  of  Vedic  mantras,  312-317 

and  the  sight  of  righteous  persons,  one  becomes  quickly  freed 
from  (Intermittent)  fever. 

In  fever  which  centres  in  ‘Rasa’  (food-juice),  the  physician  should 
cause  the  patient  to  vomit  (by  administration  of  emetics)  and  then 
to  fast.  318 

Fomentation  and.  plasters,  as  also  (the  administration)  of  correct¬ 
ives,  should  be  had  recourse  to  in  fever  that  centres  in  blood. 

The  administration  of  purgatives,  with  observance  of  fasts,  is 
beneficial  in  fever  that  centres  in  the  flesh  and  the  adeps.  3^ 

In  fever  that  centres  in  the  bones  and  the  marrow,  enemata,  qotq 
dry  and  oily,  should  be  administered-.. 


1146' 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA. 


In  that  fever  which  is  caused  by  the  curses  (of  potent  persons) 
and  (Atharvan)  incantations,  as  also  by  the  influence  of  spirits  (and 
other  superhuman  beings),  320 

dependence  on  the  deities,  as  also  all  kinds  of  medicines  (that  are 
proper),  is  desirable.* 

That  fever  which  is  caused  by  wounds  becomes  alleviated  by 
drinking  (medicated)  ghee  and  rubbing  it  on  the  body.  The  other 
means  are  blood-letting,  spirituous  liquors,  and  eating  assimilable 
food  mixed  with  meat-juice.f 

That  fever  which,  persons  habituated  to  wines  and  spirituous 
liquors  get  as  the  result  of  drink,  becomes  alleviated  by  taking  food 
along  with  meat-juice  and  wines.  32I-322 

The  fever  of  persons  afflicted  with  sores  and  boils  becomes  allevi¬ 
ated  through  treatment  of  the  sores  and  the  boils. 

Fevers  caused  by  lust,  grief,  and  fear,  become  alleviated  by  con¬ 
solatory  promises,  by  possession  of  the  object  desired,  by  subjugation 
of  the  wind,  and  by  inducement  of  cheerfulness  and  joy. 

Ferver  that  arises  from  wrath  is  quickly  alleviated  by  acquisition 
of  desirable  and  charming  objects,  by  operations  that  are  destructive 
of  bile,  and  by  agreeable  and  soothing  words.  323-326 

Fever  caused  by  wrath  becomes  alleviated  by  the  excitement  of 
lust.  Fever  born  of  lust  is  alleviated  by  the  excitement  of  wrath. 
By  the  excitement  of  either  lust  or  of  wrath,  fever  born  of  fear  and 
grief  becomes  alleviated.  327 

Of  that  man  who  catches  fever  by  continually  thinking  of  the 
time  of  its  accession  or  of  its  violence,  the  memory  should  be  obliter¬ 
ated  by  means  of  desirable  and  charming  objects.}:  328 

When  fever  is  about  to  depart,  the  patient  utters  low  and  indis¬ 
tinct  sounds,  or  vomits,  or  becomes  restless,  or  breathes  hard,  or 
becomes  pale,  or  perspires  in  every  limb,  or  shivers,  or  sits  up  and 
lies  down  repeatedly  ;  329 


*  ‘Daiva-vapaQraya’  means,  literally,  dependence  on  the  deities.  This  implies  the 
performance  of  propitiatory  rites  and  sacrifices,  &c. — T, 

t  Some  texts  read  ‘medhyaih,’  meaning  clean.  H  is  an  adjective  of  the  next  substantive. 
The  correct  reading  however,  is  ‘madyaih’,  meaning  wines  or  spirituous  liquors.— T. 

*  The  fact  is,  people  sometimes  get  fever  by  continually  thinking  of  the  time  when  the 
accession  takes  place  of  their  fever,  or  of  its  violence.  In  such  cases,  their  minds  should  be 

iverted  from  such  thoughts  by  surrounding  them  with  -agreeable  objects. — T, 


.  CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


i  14 ; 


Or  raves  deliriously,  or  his  whole  body  becomes  hot  or  cold  ;  or, 
afflicted  by  the  violence  of  the  fever,  loses  consciousness,  or  looks 
like  one  whose  wrath  has  been  excited.*  33° 

The  patient  evacuates,  with  great  force,  stools  that  are  liquid,  that 
are  mixed  with  the  faults,  and  that  are  accompanied  by  loud  sound. 

The  physician  possessed  of  intelligence  should  know  that  even 
these  are  the  symptoms  that  manifest  themselves  at  the  time  when 
fever  is  about  to  leave  the  patient.  33* 

Of  a  person  whose  faults  have  been  excited  in  an  aggravated  mea¬ 
sure,  the  fever  is  generally  seen  to  be  very  strong.  If  such  fever 
leaves  the  person  in  consequence  of  (good)  treatment  and  the  (speedy) 
digestion  of  the  (excited)  faults,  it  is  then  only  that  the  excessively 
severe  symptoms  (mentioned  above)  manifest  themselves  (at  the  time 
the  fever  departs).  33* 

Of  those  protracted  fevers  which  abate  gradually  after  having 
manifested  their  strength  according  to  the  aggravation  of  the  faults, 
the  departure  is  unaccompanied  by 'severe  symptoms  (of  the  kind 
adverted  to  above).  333 

That  person  should  "be  known  to  be  freed  from  fever  whose  sense 
of  fatigue  and  burning  are  gone,  who  no  longer  feels  any  pain,  whose 
senses  have  all  become  unclouded,  and  whose  mind  has  been  restored 
to  its  normal  condition.  334 

A  person  who  is  afflicted  with  fever,  as  also  one  who  is  just  freed 
from  fever,  should  avoid  such  food  and  drink  as  are  heavy,  as  create 
a  burning  sensation  in  the  stomach,  as  are  incapable  of  being  assimi¬ 
lated,  and  as  consist  of  inharmonious  ingredients.  335 

One  who  has  fever,  as  also  one  who  is  just  freed  from  it,  should 
also  abstain  from  sexual  congress,  excessive  toil  and  exertion,  baths, 
and  excessive  measure  of  food.  It  is  by  these  means  that  fever  is 
alleviated,  and  when  alleviated,  does  not  come  back.  3 36 

One  who  is  freed  from  fever  should  not  indulge,  until  one  gets 
back  one’s  strength,  in  physical  exercise,  sexual  congress,  baths,  and 
walking  long  distances.  337 

That  person  who,  without  having  got  back  his  strength  after  being 


*  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  when  the  fever  is  about  to  depart,  the  patient  begins  to 
perspire.  His  body  becomes  cold  and  hot  successively,  in  consequence  of  perspiration.  As 
regards  the  other  symptoms,  they  are  intelligible. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMH1T A. 


1 1 4S 

freed  from  fever,  indulges  in  these  forbidden  acts,  finds  that  his  fever 
returns.  33* 

Of  that  person  whose  fever  departs  in  consequence  of  the  (excited) 
faults  having  been  suppressed  (by  violent  remedies),  the  fever  comes 
back  if  he  indulges  in  acts  of  even  trivial  indiscretion.*  339 

One  that  is  afflicted  for  a  long  time,  and  that  has  been  weakened 
and  rendered  cheerless,  is  killed  speedily  by  that  fever  which  returns 
(in  consequence  of  indulgence  in  acts  of  indiscretion  after  cure).  34° 

Or,  (of  such  a  person  indulging  in  such  acts  after  cure),  the  faults, 
entering  the  ‘dhatus,’  become  digested  (or  assimilated)  therein.  ,  Even 
if  they  fail  to  cause  a  return  of  the  fever,  they  succeed  in  producing 
the  following  baneful  results  :  34i 

They  are  cheerlessness,  swellings,  uneasiness  (of  both  body  and 
mind),  paleness  of  complexion,  disrelish  for  food,  small  pimples 
accompanied  by  itching  sensation,  circular  eruptions  called  Impetigo, 
pimples  and  boils,  and  boils  that  suppurate  and  burst,  and  weakness 
of  the  digestive  fire.  342 

Other  ailments  also  (than  fever),  come  back  after  their  first  disap¬ 
pearance,  in  consequence  of  acts  of  even  slight  indiscretion,  if  the 
faults  causing  them  have  not  been  thoroughly  eradicated.!  343 

Hence,  even  when  fever  has  departed,  the  faults  (that  have  caused 
it)  should  be  sought  to  be  removed  or  alleviated  by  such  operations 
as  are  suited  to  the  strength,  the  condition,  and  the  constitution  of 
the  patient.  344 

When  fever  returns  (after  disappearance),  a  correction  of  the  con¬ 
stitution  by  means  of  mild  correctives  is  beneficial. 

The  administration  of  those  enemata  which  are  called  ‘yapanS,’ 
is  also  beneficial. 

.  Light  soups  (of  Pkaseolus  Mungo  and  other  pulses  of  the  kind), 
and  meat-juice  prepared  with  the  flesh  of  wild  animals,  are 
beneficial.  345-346 


*  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  the  excited  faults  should  be  alleviated  gradually  and  not  by 
administering  violent  remedies.  Time  is  an  important  factor  in  effecting  cures.  The  evil 
effects  of  finesettin  administered  indiscretely,  may  be  marked  by  even  a  layman. — T. 

t  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  it  is  not  fever  alone  that  returns  owing  to  acts  of  indiscretion 
but  other  diseases  also  do  the  same,  if  the  faults  causing  them  have  not  been  removed  by  the 
reota.  Mere  suppression  of  the  faults  by  violent  remedies  is  condemned. — T. 


CM  A  RA  KA-SA  MHl  T  A . 


11 49 


Rubbing  the  patient’s  body  with  (medicated)  oils,  kneading,  baths, 
fumigation,  and  collyria,  and  bitter  ghees ,  are  also  beneficial.  345-34® 

In  fever  that  has  returned  in  consequence  of  one’s  having  taken 
food  that  is  heavy,  that  prevents  the  secretions  from  escaping  out  of 
the  body,  or  that  is  incapable  of  assimilation,  the  treatment  that 
should  be  observed  is  fasts,  and  such  operations  as  are  heating,  even 
as  in  the  case  of  fever  that  is  new.  347 

By  drinking,  for  days  together,  the  decoction  of  Kiratatiktaka 
(Agathotes  Cherayta ),  Tikta  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa),  Musta  (Cyperus 
rotundus),  Parpataka  ( Oldenlandia  biflora ),  and  Amritfi  ( Tinospora 
cordifolia ),  recurring  fevers  are  cured.  348 

A  physician  of  intelligence  should  adopt  that  treatment  which  is 
best  suited  to  the  fever  that  returns,  taking  note  of  the  different 
conditions  of  that  fever.»  349 

Fever  is  regarded  as  the  king  of  all  diseases.  It  is  exceed¬ 
ingly  fierce,  and  is  the  destroyer  of  all  creatures.  Hence,  the 
physician  should,  by  every  means  in  his  power,  strive  to  alleviate 
or  subdue  it.  35° 

( Here  occurs  a  verse.) 

Impelled  by  the  desire  of  benefiting  all  creatures,  the  son  of  Atri 
communicated  to  Agniveca  (a  knowledge  of)  the  treatment  of 
fevers,  in  due  order  and  agreeably  to  the  questions‘(asked  by  the 
disciple).  351 

Thus  ends  Lesson  Third,  named  Treatment  of  Fever,  in  the 
Division  called  Chikitsa,  of  the  treatise  of  Agniveja  as  revised  by 
Charaka. 


*  Even  if  the  case  be  one  of  fever  that  has  returned  after  cure,  it  may  have  three  states, 
vie.,  ‘5ma’  («'.  «.,  raw  or  immature),  ‘pachyamana’  («.  e.,  that  in  which  the  excited  faults* 
have  begun  to  mature),  and  ‘pakka’  (».  e.,  that  in  which  the  faults  have  been  digested).  The 
physician  should  not,  therefore,  follow  one  method  of  treatment,  but  should  be  guided  by  the 
sonditfoa  in  Which  the  fever  is,  evnn  if  the  fever  be  one  tnat  has  returned. — T. 


LESSON  IV. 

TREATMENT  OF  RAKTA-PITTA 

(or,  HEMORRHAGE  CAUSED  BY  EXCESS  OF  BILE.) 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  Treatment  of  Hemor¬ 
rhage  caused  by  excess  of  Bile. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri. 

Bowing  with  reverence,  Agnive^a  questioned  Punarvasu  who  had 
his  soul  under  complete  control,  who  was  free  from  heedlessness,  and 
who  was  endued  with  the  effulgence  of  fire,  while  that  sage  was 
enjoying  the  delights  of  a  ramble  in  the  region  known  by  the  name 
of  ‘Pancha-Ganga’,  saying,  1 

O  illustrious  one,  the  cause,  with  the  symptoms,  of  ‘Raktapitta’ 
(blood-bile)  has  (already)  been  expounded  (by  thee) !  O  revered 
preceptor,  it  behoves  thee  (now)  to  say  that  which  should  be  said 
after  that  !*2-3 

The  preceptor  said  : 

The  physician  conversant  with  causes  and  symptoms  should 
promptly  take  up  the  treatment  of  ‘Rakta-pitta’  which  is  a  highly 
virulent  disease,  possessed  of  great  strength,  and  which  acts  as 
quickly  as  fire.  4 

The  causes  of  this  disease,  as  shown  previously,  are  food  and 
drink  that  are  heating,  keen,  sour,  pungent,  and  saline,  and  that 
produce  a  burning  sensation,  as  also  exposure  to  external  heat.  S 

Afflicted  by  these  causes,  the  bile  possesses  (overtakes)  the  blood. 
In  consequence,  again,  of  the  blood  being  its  habitat,  it  increases, 
after  having  overtaken  the  blood,  vitiating  it  (at  the  same  time).f  6 


*  ‘Pancha-Ganga’,  literally,  means  ‘the  five  Gangas’  ;  hence  the  region  of  the  five  rivers. 
Probably,  the  Panjab  is  meant.  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Lesson  on  the  destruction 
of  cities  and  inhabited  areas  is  a  discourse  delivered  by  the  Rishi  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges 
at  a  place  not  distant  from  Kampillaka.  The  last  was  probably  a  city  in  the  Panjab. — T. 

t  'Tadyonitwat the  bile  has,  among  other  ‘dhatus’  and  limbs  of  the  body,  the  blood 
for  its  seat  or  habitat.  {Vide  aphorism  12,  Lesson  XX,  Sutrasthana,  ante).  What  is  said 
here  is  that  the  bile,  which  has  its  habitat  in  blood,  increases  in  measure  when  it  overtakes 
the  blood.  At  the  same  time,  it  vitiates  the  blOod.—T. 


GHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1 1.51 

By  the  heat  of  the  bile  (thus  mixed  with  blood),  every  ‘dhatu’ 
begins  to  melt.  In  consequence  of  this  melting,  the  liquid  portions 
of  the  several  ‘dhatus’  ooze  out.  Mixing  with  those  liquid  portions, 
the  bile  increases  again  (in  quantity).*  7 

In  consequence  of  the  blood  combining  with  the  bile,  as  also  of 
the  blood  being  vitiated  thereby,  and  of  the  similarity,  in  respect  of 
•scertt  and  colour,  between  the  bile  (thus  excited)  and  the  blood,  the 
bile  (under  these  circumstances)  is  called  blood-bile  (Rakta-pitta)  by 
the  wise.  8 

The  bile  (thus  circumstanced),  dwells,  locating  itself  in  the  spleen, 
the  liver,  and  all  those  blood-bearing  ducts  of  living  creatures  which 
have  their,  origin  there  (viz.,  in  the  spleen  and  the  liver).  9  ‘ 

If  the  blood-bile  becomes  possessed  by  phlegm,  it  becomes  thick, 
of  a  light  pale  colour,  slightly  oily,  . and  slimy. 

If  possessed  by  wind,  it  becomes  of  a  dark  red  colour,  frothy,  thin, 
and  dry.  **> 

If  possessed '.by  bile,  it  becomes  of  the  colour  of  a  decoction  (of 
vegetables),  black,  like  the  urine  of  the  cow,  dark-blue,  of  the  colour 
of  domestic  soot,  or  of  antimony.  11 

When  blood-bile  is  characterised  by  two  faults  {such  as  phlegm 
and  wind,  wind  and  bile,  or  phlegm  and  bile),  it  presents  the  indica¬ 
tions  (as  mentioned  above)  of  those  two  faults. 

When  it  is  characterised  by  all  the  three  faults,  it  presents  the 
indications  (as  mentioned  above)  of  all  the  faults. 

That  blood-bile  which  is  possessed  by  one  fault  is  curable  ;  that 
which  is  possessed  by  two  faults  is  suppressible.  ™ 

That  blood-bile  which  is  .possessed  by  all  the  three  faults  is 
incurable. 

The  blood-bile,  when  severely  excited,  of  a  person  whose  digestive 
fire  is  weak,  or  of  -one  whose  body  has  been  weakened  by  various 
ailments,  or  of  one  who  is  of  advanced  years,  or  of  one  who  has  no 
appetite  for  food,  is  also  incurable.  !3 

The  blood-bile,  it  has  already  been  shown,  has  two  outlets,  viz^ 


*  ‘Tasya’  .means  ‘of  the  bile  that  has  mixed  with  the  blood’.  ‘DhatordhStoh’ ,  implies  ‘of 
every  dhStu’.  ‘DravodhStu’  means  the  liquid  portion th«  word  ‘dhXtu’  is  used  and  not 
"*an?aYb~ecause  one  ‘dhStu’  may  beget  another ;  Of,  at  least,  increase  the  measure  of  another 
by  some  product  of  its  own. — T. 

X46 


.1152 


CHAR  AKA  -  SA  M HIT  A. 


the  upward  and  the  downward.  The  upward  outlets  are  seven  in 
■Rumber.  As  regards  the  downward  ones,  they  are  two.  J4 

There  are  seven  holes  in  the  head  (viz.,  the  two  ears,  the  two 
eyes,  the  two  nostrils,  and  one  mouth),  and  there  are  two  holes  in 
the  lower  part  of  1  the  body.  That  blood-bile  which  has  its  course 
upwards  is  curable  ;  that  which  has  its  course  downwards  is  sup- 
pressible  ;  while  that  which_  has  its  course  both  upwards  and  down-  . 
wards  isjuncurable.  1S 

When  the  blood-bile  escapes  from  all  the  (nine)  holes  (mentioned 
above),  as  also  all  the  pores  of  the  body,  this  infinity  of  outlets  is  said 
to  be  destructive  of  life.  16 

That  blood-bile  also  which  escapes  copiously  through  both  the 
upward  and  the  downward  outlets,  that  in  which  the  blood  which 
escapes  is  of  corpse-like  scent,  that  in  which  the  blood  is  of  an 
exceedingly  dark  colour,  17 

That  in  which  the  blood,  mixing  with"phlegm  and  wind,  sticks  at 
the  throat  (without  coming  up\  that  which  is  afflicted  by  all  the 
supervening  symptoms  mentioned  above,  18 

That  in  which  the  blood  is  possessed  of  such  colours  as  yellow,  or 
blue,  or  green,  or  coppery,  and  that  which  afflicts  a  person  who  is 
weak  and  suffering  from  cough  (bronchitis),  are  never  cured.  *9 

That  blood-bile  which  is  accompanied  by  two  of  the  excited  faults, 
that  which  returns  after  temporary  suspensions,  and  that  which 
changes  its  course  from  outlet  to  outlet,  should  be  known  to  be 
suppressible.  2° 

That  blood-bile  which  has  only  one  outlet,  in  which  the  patient 
has  not  lost  strength,  the  intensity  of  which  is  mild,  which  is  of 
recent  origin,  which  appears  in  a  favourable  season,  and  which  is 
unaccompanied  by  supervening  symptoms,  is  curable.*  21 

The  causes  of  blood-bile  are  food  and  drink  that  are  oily  and 
heating,  as  also  food  and  drink  that  are  heating  and  dry.  It  is 
generally  seen  that  of  that  blood-bile  which  has  its  course  down¬ 
wards,  the  latter  (viz.,  food  and  drink  that  are  heating  and  dry) 
is  the  cause ;  while  of  that  which  has  its  course  upwards,  the 
former  (viz.,  food  and  drink  that  are  oily  and  heating)  is  the  cause.  22 
That  blood-bile  which  escapes  by  the  upward  outlets  becomes 


‘Favourable  season’,  as  autumn,  or  winter. — T. 


CM  A  RA  KA -SA  MHJ  TA. 


HS3? 

combined  with  phlegm  ;  that  which  escapes  by  the  downward  outlets 
is  accompanied  by  the  (excited)  wind  ;  that  which  escapes  by  both 
the  upward  and  the  downward  outlets  becomes  associated  with  both 
phlegm  and  wind.  23 

The  blood-bile  of  one  who  has  suffered  no  loss  of  strength  and 
flesh,  as  also  of .  one  whose  stomach  is  full,  should  be  known  as 
vitiated  by  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  and  as  endued  with  intensity 
Such  blood-bile  should  not  be  checked  at  the  outset.  24 

If  checked  at  the  outset,  the  following  diseases  may  manifest 
themselves,  viz.,  suppression  of  the  voice,  ozcena,  swoons,  disgust  for 
food,  fever,  abdominal  and  other  tumours,  enlargement  of  the  spleen,, 
epistasis,  leuchoderma,  strangury,  .various  kinds  of  leprosy,  piles, 
erysipelas,  loss  of  complexion,  fistula-in-ano,  and  dulness  of  under¬ 
standing  and  the  senses.  25-26 

Hence  the  blood-bile,  even  when  endued  with  intensity,  of  a 
person  who  is  possessed  of  strength,  should  not,  at  the  outset,  be 
sought  to  be  checked  by  a  physician  who  is  guided  by  considerations 
of  strength  and  faults  and  who  is  desirous  of  achieving  success.  27 
Since  it  generally  happens  that  the  blood-bile  that  is  about  to 
escape  increases  in  intensity  owing  to  the  undigested  food  in  the 
stomach  of  creatures,  therefore,  fast  at  the  outset  is  beneficial.  28 

Carefully  considering  the  outlet  by  which  the  blood-bile  escapes, 
as  also  the  fault  or  faults  with  which  it  is  associated,  and  also  the 
the  cause  or  causes  from  which  it  springs,  the  physician  should 
prescribe  either  fast  or  a  course  of  cooling  and  oily  regimen  at  the 
outset.  29' 

Unto  one  suffering  from  thirst  in  blood-bile,  should  be  given 
either  boiled  water  rendered  cool,  or  the  decoction  of  Hrivera 
(Pavonia  odorata),  Chandana  (Pterocarpus  santalinus),  Ucira  (roots 
of  Andropogon  muricatum),  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus ),  and 
Parppata  ( Oldenlandia  biflora ).  3° 

A  physician  who  is  conversant  with  time,  with  all  that  is  assimi¬ 
lable,  with  supervening  symptoms,  and  with  the  normal  constitution 
of  the  patient,  should,  at  the  outset,  prescribe  ‘Tarpana’  in  cases  in 
which  the  blood  escapes  by  the  upper  outlets,  and  ‘Peya’  in  cases  in 
which  the  blood-escapes  by  the  lower  outlets.*  31 


*  The  words  ‘Tarpana’  and  ‘Peya’  have  been  explained  in  the  verses  that  foils  w‘. — T.  - 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


*  1 54 

For  ‘Tarpana’  the  following  should  be  given,  vix.t  the  infusion, 
cooled,  and  mixed  with  sugar,  of  Kharjjura  (Phoenix  dactylif era')), 
Mridvika  (raisins),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  and  Pafushaka  ( Grewia 
Asiatica).  32 

(As  regards  solid  food)  for  purposes  of  ‘Tarpana’,  the  physician 
should  give  fried  paddy,  reduced  to  powder  and  mixed  with  ghee  and 
honey.  This,  if  drunk,  alleviates  in  time  that  bloOd'-bile  which 
escapes  by  the  upward  outlets.*  33 

Unto  one  whose  appetite  is  hot  keen,  and  who  can  (from:  habitual 
use)  assimilate  what  is  sour,  the  physician  may  administer  the  above 
‘Tarpanas’  by  mixing  them  with  what  is  sour. 

It  should  be  known  that  for  making  these  ‘Tarpanas’  sour,  they 
may  be  mixed  with  the  juice  of  pomegranates  and  the  fruit  of  Phyl- 
lanthus  Emblica.  34 

For  persons  suffering  under  blood-bile,  the  food  should^  consist  of 
rice  of  these  varieties,  viz.,  £ali,  Shastika,  Nivara,  Koradusha,  Praja- 
tika,  SySm&ka,  and  Prfyangu.f  35. 

Mudga  ( Phaseolus  Mungo \  Masura:  {Cicer  lens),  Chanaka  {Cicer 
arietinum },  with  Makushtha  ( Phaseolus  aconitifolia),  and  the  seeds  of 
Aclhaki  ( Cajanus  Indicue ),  are  regarded  as  beneficial  in  the  prepara¬ 
tion  of  soups  for  persons  suffering  from  blood-bile.  3& 

The  leaves  of  Patola  (. Trichosanthes  dioica),  of  Nimva  ( Melia  Aza- 
dirachta),  the  heads  of  Vetra  ( Calamus  rotang ),  the  leaves  of  Plaksha 
( Ficus  infectoria),  those  of  Vetasa  ( Calamus  rotang ),  those  of  Kirfitai 
tiktaka-  ( Agathotes  Ckerayta),  the  potherb  named  Gandira  (otherwise 
called  £amatha),  the  leaves  of  Kotillaka  ( Momordica  chardntia ),  the 
flowers  of  Kovidara  ( Bauhinim  variegata),  those  of  Kfifmarya 
( Gmelina  arborea);  and  those  of  £almali  ( Bombax  Malabaricum},. 


*  The  infnsion  spoken  of  in  verse  31  is  a  drink.  That  referred  to  in  verse  32,  is  "solid, 
food,  though  ‘pitam)’  or  drunk  is  used.  The  fact  is,  fried,  paddy,  reduced  to  powder  and. 
then  mixed  with  ghee  and  honey  in  a  copious  measure,  makes  a  compound  that  is  drinkable.. 
There  are  many  kinds  of  solid  food  about  which  ‘pita’  is  used.  Frumenty  (rice  boiled  in. 
milk  and  sugar)  is  an  example. — T. 

+  TheSe  varieties  of  rice  may  be  used  for  preparing.  ‘P"ey5’  or  liquid  drink.  ‘<^51i’  is  the- 
red  variety.  ‘Shashtika!’  is-  that  which  ripens  in  sixty  days.  ‘Nivara’  is  a  "wild  variety,, 
otherwise  called  ‘Uri.’  It  grows  spontaneously.  ‘Koradusha’  is  probably  that  which  is. 
called  ‘Kodrava’  or  Paspalum  serebiculatum,  Linn.  ‘PragatikS’  is  otherwise  called  ‘Kangu,’ 
ior  Selafia  JfaTica.  ‘SySinlka’  is  Panictm  frummtdctum.  ‘PriyangU’  here  implies  a. 
variety  of  paddy. : — T.1 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA . 


H55 

those  potherbs  which  have  been  mentioned  in  the  Lesson  bearing 
upon  the  ordinances  relating  to  food  and  drink  (viz.,  Lesson  XXVII, 
Sutrasthana),  and  everything  else  that  is  alleviative  of  blood-bile,  37-38 

These,  when  potherbs  are  to  be  given,  are  beneficial  for  those 
persons  afflicted  with  blood-bile  who  are  habituated  to  the  use  of 
potherbs. 

These  should  be  given  either  boiled,  or  fried  in  ghee,  or  cooking 
them  into  a  soup.  39 

Doves,  pigeons,  'Lavas’  (Perdix  chinensis),  red-eyed  ‘V-artakas’ 
(Perdix  olivaced),  hares,  ‘Kapinjalas’  (francoline  partridges),  black 
antelopes,  deer,  and  black-tailed  deer,  are,  it  should  be  known,  bene¬ 
ficial  in  blood-bile.  The  meat-juice  of  these  should  be  given,  without 
mixing  it,  or  mixing  it,  with  a  small  measure  of  something  that  is 
sour,  frying  it  in  ghee,  and  adding  a  little  sugar  to  it.  40-41 

In  that  blood-bile  which  is  marked  by  excited  phlegm,  soups 
of  the.  pulses  and  the  potherbs  mentioned  above  should  be  given  ; 
while  in  that  blood-bile  which  is  marked  by  excited  wind,  the  meat- 
juice  of  the  animals  mentioned  above  should  be  given.  We  shall 
now  lay  down  the  varieties  of  ‘Yavilgu’  or  gruel  that  are  capable,  of 
being  administered  in  this  disease.  42 

‘Peya’  made  by  boiling  rice  in  the  decoction  of  the  filaments  of 
Padma  (lotus)  and  Utpala  (Nymphcea  stelleta ),  Prishniparni  (Doodioa 
Iogopodioides),  and  Priyangu  (Agiaia  Roxburghiana),  should  be  given 
to  one  afflicted  with  blood-bile.*  43 

‘Peya’  may  also  be  made  by  boiling  rice,  after  the  same  manner, 
in  the  decoctions  of  these  : 

1.  Chandana  (Pterocarpus  santalinus),  Ushira  (roots  of  Andro- 
pogon  touricatum),  Lodhra  (Symplocos  racemosa),  and  N&gara  (dry 
ginger ; 

2.  Kiratatiktaka  (Agathoies  Cher  ay  ta),  Ushira  (the  roots  of 
Andropogon  muricatum),  and  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus)  • 

3.  Dhfitaki  (Woodfordia  floribunda),  Dhanvayasa  ( Alhagi  Mau- 
rorum),  Ambu  (otherwise  called  Bala,  Pavonia  odorata),  and  Vilwa 
■(dried  pieces  of  the  fruit  of  AEgle  marmelos )  ; 

4.  Masura  ( Cicer  lens),  and  Prishniparni  (Doodia  Iogopodioides)  \ 


*  The  filaments,  &c.,  should  first  be  boiled  in  water.  In  that  water  rice  should  be  boiled 
till  it  becomes  melted.  The  gruel  thus  prepared  forms  a  ‘peyT  or  drink  that  is  beneficial 
in  blood-bile.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


HS6 

5.  Sthiri  (Desmodium  Gangeticum ),  and  Mungo  {Phaseolus 
Mungo) ; 

6.  Harenuka  {Piper  aurantiacum ),  and  Ball  (.SYrfo  cordifolia ) ; 
in  this  case,  the  decoction  should  be  mixed  with  a  little  measure  of 
ghee  before  boiling  rice  in  it. 

‘Peya’  may  also  be  made  by  boiling  rice  in  the  meat- juice  of  each 
of  the  animals  named  above,  viz.,  doves  and  the  rest.  44-46 

Thus  have  the  gruels  that  are  alleviative  of  blood-bile,  been 
spoken  of.  These  should  be  taken  when  cooled,  and  adding  to  them 
honey  and  sugar.  Gruels  may  also  be  prepared  with  meat-juice  (as 
explained  above).*  47 

If  the  bowels  are  constipated  of  persons  afflicted  with  blood-bile, 
the  flesh  of  hares  or  rabbits,  cooked  with  the  potherb  called  Vfistuka 
(1 Chenopodium  album)  proves  beneficial. 

In  those  cases  of  blood-bile  in  which  the  wind  is  excited,  the  flesh 
of  Tfttiri  (francoline  partridge),  boiled  in  the  decoction  of  Udumvara 
{Ficus  glomerata),  proves  beneficial.  48 

The  flesh  of  the  peacock  boiled  in  the  decoction  of  Plaksha  {Ficus 
infectoria),  the  flesh  of  fowl  boiled  in  the  decoction  of  Nyagrodha 
Ficus  Bengalensis ),  and  the  flesh  of  Vartaka  {Perdix  olivacea )  and 
that  of  Krakara  {Perdix  sylvatica ),  boiled  in  the  decoction  of  Vilwa 
{ASgle  marmelos)  and  Utpala  {Nymphcea  stellata),  are  beneficial.  49 

Unto  one  that  is  thirsty  (among  patients  afflicted  with  blood-bile) 
should  be  given  the  decoction  of  the  Group  of  bitters  ;  or  the  decoc¬ 
tion,  that  is  known  to  be  alleviative  of  thirst,  of  the  fruits  (of  the 
several  varieties  of  Ficus )  ;  or  the  decoction,  cooled,  of  Vidarigandha 
{Desmodium  Gangeticum )  and  the  rest.  5° 

Ascertaining  which  of  the  two  faults  {viz.,  wind  and  phlegm)  is 
next  in  predominance  (to  the  excited  bile),  as  also  the  strength  of  the 
patient  and  the  measure  of  his  food,  the  physician  should  give  even 
a  little  water  unto  a  patient  that  is  thirsty,  after  the  escape  of 
blood.f  5i 


*  All  the  gruels  mentioned  above  are  directed  to  be  taken  when  cooled.  Honey  and 
sugar  should  be  added  to  them.  Meat-juice,  also,  is  directed  to  be  used,  like  the  decoction 
of  the  several  vegetables. — T. 

The  sense  is  this  :  to  a  patient  who  is  thirsty  after  the  escape  of  a  quantity  of  blood, 
♦he  physician,  in  giving  even  a  little  measure  of  water,  should  take  note  of  the  particulars, 
mentioned.— T. 


CHARAKA -SAM HIT  A. 


157 


Those  that  are  afflicted  with  blood-bile  should  not,  if  they  wish 
for  life  and  health,  indulge  in  such  food,  drink,  and  practices  as  have 
been  stated  in  brief  to  be  the  causes  of  blood-bile.  5* 

Thus  have  been  laid  down,  one  after  another,  the  varieties  of  food 
and  drink  that  are  prescribable  in  cases  of  blood-bile.  I  shall  now 
lay  down  that  which  should  be  done  by  strong  patients  in  whom 
,  (however)  the  faults  have  been  excited  in  a  great  measure  *  S3 

Of  one  whose  strength  and  flesh  have  not  diminished,  of  one 
whose  disease  has  arisen  from  indulgence  in  luxurious  food  and  drink, 
of  a  strong  patient  whose  blood-bile  is  marked  by  faults  that  are 
excited  in  a  large  degree,  but  is  without  supervening  afflictions  of  any 
kind,  and  of  one  who  is  fit  for  the  administration  of  correctives  in 
time,  the  disease,  if  it  has  an  upward  course,  should  be  checked  by 
purgatives  ;  and  if  it  has  a  downward  course,  by  emetics.  54-55 

The  powder  of  Trivit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethum ),  that  of  AbhayS 
(chebulic  myrobalans),  the  fruit  of  Aragbadha  ( Cassia  fistula ),  Traya- 
mana  ( Ficus  heterophylla ),  the  roots  of  Gavakshi  ( Cucumis  colocynthis ), 
the  fruits  of  Amlaka  ( Phyllanthus  Emblica ),  mixed  with  a  large 
measure  of  honey  and  sugar,  should  be  administered  by  a  physician 
possessed  of  wisdom,  as  purgatives.- 

The  meat-juice  of  the  animals  mentioned  above,  obtained  by 
boiling  the  flesh  in  the  decoction  of  these,  is  especially  beneficial  in 
blood-bile.  56-57 

‘Mantha’  mixed  with  the  paste  of  the  fruit  of  Madana  (Randia 
dumetorum ),  as  also  with  honey  and  sugar,  should  be  administered 
for  vomiting.f 

Or,  (hot)  water  mixed  with  sugar  and  the  paste  of  Madana  (fruit 
of  Randia  dumetoruni)  may  be  given  ; 

Or,  the  juice  of  Ikshu  (sugarcane),  mixed  with  the  paste  of 
Madana  (fruit  of  Randia  dumetoruni), ;  58 

Or,  the  seeds  of  Vatsaka  (otherwise  called  Indrayava,  i.  e., 
Holarrhena  antidysenterica ),  the  tubers  of  Musta  ( Cyperus  rotundus ), 
.the  fruit  of  Madana  ( Randia  dnmetornm ),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  and 


*  ‘VahudoshSnam’  implies  patients  in  whom  the  faults  have  been  greatly  excited.— T. 
t  The  direction  about  the  preparation  of  ‘Mantha’  is  that  the  decoction  of  raisins,  &c., 
should  be  taken  ;  the  flour  of  barley,  or  of  wheat,  or  of  fried  paddy,  should  then  be  mixed 
with  it  to  give  it  the  needful  consistence  — T. 


.  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1158 

Madhu  (honey),  form  excellent  emetics  in  blood-bile  having  a  down¬ 
ward  course.  59 

In  blood-bile  having  an  upward  course,  for  a  person  whose  bowels 
have  been  cleared,  ‘Tarpanas’,  in  the,  order  in  which  they  have  been 
laid  down,  are  beneficial. 

In  blood-bile  having  a  downward  course,  (for  a  person  whose 
bowels  are  clear),  gruels  and  the  rest  are  beneficial,  if  the  wind  be  not 
predominant.*  60 

One  that  has  strength  and  flesh,  one  that  is  afflicted  by  weight 
of  grief  or  .by  the  toil  of  walking,  one  that  is  afflicted  by  the  heat  of 
fire  or  the  sun,  or  one  that  has  been  weakened  by  other  afflictions, 
-one  that  is  pregnant,  one  that  is  of  advanced  years,  one  that  is  of 
tender  years,  one  that  is  accustomed  to  dry  and  sparing  food,  should 
be  known  as  unfit  for  the  administration  of  purgatives  and  emetics 
if  suffering  under  blood-bile.  6i--6s 

If,  again,  consumption  supervenes  upon  blood-bile,  neither  purga¬ 
tives,  nor  emetics,  should  be  administered.  For  persons  of  this 
description,  when  they  suffer  from  blood-bile,  treatment  by  adminis¬ 
tering  medicines  called  ‘Sansamanas’  (alleviatives)  is  beneficial. 

As  regards  ‘Samsamanas’,  they  are  laid  down  below.  63 

The  decoction  of  Atarushaka  (otherwise  called  Vasaka,  i.  e.  Justi- 
cta  Adhatodd ),  Mridwika  (raisins),  and  Pathya  (chebulic  myrobalans) 
mixed  with  sugar,  as  also  with  honey,  is  alleviative  of  asthma,  con¬ 
sumption,  and  blood-bile.f  64 

Into  the  decoction  of  Atarushaka  (Justicia  Adhatodd ),  should  be 
thrown  a  Priyangu  (Aglaia  Roxburghiana)  Saurashtra  earth,  Anjana 
(Galena  or  sulphide  of  lead),  Lodhra  Symplocos  racemosus),  and  honey. 
This  medicine  is  alleviative  of  blood-bile.  It  should  therefore,  be 
drunk  by  one  suffering  under  that  disease.}  65 


*  ‘VavSgwSdi’,  that  is,  gruels  and  the  rest,  meaning  gruels  which  constitute  ‘Pey£’  anp 
which  should  be  prepared  according  to  the  directions  already  laid  down.  Vide  verses  43  &c. 
ofithis  Lesson. — T. 

+  Such  decoctions,  so-mixed,  which  are  cooling,  are  called  ‘Sansamanas.’— T. 
i  Some  take  ‘Anjana’  to  mean  the  juice  of  Berbris  Asiatica.  'In  fact,  Bengal  physicians 
*ake  the  word  to  mean  galena  ;  while  in  the  N.  W.  Provinces,  it  is  always  taken  for  the 
juice  of  Btrberis  Asiatica.— T. 


CHAR  A  K A- SAM HI  TA. 


11 59 


Into  the  decoction  of  Atarushaka  (Justicia  Adhatodd)  should  be 
thrown  the  paste  of  Padmak&shtha  (the  fragrant  wood  of  that  name 
brought  from  Malwa  and  southern  India),  that  of  Padmakinjalka 
(the  filaments  of  the  lotus),  that  of  Durba  {Panicum  Daclylon ), 
that  of  Vastuka  (the  potherb  called  Chenopodium  album),  that  of 
Utpala  ( Nymphcea  stellata),  that  of  Nagapushpa  ( Mesua  f erred),  and 
that  of  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racemosus ).  It  should  be  drunk  in  the 
•same  way,  viz.,  by  adding  to  it  honey  and  sugar\  66 

Prapaundarika  (the  root-stock  of  Nymphcea  lotus),  liquorice,  and 
honey,'  dissolved  in  the  expressed  juice  of  horse-dung,  or  the  roots  of 
Yavasa  ( Hedysarum  Alhagi),  and  those  of  Bhringar&ja  ( Verbesina 
ealendulacea),  reduced  to  paste  and  dissolved  in  the  expressed  juice 
<of  cowdung,  form  good  ‘peyas’  (drinks)  that  are  alleviative  of  blood- 
bile.  Each  of  these  should  be  mixed  with  water  in  which  (sun-dried) 
rice  has  been  washed. 

Or,  the  expressed  juice  of  cowdung  or  horse-dung,  mixed  with 
honey  and  sugar,  may  be  licked. 

The  flowers,  reduced  to  powder,  of  Khadira  ( Acacia  acuminata ), 
and  £&lmali  (. Bombax  Malabaricum),  mixed  with  honey,  should  be 
licked  by  a  person  afflicted  by  blood-bile.  67-69 

The  fruit  of  (^ringataka  (  Trapa  bispinosa),  fried  paddy,  the  tubers 
of  Mustaika  ( Cyperus  rotundus),  and  the  seeds  of  Kharjjura  (date), 
reduced  to  powder  and  mixed  with  honey,  or  the  filaments  of  the 
lotus,  mixed  with  honey,  should  be  licked.  7® 

The  flesh  of  fowl  and  animals  having  their  habitat  in  the  wilder¬ 
ness,  mixed  with  honey,  should  be  licked. 

When  the  blood  of  the  patient  becomes  collected  in  ducts,  he 
should  then  lick  the  dung  of  doves,  mixed  with  honey.  71 

Ushira  (the  roots  of  Andropogon  muricatum),  Kaliyaka  (a  variety 
•of  yellow  sandal  wood ,  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racemosa),  Padmaka  (a 
fragrant  wood),  Priyangu  ( Aglaia  Roxburgkiana),  Katphala  ( Myrica 
sapida),  £ankha  (conchs),  Gairika  (red  chalk', — these  eight  should  be 
powdered,  each  separately. 

To  the  powder  of  each  should  be  added  an  equal  measure  of  the 
powder  of  red  sandal  wood. 

Sugar  should  next  be  added.  Each  -of  the  powders  thus  prepared 
should  then  be  dissolved  in  water  in  which  (s.un-dried)  rice  has  be  eh 
washed,  7 3 


H  7 


n6o 


CH A  RA  KA  -  SA  MHITA . 


Each  of  these  drinks  alleviates  blood-bile,  the  disease  called 
‘Tamaka’  (a  severe  variety  of  asthma  which  is  accompanied  by  the 
sight  of  darkness  all  around);  as  also  thirst,  and  burning  of  the  skin. 

Kirfitatikta  ( Agatkotes  Cherayta ),  Kramuka  (betel-nut),  Musta 
(tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus ),  Prapaundarika  (the  fragrant  wood  of 
that  name  brought  from  Malwa  and  southern  India;,  Kamala  ( Nelum - 
bium  speciosum),  Utpala  ( Nymphcea  stellatd,  the 'roots  of  Hrivera 
( Pavonia  odorata),  the  leaves  of  Patola  ( Trichosanthes  dioica),  Dura- 
labha  {Alhagi  Maurorum ),  Parppataka  {Oldenlandia  biflora ),  Mrinala 
(lotus  stalks),  the  bark  of  Dhananjaya  (otherwise  called  Arjun'a,  i.  e., 
Pentaptera  Arjund ,  that  of  Udumvara  ( Ficus  glomerata ),  that  of 
Vetasa  ( Calamus  rotang),  that  of  Nyagrodha  ( Ficus  Indica ),  £sleya 
( Fceniculum  Vulgare,  or  fennel  seeds),  the  bark  of  Yavasaka  ( Alhagi 
Mauroram ),  Tuga  (otherwise  called  Vangsalochana,  i.  e.,  bambu 
manna),  Lata  (otherwise  called  (^yamalata,  i.  e.,  Echites  frutescens ), 
Nagega  ( Mesua  f erred),  Tanduliya  ( Amaranikus  polygamus'),*  £firiva 
(Asclepias  pseudosarsd),  Mocharasa  (the  exudation  of  Bombax 
Malabaricum ),  and  Samanga  (otherwise  called  Varahakranta,  i.  e., 
Mimosa  pudica ) ; 

Each  of  these  should  be  powdered  and  mixed  with  the  powder 
of  red  sandal  wood  (in  equal  measure).  Sugar  should  then  be  added, 
and  the  compound  dissolved  in  water  in  which  (sun-dried)  rice  has 
been  washed.  Each  (of  these  preparations  is  regarded  beneficial  in 
blood-bile.  73-75 

Cold  infusions  (obtained  by  steeping  them  in  water  during  night 
time),  or  the  expressed  juice,  or  the  paste  (obtained  by  grinding  them 
in  a  mortar),  or  the  powder,  or  the  decoction  (obtained  by  boiling 
them  in  water)  of  these,  taken  separately  or  in  groups,  alleviate 
blood-bile.f  76 

The'  infusion  of  these,  viz.,  Mudga  ( Phaseolus  Mungo'),  fried  paddy, 
barley,  the  fruit  of  Krishna  (otherwise  called  Pippali,  i.  e.,  Piper 
longnm),  Ushira  (the  roots  of  Andropogon  muricatmri),  Musta  (tubers 
of  Cyperus  rotundus ),  and  Chandana  (Pterocarpus  santalinus ),  obtained 


*  Some  identify  it  with  Amaranthus  spinosus,  i.  e.,  ‘Kanta-Natiya’  and  not  ‘Champa- 
Natiy5.’^-T. 

t  Two  groups  of  drugs  are  mentioned,  viz.,  the  groHp  referred  to  in  verse  72  and  that 
referred  to  in  verses  73  to  75.  What  is  stated  here  is  that  cold  infusions,  &c,,  of  either  of 
the  groups,  or  of  each  drug  mentioned  in  them,  are  beneficial. — T. 


CHAR  A  K A-S AM  HIT  A . 


n6r 

by  steeping  them  in  the  decoction  of  Bala  (Sida  cordifolia ),  alleviates 
even  seven  varieties  of  blood-bile.  77 

The  powder  of  these,  viz.,  Vaiduryya  ( lapis  lazuli ),  pearls,  gems, 
red  chalk,  Saurashtra  earth,  conchs,  gold,  fruit  of  Amlaka  ( Phyllan - 
thus  Emblicd),  and  Udaka  (otherwise  called  Bala,  i.  e.,  Pavonia  odo - 
rata),  dissolved  in  honey  and  water,  or  in  the  expressed  juice  of  the 
sugarcane,  forms  a  drink  which  alleviates  blood-bile.  78 

Take  Ushira  (the  roots  of  Andropogon  muricatum ),  Padma  ( Nym - 
phoea  lotus),  Utpala  ( Nymphcea  stellata ),  and  Chandana  ( Pterocarpus 
santalinus).  Pound  them  together  and  soak  the  pounded  mass  in 
water.  Into  the  infusion  thus  obtained  throw  a  heated  clod  of  earth. 
Strain  the  infusion  (through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth.).  When  cooled 
mix  it  with  sugar  and  honey.  This  drink  should  be  given  to  a 
person  afflicted  with  aggravation  of  blood.  It  produces  beneficial 
consequences.*  79 

Priyanguka  ( Aglaia  Roxburghiana),  Chandana  ( Pterocarpus  santa¬ 
linus),  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racemosd),  £ariva  ( Echites  frutescens ), 
Madhuka  (Bassia  latifolia),  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus), 
Abhaya  ( Chebulic  myrobalans ),  and  Dhataki  ( Grislea  tomentosa), 
should  be  pounded  and  soaked  in  water.  Into  the  infusion  thus 
obtained  should  be  thrown  a  little  of  Saurastra  earth.  It  should  then 
be  strained  (through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth).  The  infusion,  drunk 
with  sugar  and  water  in  which  has  been  washed  ‘Shastika’  rice,  is 
highly  beneficial  in  checking  blood-bile.  8o 

If,  by  (administering)  the  diverse  preparations .  of  ‘Kashayas’  as 
mentioned  above,  the  patient’s  digestive  fire  be  kindled  and  his 
phlegm  conquered,  without  the  blood-bile  becoming  alleviated,  and 
if  the  wind  be  excited,  then  that  which  should  be  done  is  laid  down 
below.  8i 

For  (internal)  administration  the  following  are  foremost :  goat’s 
milk,  or  vaccine  milk,  boiled  with  five  times  as  much  water  (and  taken 
down  when  the  water  has  evaporated  and  the  measure  of  milk  only 
remains),  mixed  with  sugar  and  honey  ; 


*  I  give  the  substance  of  the  verse,  because  the  original  is  exceedingly  terse.  'RaktSti- 
yoga’  means  excess  or  aggravation  of  blood,  i.  e.,  blood-bile,  for  this  disease  is  the  result  o 
an  abnormal  increase  of  blood. — T. 


»i6z 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Or,  the  milk  should  be  boiled  with  the  group  of  drugs  beginning 
with  Vidarigandha  {Convolvulus paniculatus) ;  82 

[The  group  beginning  with  Vidarigandha  consists  of  these,  viz., 
t.  Vidari  {Convolvulus  panieulatus),  2.  Sahadeva  (otherwise  called1 
Berela,  i.  e.r  Sida  cordifolia ),  3.  Vigwadeva  (otherwise  called  Goraksha- 
chakule,  i.  e.,  Sida  spinosa  ,  4.  £wadangstra  {Tribulus  lanuginosus), 
5,  Prithakparni  {Doodia  lagopodioides),  6.  £atSvari  {Asparagus  race- 
mo  sus),  7.  Sariva  {Ex kites  frnteseens),  8v  Krishna-sariva  {Echites 
frutescens  of  tfre  dark  variety',  9.  Jivaka  (not  identifiable,  Guduchi  or 
Tinospora  cordifolia  being  used  as  a  substitute),  10.  Rishabhaka  (not 
identifiable,  Vangalochana  or  bambu-manna  being  used  instead), 
Mahasaha  (otherwise  called  Mashaparni,  i.  e.,  Glycine  debilis), 
12.  Kshudrasaha  (Phaseolus  trilobus),  13.  Vrihati  {Solanum  Indicum),. 
Kantakfiri  {Solanum  Xmvthocarpu m ),  15.  Punarnava  {Boerhavia 

diffusa),  16.  Eranda  {Ricinus  communis),  17.  Hansap&di  {Cissus  peda- 
tus  ,  18.  Vrischika  {Tragia  involucrata),  and  19.  Rishabha  {Mucuna 
pruriensfl 

Or,  the  milk  should  be  boiled  with  Draksha  •  (grapes)  or  with 
Nagaraka  (dry !  ginger) ;  or  with  Bala  {Sida  cordifolia)  -,  or  with 
Gokshura  {Tribulus  lanuginosus)  ; 

Or,  the  milk  should  be  given,  boiled  with  Jivaka  (not  identified^ 
Tinospora  cordifolia  being  used  instead);  Rishabhaka  (not*  identified, 
bambu-manna  being  used  '  instead) ;  and  mixed  with  ghee  and 
sugar.  83 

Or,  the  milk  should  be  boiled  with  £atavari  {Asparagus  raccmosus'), 
and  Gokshura  {Tribulus  lanuginosus),  or  with  the  Parnis  {viz.,  1.  £fila- 
parni,  i.  e.,  Hedysarum  Gangeticuin,  2.  Prishniparni,  L  e.,  Doodia  lago¬ 
podioides,  3.  Mudgaparni,  i.  e.,  Phaseolus  trilobus,  and  4.  Mashaparni, 
i.  e.,  Glycine  debilis).  This  drink  quickly  checks  aggravated  blood 
with  either  an  upward  or  downward  course,  especially  that  blood 
which  escapes  through  the  urethra  causing  severe  pain.  84 

When  the  aggravated  blood  escapes,  in  special,  through  the  anal 
canal,  milk  boiled  with  Mocharasa  (exudation  of  Bonibax  Malabari- 
cum ),  or  with  the  hanging  roots  of  Bata  {Ficus  Indica),  or  with  the 
sprouts  of  Bata  {Ficus  Indica ),  or  with  Hrivera  ( Pavonia  odorata ),  or 
with  Nilotpala  ( Nymphcea  stellata),  or  with  Nagara  (dry  ginger), 
is  regarded  beneficial.  8S 

Or,  causing  the  patient  to  drink  at  first  the  various  ‘Kashayas’ 


'  CHARAKA-S  AM  HIT  A.  1163 

(decoctions),  mentioned  above,  with  milk,  the  physician  should  give 
him  <£ali  rice  with  milk  ; 

Or,  the  patient  should  drink  ghee  boiled  with  these  ‘Kashayast’ 
when  the  discharge  of  blood  is  excessive.  86 

VASA-GHRITAM. 

Taking  the  decoction  of  Vasa  (Justicia  Adhatoda )  with  its 
branches,  leaves,  roots,  and  flowers,  and  the  paste  also  of  the  same, 
ghee  should  be  cooked.  Mixed  with  honey,  this  ghee  quickly  alleviates, 
aggravated  blood.  87 

Ghee ,  boiled  with  the  expressed  juice  of  the  root-stalks  of  the. 
leaves  of  PalSga  ( Butea  frondosa ),  and  the  paste  of  the  same* 

or  ghee,  boiled  with  the  expressed  juice  of  the  root-stalks  of  the 
leaves  of  Madhu  (Bassia  latifolia)  and  the  paste  of  Vatsaka: 
(seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica ), 

or  ghee  boiled  with  (the  expressed  juice  and  paste  of)  SamangA 
(Mimosa  pudica),  Utpala .  ( Nymphcea  stellata),  and  Lodhra, 
( Symplocos  racevvosa),  should  be  licked  (by  one  afflicted  with 
blood-bile.*  88 

The  process  with  .regard  to  TrayamSna  ( Ficus  heterophylla)  ■■  is  the; 
same  (i.  e.,  ghee  should  be  boiled  with  the  decoction  and  the  paste; 
of  Ficus  heterophylla  in  the  same  way  as  above). 

As  regards  Udumvara  ( Ficus  glomerata),  and  the  leaves  of  Patola 
(Trichosanthes  dioica)  alsp, .  the  process  is  the  same  (i.  e.,  ghee  should 
be  boiled  with  the  decOetion  and  the  paste  of  Udumvara,  and  the: 
decoction  and  the  paste  of  Patola-leaves  after  the  same  manner); 

All  those  ghees,  again,  which  have  been  laid  down  as  alieviative 
of  fever  characterised  by  excitement  of  the  bile,  are  beneficial  in 
blood-bile.  89 

Thus  (ends)  the  group.of  ghees  which  are  alieviative  of  blood-bile. 

Those  preparations  of  ‘Avyangas’  (or  medicated  oils  for  rubbing 
the  body  with),  of  ‘Parisechana’  (medicated  waters  for  sprinkling 


*  It  seems  that  three  preparations  are  spoken  of  here  :  I.  Ghee  cooked  with  the  juice 
and  the  paste  of  Palana  ;  2.  that  cooked  with  the  juice  of  Madhu  or  Madhuka,  and  the  paste 
of  Vatsaka  ;  and  3.  that  cooked  with  the  juice  and  paste  of  Samanga  and  the  rest.  ,  Some 
commentators  take  it  that  the  paste  of  Madhuka  is  implied.  According  to  them,  the  number 
of  ‘Yogas’  is  four,  and  not  three.. — T. 


1 164  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 

the  body  with),  ‘Sweda’  (fomentations  and  appliances  for  causing 
perspiration),  and  of ‘Abagaha’  (baths  cold  and  hot) ;  and  those. beds, 
chambers,  ordinances  about  cooling  the  system,  and  the  highly 
beneficial  directions  about  enemata,  which  are  seen  to  be  efficacious  in 
fever  characterised  by  excitement  of  the  bile,  should  all  be  prescribed 
for  (persons  afflicted  with)  blood-bile,  considering  beforehand  ques¬ 
tions  of  time  and  dose. 

Those  ghees  and  treacles  which  are  beneficial  in  all  varieties  of 
sores,  promptly  subjugate  blood-bile.  9°-9i 

If  the  blood-bile  be  accompanied  by  excited  phlegm,  and  if  it 
adheres  to  the  passage  of  the  throat,  the  following  should  be 
administered  : 

The  alkaline  ashes  of  the  stalks  of  Utpala  ( Nymphcea  stellata ), 
those  of  the  stalks  of  the  lotus  and  other  plants  of  the  same  species, 
of  lotus  flowers,  of  the  flowers  of  Utpala  *( Nymphcea  stellata ),  of 
Kegara  (i.  <?.,  Nagakegara  or  Mesna  f erred),  of  Palaga  ( Butea  frondpsa :), 
of  Priyangu  ( Aglaia  Roxburghiana ),  as  also  those  of  the  flowers  of 
Madhuka  ( Bassia  latifolia),  and  of  the  flowers  of  Sana  ( Crotalaria 
junced,  each  mixed,  in  judicious  proportions,  with  honey  and  ghee.  92-93 

Grinding  the  following,  viz.,  (^atavari  ( Asparagus  racemosus ), 
Dadima  ( Punica  granatum ),  Tintidika  ( Tamarindus  Indica ),  Kakoli 
(a  root  brought  from  Nepal),  Meda  (not  identifiable,  Agwagandha  or 
Physalis  flexuosa  being  used  as  a  substitute),  Madhuka  (liquorice), 
and  Vidari  {Convolvulus  paniculatus),  as  also  the  roots  of  Phalapuraka 
(1 Citrus  medico),  into  a  paste,  ghee  should  be  boiled,  with  it,  adding 
milk  four  times  its  measure.  94 

This  Ghee  cures  bfonchites,  fever,  epistasis,  retention  of  stools,  &c., 
and  deep-seated  abdominal  pains,  as  also  blood-bile. 

That  ghee  also,  which  is  boiled  with  the  five  groups  of  five  roots, 
is  productive  of  the  same  effects  (as  the  above).*  95 

Thus  ends  Ghee  called  ‘^atamuli.’ 


*  The  five  groups  of  five  roots  are  these  :  1.  Swalpa-panchamula,  2.  Vrihat-panchamula, 
3.  Trina-panchamula,  4.  Kantaka-panchamula,  and  5.  Valli-panchamula.  The  first  comprises 
<j31aparni,  Prishniparni,  Vrihati,  Kantakari,  and  Gokshura.  The  second  comprises  Vilwa, 
(Pyonaka,  Gambhari,  Patala,  and  Ganiari.  The  third,  KuQa,  Kaga,  Sara,  Darbha,  and 
Ikshu.  The  fourth,  Karamardda,  Qwadangshtra,  Hinggra,  Jhinti,  and  (Jatavari.  The  fifth, 
Vidari,  Ajagringi,  Rajani,  Sariva,  and  Ainrita. 

The  decoction  and  the  paste  of  each  should  be  taken  for  boiling  ghee. — T. 


CHARAKA-SA  MBIT  A. 


165 


Those  combinations  of  ‘Kashayas’  (decoctions)  which  have  already 
been  laid  down,  may  be  administered  by  physicians  in  the  form  of 
snuff' as  well,  when  the  blood-bile  flowing  from  the  nose  has  been 
ascertained  to  be  free  from  vitiated  faults.  96 

For,  if  the  vitiated  blood  be  checked  by  means  of  snuffs,  malignant 
forms  of  ‘Pratigyaya’  (catarrh  in  the  nose),  head-diseases,  blood  mixed 
with  pus  and  having  a  corpse-like  scent,  afflicting  worms,  and  loss  of 
scent  itself,  may  follow.  97 

The  other  snuffs  prescribable  in  blood-bile  (flowing  from  the  nose) 
are  as  follow  : 

Nilotpala  ( Nymphcea  stelletta ),  Gairika  (red  chalk),  the  pulv  of 
conch-shells,  and  red  sandal  wood,  grinded  into  a  paste  and  dissolved 
in  sugar-water ; 

The  expressed  juice  of  mango-seeds,  that  of  Samanga  ( Mimosa 
pudicci),  that  of  Dhataki  ( Grislea  tomeniosa),  the  exudation  of  Bombax 
Malabaricum ,  that  of  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racemosa),  the  juice  of 
DrakhS  ( Vitis  vinifera ),  that  of  Ikshu  ( Saccharum  officinarum),  milk, 
or  the  expressed  juice  of  Durva  (Panicum  Dactylon)  that  of  the  roots 
of  Duralabha  ( Hedysarum  Alh'agi),  that  of  the  roots  of  Palandu 
(onion)1,  or  that  the  flowers  of  D&dimva  {Punic a  granatum )  ;  9s -99 

The  oil  of  the  seeds  of  Piyala  ( Buchanania  latifolid),  Madhuka 
(liquorice)  boiled  in  water,  vaccine  milk,  ghee  obtained  from  the  milk 
of  the  buffalo  or  the  goat  and  boiled  with  milk  four  times  its  measure, 
and  mango  seeds,  {Echites  frutescens ),  Kamala  ( Nymphcea  lotus ) 

and  Utpala  ( Nymphcea  stelleta).*  100 

Bhadragiya  (white  sandal  wood),  Lohita-chandana  (red.  sandal 
wood),  Prapaundarika  (root-stock,  of  Nymphcea  lotus),  Kamala  ( Nym¬ 
phcea  lotus),  Utpala  ( Nymphcea  stellata),  Ugira  (roots  of  Andropogon 
muricatuvi ),  Vanira  ( Calamus  rotang',  Jala  (otherwise  called  Bala,  i.  e. 
Pavonia  odorata ),  Mrinala  (stalks  of  lotus  and  other  plants  of  the 
same  species),  Sahasraviryya  {Panicum  Dactylon),  Madhuka  (liquorice), 
Payasya  (a  bulb  of  the  onion  tribe,  otherwise  called  Kshirakakoli), 
the-  roots  of  £ali  (well-known  paddy  of  that  name)  Ikshu  ( Saccharum 
officinarwri),  the  roots  of  Yavasa  ( Hedysarum  Alhagi),  those  of  GundrS 


*  Ghee  obtained  from  the  milk  of  the  buffallo  or  the  goat  is  to  be  boiled  with  vaccine 
milk  of  the  measure  mentioned,  as  also  with  the  decoction  and  the  paste  of  mango-seeds  and 
the  other  articles  named, — T. 


1 1 66 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


[Panicum  uliginosuni ),  those  of  Nala  ( Arunda  kart  a',  those  of  Kugtt 
{Poa  cynosuroides),  those  of  Kaga  ( Saccharum  spontaneuni),  Kuchan- 
■dana  (otherwise  called  Bakam,  i.  e.,  Ccesalpina  Sappan ),  (^aivala 
( Vallisneria  octandra ),  Ananta  ( Asclepias  pseudosarsa),  Kalanusfiryya 
(probably  a  species  of  lichen),  the  roots  of  Trina  (otherwise  called 
Gandha-trina,  i.  e.,  Andrapogon  schcenanthus),  Riddhi  (not  identifiable, 
Bala  or  Sida  cordifolia  being  used  instead),  the  roots  and  flowers  of 
all  aquatic  plants,  and  mud  or  mire  obtained  from  tanks  : 

All  these  should  be  grinded  together  into  a  paste  and  applied  as 
a  plaster.  Such  plasters  alleviate  blood-bile. 

Udumvara  [Ficus  glomerata',  Agwatha  [Ficus  religiosa ),  Madhuka 
[PSassia  latifolia ),  Lodhra  [Symplocos  racemosa ),  all  varieties  of  astrin¬ 
gent  trees  (such  as  Bata  or  Ficus  Indica  and  others),  and  all  varieties 
•of  trees  having  cooling  virtues)  : 

Alf  these  may  be  used  for  purposes  of  plasters,  sprinkling,  and 
baths.  Their  decoction  and  paste  may  be  used  for  cooking  ghees 
and  oils. 

The  physician  who  is  desirous  of  alleviating  blood-bile  may 
administer  the  drugs  mentioned  above,  viz.,  those  beginning,  with 
Bhadragriya  (white  sandal  wood).  *01-104 

DharSgriha,’  cool  ‘Bhumigriha’,  delicious  groves  rendered  cool  by 
pieces  ®f  water  and  soft  breezes,  and  the  touch  of  articles  set  with 
Vaiduryya  [lapis  lazuli ),  pearls,  and  gems,  and  rendered  cold  by 
•exposure  to  the  night-dew,  relieve  the  burning  sensation  (in  blood- 
bile).*  i°5 

The  leaves  and  the  flowers  of  aquatic  plants,  cool  cloths  made  of 
.silk,  the  leaves  of  plantain  plants,  and  the  petals  of  Padma  ( Nelum - 
Mum  speciosum),  and  Utpala  [Nymphcea  stellafa),  are  commendable 
an  covering  beds  and  seats  (for  the  use  of  persons  afflicted  with  blood- 
bile  accompanied  by  burning  sensation  of  the  body). 

When  there  is  burning  of  the  skin  (in  blood-bile),  the  touch  is 
commendable  of  beloved  and  beautiful  women  with  bodies  laved 
•with  the  paste  of  Priyangu  [Aglaia  Roxburghiana),  and  Chandana 
[Santalum  album),  as  also  the  touch  of  the  cool  flowers,  drenched  in 


*  A  ‘dharagriha’  is  a  chamber  in  which  cool  water  is  allowed  to  fall  from  fountains  and 
■other  appliances  of  the  kind.  A  ‘bhumigriha’  is  a  sabterranean  chamber.  Almost  every 
residential  house  in  the  N.  W.  Provinces  contains  one  or  two  subtarranean  chambers  which 
are  resorted  to  during  the  summer  season  at  daytime  f  heir  coolness. — T. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA . 


u6  7 

,  water,  of  Padma  ( Nelumbium  speciosuni)  and  Utpala  ( Nymphcea  stellata ), 
and  the  wind  produced  by  fans  made  of  peacock  plumes.  106-107 

The  contact  of  rivers  and  lakes,  of  caves  in  the  Himalayas,  of 
moonlight,  and  of  tanks  adorned  with  lotuses,  all  kinds  of  cool  things, 
and  pleasant  and  agreeable  discourses, .  alleviate  t(the  burning  sensa¬ 
tion  in)  blood-bile.  108 

( Here  occur  two  verses  containing  a  summary ). 

The  preceptor  (viz.,  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri)  has,  in  this  Lesson 
on  the  Treatment  of  Blood-bile,  discoursed  on  the  cause,  aggravation, 
nomenclature,  seat,  symptoms  according  to  the  particular  fault  that 
is  excited,  the  two  outlets,  curability,  and  suppressibility,  the  course 
of  treatment,  the  food  and  drink  that  are  beneficial  and  those  that 
should  be  avoided,  the  correctives,  and  the  alleviatives  (of  Blood- 
Bile).*  1-2  . 

Thus  ends  Lesson  IV,  on  Blood-Bile,  in  the  Division  called 
Chikitsa  (Treatment),  of  -the  treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised  by 
Charaka. 


LESSON  V. 

TREATMENT  OF  GULMA  (TUMOURS). 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  treatment  of  Gulma 
(tumours). 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atari.  1 

That  refuge,  as  a  father,  of  all  creatures,  that  lord  of  the  past  and 
the  future,  that  foremost  of  speakers,  viz.,  Punarvasu,  inculcated  the 
treatment  whose  results  had  been  tested  by  experience  and  which 
had  for  its  object  the  cure  of  tumours.  2 

From  excessive  loss  of  stools,  phlegm,  and  bile, 

or  oppressed  by  these  increased  excessively, 

or  by  the  suppression  of  the  pronounced  urgings  (of  urine  and 
stools),. 

or  by  excessive  shocks  caused  by  external  wounds, 


*  The  correct  reading  is  ‘samjna’,  meaning  .  nomenclature,  and  not  ‘sankhya’  which 
implies  number  or'varieties. — T, 

148  '  . 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


1168 


or  by  excessive  indulgence  in  dry  food  and  drink, 
or  by  grief, 

or  by  injudicious  application  of  correetives  (such  as  purgatives, 
emetics,  enemata), 

or  .by  indulgence,  at  once  irregular  and  excessive,  in  acts  and 
exertions  that  are  injurious, 
the  wind  becomes  excited  in  the  stomach.  3-4 

Vitiating  the  phlegm  a  nd  the  bile,  bearing  them  upwards,  and 
obstructing  thereby  its  own  paths,  the  excited  wind  causes  (deep- 
seated)  pains  in  the  chest,  the  spleen,  the  flanks,  the  abdomen,  and 
the  bladder.  Its  passage  being  obstructed,  it  becomes  incapable  of 
moving  downwards.  It  then  stays  independently  or  in  dependance  on 
others,  in  the  ‘Pakkagaya’,  or  in  the  seat  of  the  bile,  or  of  the  phlegm  ; 
perceivable  by  touch,  it  becomes  solidified  into  a  globular  form 
and  obtains  the  name,  ‘Gulma’  (round  or  ball-like),  and  is  called  after 
the  particular  fault  that  predominates.*  5-6 

The  bladder,  the  navel,  the  chest,  and  the  two  flanks  are  the  five 
seats  of  ‘Gulma.’ 

I  sh^ll  now  lay  down  the  origin,  the  symptoms,  and  the  treatment 
of  ‘Gulma’  which  is  of  five  varieties.-]-  7 

Food  and  drink  that  are  dry,  exertions  (both  mental  and  physical) 
that  are  irregular  and  that  involve  an  excessive  strain,  suppression  of 
the  urgings  (of  stools  and  urine),  grief,  shocks  due  to  wounds  and  acts 
of  violence,  excessive  loss  of  stools,  and  abstention  from  food,  are  the 
causes  of  wind-born  ‘Gulma.’  8 

That  ‘Gulma’  which  is  characterised  by  irregularity  in  respect  of 
its  seat,  size,  and  the  pain  it  causes,  which  brings  about  an  obstruct¬ 
ion  in  respect  of  both  stools  and  wind,  which  causes  a  dryness  of 
both  the  mouth  and  the  throat,  which  produces  a  complexion  that  is 


•  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  the  wind,  becoming  obstructed,  becomes  solidified  into  a 
ball-like  substance  ;  hence,  it  comes  to  be  called  ‘Gulma’,  which  literally  means  a  ball-like 
or  globular  thing.  Having  obtained  the  name  of  ‘Gulma’  it  comes  again  to  be  called  after 
the  particular  fault  that  predominates,  viz.,  ‘wind-gulma„  ‘bile-gulma’,  ‘phlegm-gulma’,  or 
‘s3  nnipa  tika-gulma.  ’ — T. 

t  The  five  varieties,  which  are  mentioned  in  the  following  verses,  are  I.  wind-bom, 
4.  bile-bom,  3.  phlegm-born,  4.  that  born  of  all  the  three  faults,  and  5.  that  bom  of 
irregular  menstruation. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


1169 

dark  and  red,  which  brings  about  a  cold  fever  as  also  pains  in  the 
chest,  the  abdomen,  the  flanks,  the  shoulders,  and  the  head,  which 
gains  in  intensity  (as  regards  the  pains  it  causes)  when  digestion  has 
taken  place  of  the  food  that  has  been  eaten,  and  which  becomes 
milder  when  the  stomach  is  stuffed  with  some  food,  should  be  known 
as  having  sprung  from  the  wind.  When  one  is  afflicted  by  such  a 
‘Gulma’,  one  should  not  take  food  or  drink  that  is  dry,  or  astringent, 
or  bitter,  or  acrid.  9-m 

Food  and  drink  that  are  acrid,  or  sour,  or  keen,  or  hot,  or  burning, 
or  dry,  wrath,  excessive  indulgence  in  alcoholic  wines,  exposure  to 
the  sun  and  fire,  generation  in  the  stomach  of  ‘ama’  (mucus)  in  an 
excessive  measure,  and  vitiated  blood,  have  been  said  to  be  the 
originating  causes  of  bile-born  ‘Gulma.’  “ 

Fever,"  thirst,  redness  of  the  whole  body,  especially  of  the  face, 
excessive  pain  while  the  food  taken  is  in  course  of  digestion,  perspi¬ 
ration,  and  a  burning  sensation  of  the  skin,  are  the  symptoms  of  this 
variety  of ‘Gulma.’  Besides,  this  kind  of ‘Gulma’  becomes  as  untouch¬ 
able  as  an  inflammatory  boil.  12 

Food  and  drink  that  are  cold,  and  heavy,  and  oily,  absence  of  all 
exertion,  gorging  the  stomach  with  food,  and  sleep  at  daytime,  are 
the  causes  of  phlegm-born  ‘Gulma.’ 

All  the  causes  mentioned  above  bring  about  that  ‘Gulma’  which 
is  born  of  all  the  three  faults.  13 

Of ‘Gulma’  that  is 'phlegm-born,  the  symptoms  are  a  sensation  of 
wetness  (as  if  the  body  is  covered  with  a  piece  of  wet  cloth),  cold 
fever,  langour  of  limbs,  nausea,  bronchites,  disgust  for  food,  heaviness 
of  limbs,  sensation  of  cold,  mildness  of  pains,  hardness, .  and  elevation 
(swelling^.  14 

In  that  ‘Gulma’  which  is  born  of  two  faults,  the  physician,  after 
ascertaining  its  causes  and  symptoms,  as  also  the  (comparative) 
strength  and  weakness  of  the  two  faults,  should,  for  prescribing 
(prop&V)  medicaments,  take  into  consideration  the  three  other  varieties 
of  ‘Gulma’  {viz.,  the  simple  or  unmixed  ones',  whose  symptoms  have 
been  combined  in  the  case  that  confronts  him.#  15 


*  I  have  rendered  the  original  as  nearly  as  possible.  The  reader  will  have  some  idea, 
from  this,  of  the  terseness  of  Sanskrit.  What  is  said  hare  is  this  :  there  are  some  ‘Gulmas’ 
which  are  born  of  two  faults,  such  as  wind  and  bile,  bile  and  phlegm,  and  wind  and  phlegm. 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA . 


1170 

‘Gulma’  born  of  all  the  three  faults  is  characterised  by.  intense 
pain,  is  accompanied  by  a  burning  sensation,  and  is  hard  and  elevated, 
like  a  ball  of  stone.  It  quickly  ripens,  and  assumes  a  virulent  type. 
It  is  deprivative  of  strength  of  mind,  body,  and  digestive  fire.  The 
physician  should  regard  it  as  incurable.  16 

In  consequence  of  abstention  from  food  during  the  menstrual 
period,  of  fear,  of  food  and  drink  that  are  dry,  of  suppression  of  the 
urgings  of  stools  and  urine,  of  indulgence  in  food,  &c.,  that  are  con¬ 
stipating,  as  also  in  things  that  attenuate  the  system  by  promoting: 
copious  secretions,  and  of  faults  of  the  generative  organ,  ‘Gulma’ 
born  of  blood  afflicts  women.  *7 

That ‘Gulma’,  of  a  globular  form,  which  stirs  at  long  intervals 
without  any  of  its  parts  stirring,  which  is  accompanied  by  pain,  and 
whose  symptoms  resemble  those  of  conception,  is  bl6od;born.  It 
afflicts  women  only  ;  and  it  should  never  be  treated  before  at  least 
ten  months  of  its  appearance.*  ^ 

I  shall  now  expound  what  the  course  of  treatment,  whose  success 
has  been  ascertained  by  experience,  is  that  should  be  followed  for  the 
cure  of  ‘Gulma’  of  persons  afflicted  by  them.  I  shall  then  lay  down 
what  those  combinations  are  (of  drugs,  &c.)  that  are  alleviative  of 
‘Gulmas.’f  19 


When  the  phystcian  finds  such  a  case,  how  is  he  to  treat  it  ?  He  should  consider  what  the 
treatment  is  of  the  simple  varieties  of  ‘Gulma’,  that  is,  of  the  wind-born,  the  bile-bqrr?, 
and  the  phlegm-born  ones,  respectively.  Having  ascertained  which  of  the  two  faults  have 
produced  the  ‘Gulma’  and  in  what  proportion  each  of  them  has  been  excited,  he  will  be 
able  to  adopt  the  proper  course  of  treatment  by  combining  the  courses  of  treatment  followed 
in  those  two  simple  varieties  whose  symptoms  are  jointly  manifested  in  the  case  that 
confronts  him.  Thus,  if  the  ‘Gulma’  be  the  result  of  wind  and  bile,  its  treatment  should 
be  a  combination  of  the  courses  of  treatment  followed  in  the  wind-bom  and  the  bile-born 
varieties  respectively. — T. 

*  There  is  great  resemblance  between  a  blood-born  ‘Gulma’*  and  an  embryo  in  the  womb. 
There  is  this  difference  :  when  the  embryo  moves,  its  parts  may  be  felt  to  move.  But  in  the 
case  of  a  ‘Gulma’,  it  stirs  bodily,  for  it  has  no  parts  (like  the  limbs  of  an  embryo)  which  can 
move  or  stir.  Then,  again,  a  ‘Gulma’  stirs  in  this  way  at  long  intervals.  But  an  embryo 
stirs  often.  Other  symptoms  of  conception,  such  as  stoppage  of  the  menstrual  flow,  paleness 
of  complexion,  &c.,  appear.  Hence,  a  ‘Gulma’  of  this  kind  should  not  be  treated  before  ten 
months  which  an  embryo  takes  in  developing  and  coming  out. — T. 

+  It  is  difficult  to  understand  what  the  difference  is  which  the  Rishi  contemplates  between 
‘kriyakrama’  (course  of  treatment)  and  ‘Gulmanivarhanan  yogan’  (combination  of  drugs 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


H7l 


A  ‘Gulma’  that  is  wind-born,  that  has  arisen  from  dry  food  and 
drink  and  severe  physical  exercise,  that  is  accompanied  by  intense 
pain,  and  that  causes  a  stoppage  of  stools  and  the  downward  wind, 
should,  from  the  outset,  be  treated  with  oils.  20 

To  one  who  has  been  (properly)  oiled  by  means  of  (oily)  food  and 
unguents,  (oily)  drinks,  enemata  (dry  and  oily),  the  physician  should 
administer  ‘sweda’  (fomentation)  for  the  relief  of  his  ‘Gulma.’  ai 
•  The  ‘sweda’  that  is  administered  unto  a  person  who  has  been 
properly  oiled,  having  softened  the  ducts  and  subdued  the  excited 
wind  and  removed  the  constipation  of  the  bowels,  destroys  the 
'Gulma.’  22 

The  drinking  of  oils  is  especially  beneficial  in  a  ‘Gulma’  that 
appears  in  any  region  above  the  navel. 

In  the  case  of  ‘Gulma’  that  appears  in  the  ‘pakkafaya’  (or  that 
part  of  the  stomach  where  digestion  goes  on),  the  administration  of 
enemata  is  beneficial. 

In  a  ‘Gulma’  that  appears  in  the  abdortien,  both  {vis.,  the  drinking 
of  oils  and  the  administration  of  enemata)  are  beneficial.  23 

If  in  wind-born  ‘Gulma’,  the  digestive  fire  be  enkindled,  and  the 
(downward)  wind  and  the  stools  be  constipated,  then  food  and  drink 
that  are  ‘Vringhaniya’  (that  is,  which  promote  nutrition  and  corpu¬ 
lency),  should  be  administered,  as  also  food  and  drink  that  are  oily 
and  heating.  24 

In  all  varieties  of  wind-born  ‘Gulma’,  frequent  drinking  of  (medi¬ 
cated)  oils,  as  also  the  administration  of  enemata  both  dry  and  oily, 
is  prescribable  by  the  physician  who  should,  however,  seek  to  keep 
the  phlegm  and  the  bile  in  their  normal  condition.  25 

If  when  the  (excited)  phlegm  and  the  wind  are  almost  subdued, 
the  bile,  or  the  blood,  be  provoked  during  the  continuance  of  the 
treatment  then  medicine  should  be  administered,  agreeably  to  the 
fault  that  is  aggravated,  by  the  physician  who  should,  at  the  outset, 
in  the  the  middle,  and  at  the  end,  seek  to  keep  the  wind  in  its  normal 
condition.  27 

If  in  wind-born  ‘Gulma’,  the  phlegm,  becoming  aggravated,  and 
quenching  the  digestive  fire,  brings  about  disgust  for  food,  nausea, 


alleviative  of  ‘Gulmas.’)  If  there  is  any  difference,  it  will  appear  from  the  verses  that 
follow.— T. 


II 72 


CH ARAKA-  SAM  HIT  A. 


heaviness  of  the  limbs,  and  drowsiness,  the  physician  should  tear  out 
{expel)  the  phlegm  (by  administering  emetics).  28 

If  in  ‘Gulma’  caused  by  excited  wind  and  phlegm,  ‘£ula’  (deep- 
seated  pains),  epistasis,  and  constipation  occur,  the  administration  of 
sticks,  pills,  and  powders,  that  are  alleviative  of  phlegm  and  wind, 
is  regarded  beneficial.  29 

If  of  a  person  who  is  afflicted  with  wind-born  ‘Gulma’,  the  bile, 
becoming  excited,  causes  great  heat  or  burning  of  the  body,  that 
person  should  be  purged  by  administering  such  medicated  oils  as 
are  calculated  to  restore  to  the  vitiated  faults  their  normal  condition.  3° 
If  a  ‘Gulma’  does  not  abate  notwithstanding  the  administration 
of  proper  medicines  for  checking  wind  and  the  rest,  it  becomes 
alleviated  by  letting  the  blood  of  the  patient  out.  31 

If  in  consequence  of  indulgence  in  oily  and  heating  food  and 
drink,  bile-born  ‘Gulma’  becomes  aggravated,  purgatives,  called 
‘Srangsana’,  are  regarded  beneficial.* 

If  by  indulgence  in  food  and  drink  that  ar%  dry  and  heating,  bile- 
born  Gulma’  becomes  aggravated,  (medicated)  ghees  are  regarded  as 
the  foremost  of  alleviatives.  32 

If  bile,  in  bile-born  ‘Gulma’,  be  ascertained  to  be  located  in  the 
‘pakkagaya’,  then  the  physician,,  conversant  with  considerations  of 
time,  should  promptly  expel  it  by  administering  enemata  composed 
of  milk  and  astringent  drugs.  33 

Or,  he  should  purge  the  patient  by  milk  boiled  with  bitters  and 
administered  in  a  lukewarm,  state. 

Or,  carefully  ascertaining  the  strength  of  the  patient’s  digestive 
fire,  the  physician  should  purge  him  by  administering  (medicated) 
ghees  or  oils.  34 

In  thirst,  fever,  excessive  burning,  ‘£ula’,  perspiration,  mildness 
of  the  digestive  fire,  and  disgust  for  food,  manifested  in  persons 
afflicted  with  bile-born  ‘Gulma’,  the  physician  should  let  the  patient’s 
blood  out  (by  opening  the  veins,  &c).  35 

If  their  very  roots  be  torn  up,  ‘Gulmas’  do  not  ripen  (suppurate)* 

*  ‘Virechaka’  or  purgatives  are  described  under  three  heads,  viz. ,  ‘Srangsana’,  ‘Bhedana, 
and  ‘Rechaka.’  Those  medicines  which  hurry  the  chyle  or  materials  for  digestion,  without 
allowing  them  to  be  properly  digested,  are  called  ‘Srangsana,’  as,  for  example,  pulv  of  Cassia 
fistula.  ‘Bhedana’  ate  those  which  expel  the  scybalae,  &c’,  without  liquefying  them. 
•Rechaka’  indude  those  which  first  liquefy  the  scybalae,  &c.,  and  then  expel  theip. — T. 


CM  A  RAKA-  SAM  HIT  A , 


”  n 

On  the  other  hand,  their  roots  torn,  they  perish  or  disappear.  It  is 
the  blood  that  becomes  vitiated  and  transformed  into  pus.  There 
being  no  blood,  there  can  be  no  disease.*  3$ 

When  the  faults  {viz.,  blood  and  bile)  have  been  expelled,  the 
person  afflicted  with  ‘Gulma’  becomes  strengthless.  He  should  be 
nourished  with  meat-juice  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  wild  animals. 

When  the  patient  has  become  assured  of  recovery,  the  ailments 
that  remain  should  be  treated  with  ghee.  37 

If  in  consequence  of  the  excessive  aggravation  of  blood  and  bile, 
and  of  want  of  proper  treatment,  a  ‘Gulma’  (born  of  blood)  ripens 
(suppurates),  the  lancet  is  the  proper  remedy.  38 

A  ‘Gulma’  that  is  heavy,  of  hard  form,  with  the  deep-seated  flesh 
for  its  subsequent  refuge,  without  discolouration,  and  immovable,  is 
said  to  be  raw  (or  unripe).  39 

By  these  indications,  viz.,  burning,  ‘£ula’,  disturbance  of  the 
digestive  fire,  loss  of  sleep,  cheerlessness,  and  fever,  a  ‘Gulma’  should 
be  known  as  ripening.  Such  a  ‘Gulma’  should  be  treated  with 
poultices.  4°  - 

When  in  a  ‘Gulma’  that  is  about  to  ripen,  the  following  indications 
are  observable,  it  should  then  be  regarded  as  having  ripened:  swell¬ 
ing  outwards,  uniform  elevation,  darkness  of  complexion  with  redness 
of  the  borders,  resemblance  with  a  leathern  bag  when  touched,  elasti¬ 
city  (i.  e.,  going  down  when  pressed  and  rising  up  when  the  pressure 
is  withdrawn),  numbness,  appearance  in  the  form  of  a  ball  on  that 
side  on  which  the  patient  lies  down,  and  ‘£ula’  pains.  41  24 

In  the  treatment  of  such  a  case,  those  physicians  who  are  well- 
skilled  in  the  operations  of  opening  or  piercing,  dressing,  and  plastering, 
and  who  are  followers  of  Dhanwantari,  are  regarded  as  concerned.  43 
If  the  inner  portion  of  a  ‘Gulma’  undergoes  the  process  of  ripen¬ 
ing,  the  following  symptom  appears  : 

Swelling  of  the  chest  and  the  abdomen. 

This,  when  ripening,  goes  on  internally.  When  it  goes  on  exter¬ 
nally,  the  ‘Gulma’  comes  out  on  the  (right  or  the  left)  side.  44 


*  What  is  said  here  is  this  ;  if  the  very  roots  of  a  ‘Gulma’  be  torn  up,  it  does  not  ripen. 
The  fact  is,  it  is  the  heat  of  the  excited  bile  and  of  blood  that  causes  boils  to  ripen.  It  is 
the  heat  of  bile  and  blood  that  causes  ‘Gulmas’  also  to  ripen.  If,  therefore,  the  bile  and  the 
blood  be  expelled,  ‘Gulmas’  would  not  ripen  or  suppurate. — T. 


M  74 


CHARAKA-SA  MH1 TA. 


A  ‘Gulina’  that  has  ripened,  drenchiug  the  ducts,  goes  out  either 
by  the  upward  or  the  downward  passage.* 

The  physician,  checkiing  all  supervening  symptoms,  should  not, 
for  ten,  or  two  and  ten,  days,  interfere  with  the  pus  issuing  of  itself, 
but  should  give  the  patient  beneficial  food  and  diet. 

After  this,  the  drinking  of  ghee ,  along  with  the  application  of 
healing  drugs,  is  beneficial.  45-46 

The  ghee  for  administration  in  such  cases,  it  is  desirable,  should 
be  pure,  boiled  with  bitters,  and  mixed  with  honey. 

If  in  consequence  of  indulgence  jn  food  and  drink  that  are  cold, 
heavy,  and  oily,  phlegm-born  ‘Gulma’  is  generated,  and  if  emetics  be 
incapable  of  being  administered  to  the  person  afflicted  by  it,  and  if 
his  digestive  fire  be  mild,  he  should  be  made  to  fast  from  the  very 
outset.  47 

r  If  a  person  afflicted  with  (phlegm-born)  ‘Gulma’  presents  these 
symptoms,  viz.,  mildness  of  digestive  fire,  mild  pains,  heaviness  and 
stupefaction  of  the  stomach,  nausea,  and  disgust  for  food,  he  should 
then  be  considered  as  fit  for  the  administration  of  emetics.  48 

After  a  person  has  undergone  a  course  of  fast  and  emetics,  he 
should  be  treated  with  drugs  that  are  of  heating  virtues.  The  physi¬ 
cian  should  also  give  him.  a'  course  of  food  and  drink  mixed  with 
things  that  are  acrid  and  bitter.  49 

Seeing  a  ‘Gulma’  that  exists  with  epistasis  and  constipated  bowels 
and  that  is  hard  and  elevated,  the  physician  should,  from  the  outset, 
considerately  cause  ‘sweda’  to  be  applied.  After  the  patient  has 
undergone  the  process  of  ‘sweda’,  the  physician  should,  by  proper 
•means,  kindle  the  digestive  fire  of  the  patient.  5° 

In  a  case  of  phlegm-bom  ‘Gulma’,  after  the  patient  has  undergone 
a  course  of  fast  and  emetics,  after  he  has  undergone  the  process  of 
‘sweda’,  and  after  -his  digestive  fire  has  been  kindled,  the  patient 
should,  in  proper  time,  drink  ghee  mixed  with  alkaline  ashes  and 
acrids  (such,  for  example,  as  Tryushanadi-Ghrita).  S1 

When  it  has  been  ascertained  that  a  phlegm-born  ‘Gulma’  has 
sifted  from  its  place,  the  patient  should  be  subjected  to  a  process  of 
correction  by  means  of  oily  purgatives  or  by  oily  enemata  mixed 
with  the  decoction  of  the  ten-  roots.  52 

■*/.«.,  it  bursts  and  the  pus  escapes  either  through  the  mouth  or  the  anal  duct. — T. 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland,  U.  S.  A. : — You  have  undertaken 
k  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  So  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California  . As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent.  . . 

there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  .-—You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite— a.  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Ohio,  U.  S.  A.  : — The  work  interests  me  verv 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge .-■ — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York : — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest'  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  A  met  ican  fournal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia-.— Thank  you’  for  thip  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 

F. A.  Castle,  Esq.,— Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.‘  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia : — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting’aod  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appearin  the  -University- Medical  Magazine,,  the  demi-official  organ  of-  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra, Chief  Medical  Officer  of  Cashpteye  t— Nofmedical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charalca  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  Work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-Western 
University,  Secretaty  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition  I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it'in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,' Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  : — Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  ig,  East  38th  Street,  New  Ymk : — Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Traise,  Dramstadt : — The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  Out  the  translation  I  ftilly -sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well: 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist : — I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere ,  174,  Boulevatse,  Saint  Germain  : — Beg 
I"  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia-. — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  I 
arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop 
from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modem  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients 
according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and 
fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of 
the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street ,  Calcutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
[about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after. — 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia:—!  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  jn  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing: — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector : — Your  patriotic, 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  A.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  : — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hypocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gya  It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  Wales  : — The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  fa  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the'treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is 
a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji,— The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


PART  XXXVIII. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


(TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH >. 

PUBLISHED  BY 

PARESHNATH  SARMA,  / 

SON  OF  LATE 

KAVIRAJ  AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  Original)  WITH  COMMENT¬ 
ARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 
journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  the  Hindu 
SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C.,  &C. 


CALCUTTA : 

200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N.  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRATNA  PRESS* 
12,  SIMLA  STREET,  BYE-LANE. 

I906. 

f  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved. ) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters .) 

Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall’  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish.- — Writing  again  in  November  1895,  he  says, — .  I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention. 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office — . Your 

excellent  translation  . a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu-medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

. Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation.  , 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
-  fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gotkenburgh,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A. — I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing,  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth^,  Paris  Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris  :—l  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to,  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany: — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science.  . 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzemtram  Konigsburtk,  Germany  .•—English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal : — I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
'  which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life, 
cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1175 

[‘Dagamula’  or  the  ten-roots  are  supplied  by  the  following  and 
their  ‘kwatha’  or  decoction  is  taken:  1.  Salaparni  (Hedysarum 
Gangeticum),  2.  Prishniparni  (Uraria  lagopodioides),  3.  KantakSrl 
( Solatium  Xanthocarpum ),  4.  Vrihati  ( Solarium  Indicum),  5.  Gokshura 
(Trtbulus  terresiris),  6.  Vilwa  {Aigle  marmelos ),  7.  Syonaka  (Colo- 
■santkes  Indica ),  8.  Gambhari  ( Ginelina  arborea ),  9.  P5tala  ( Stereos - 
permum  suave-olens ),  and  10.  Ganiari  ( Premna  spinosa ).] 

When,  in  cases  of  "phlegm-born  ‘Gulma’,  the  digestive  fire  is 
kindled  and  the  wind  is  restored  to  its  normal  course, 

and  when  the  physician  understands  that  the  stomach  has  been 
sufficiently  oiled,  then,  unto  the  person  afflicted  with  such  ‘Gulma’, 
‘GudikS’  (boluses),  'Churna’  (powders),  ‘Niryuha’  (decoctions),  should 
be  administered.*  S3 

A  phlegm-born  ‘Gulma’  that  is  deep-rooted, 
that  has  an  extended  base, 
that  is  hard,  and  moist, 
and  that  is  heavy, 

should  be  subjugated  by  means  of  caustic  applications, 
by  administration  of  ‘Arishtas’  (fermented  liquors), 
and  by  application  of  fire  (with  heated  irons,  &c.).  54 
The  physician  conversant  with  the  measure  of  strength  and  of 
faults  should  administer  caustic  applications  in  the  case  of  ‘Gulma’  in 
which  the  excited  phlegm  is  ascertained  to  predominate.  55 

Indeed,  the  physician  skilled  in  the  knowledge  of  the  increase  and 
decrease  of  the  strength  and  of  the  faults  of  the  body,  should  do  this, 
at  intervals  of  one  day,-  or  two  days,  or  three  days.  56 

The  patient  should  be  given  milk,  ghee ,  and  meat  to  drink  and  eat. 
Caustic  applications,  repeatedly  cutting  and  tearing  off  the  phlegm, 
which  is  sweet,  and  oily,  and  displacing  it  from  its  site, 

cause  the  ‘Gulma’  itself  to  be  expelled  through  the  downward 
passage. 

The  very  nature  of  ‘kshara’  (caustics)  is  such.f  57 


*  The  boluses,  powders,  and  decoctions,  are  those  which  are  spoken  of  at  the  end  of  this 
Lesson.— T. 

+  In  the  last  portion  of  the  second  line,  the  etymological  meaning  of  ‘kshara’  (caustics) 
is  given,  and  its  effects  explained.  It  is  called  ‘kshara’  because  of  its  nature  as  ‘kshara’ 
which  etymologically  implies  something  that  cuts  and  tears  and  removes  or  dissolves 
away. — T. 


149 


1176 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Unto  persons  afflicted  with  phlegm-born  ‘Gulma’,  ‘Arishtas’ 
(fermented  liquors,  combined  with  medicinal  substances)  should  be 
given, 

if  their  digestive  fire  becomes  weakened, 

if  they  feel  a  disgust  for  food, 

and  if  they  happen  to  be  habituated  to  wine  and  oily  food  and  . 
drink, 

the  object  being  the  clearing  of  the  ductS*  (in  general,  principally 
that  which  carries  away  the  stools).*  58 

If  a  person’s  ‘Gulma’  born  of  phlegm  does  not  abate,  in  “conse¬ 
quence  of  its  roots  being”  deeply  laid,  by  means  of  fasts, 
then  administration  of  emetics,  application  of  ‘sweda’,  drinking  of 
ghees,  use  of  purgatives,  as  also  of  enemata,  boluses,  powders,  caustics, 
and  diverse  ‘Arishtas’,  should  be  prescribed  ; 

his  blood  should  be  let  out,  and  cautery  also,  by  means  of  rods, 
knives,  &c.,  of  iron,  is  regarded  as  the  best  treatment.  59-6° 

In  cases  of  ‘Gulma,’  phlegm  and  wind  are  subdued  by  fire  (cautery) 
in  consequence  of  its  keenness  and  heating  virtues. 

Owing  to  the  subjugation  of  these  two,  the  compactness  of  the 
‘Gulma’  gradually  disappears.  61 

When  applications  of  cautery  are  needed,  the  field  is  for  the 
exercise  of  skill  by  physicians  of  the  Dhanwantari  class. 

When  the  application  of  caustics  becomes  necessary,  the  field  is 
for  the  exercise  of  skill  by  those  physicians  who  are  conversant  with 
the  science  of  such  applications. 

If  the  case  be  one  in  which  the  morbid  indications  are  of  a  mixed 
character,  the  course  of  treatment  should  be  mixed,  (that1  is,  both 
the  physician  and  the  surgeon  should  be  called  in),  6z 

I  shall  now  speak  of  those  combinations  of  tested  efficacy  which 
are  curative  of  ‘Gulmas.’ 

TRYUSHANADI-GHRITA. 

Tryushana  (dry  ginger,  Piper  longum  and  black  pepper),  TriphalS 
(the  three  myrobalans,  viz.,  chebulic,  emblic,  and  belleric),  Dhanya 
( Coriandrum  sativum),  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes ),  Chavya  ( Chavica 
officinarum ),  and  Chitraka  (. Plumbago  Zeylanica ), — these  should  be 


*  'Arishtas’  are  fermented  liquors.  They  may  be  given  to  persons  that  are  habituated 
to  wines  and  *ily  food,  &c.— T, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


»  77 


reduced  into  a  paste.  Then  ghee  should  be  boiled  with  it.  To  the 
boiled  product  milk  should  be  added. 

This  medicine,  called  ‘Tryushanadi-Ghrita’,  is  corrective  of  wind- 
born  ‘Gulma.’  63 

ANOTHER  KIND  OF  TRYUSHANADI-GHRITA. 

The  same  drugs  which  have  been  mentioned  above  should  be 
reduced  to  paste.  This  paste  should  be  boiled  with  the  decoction  of 
the  five  roots,  or  with  that  of  the  twice  five  (or  ten)  roots.* 

The  ghrita  thus  prepared  is  highly  efficacious  in  curing  ‘Gulma.’  64 
GULMA-SHATPALA-GHRITA. 

That  ‘Shatpala-Ghrita’  which  is  laid  down  in  the  treatment  of 
‘Raja-yakshma’  (phthisis)  should  be  drunk  by  a  person  who  is  afflicted 
with  ‘Gulma.’ 

Ghee,  raised  from  milk,  should  be  boiled  with  *the  wine  called 
Prasanna,  or  with  the  juice  of  pomegranate  fruit,  or  with  the  cream 
of  curds. 

This  ghee  is  beneficial  for  those  persons  that  are  afflicted  with 
wind-born  ‘Gulma.’  65 

HINGU-SAUVARCHALADYA-GHRITA. 

Hingu  (assafoetida),  Sauvarchala  (Sanchala  salt),  Ajaji  (otherwise 
called  Jiraka,  that  is,  cumin  seeds),  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes ),  Dadima 
( Punica  Granatuni),  Dipyaka  (another  name  of  Yamani,  that  is, 
Ptychotis  Ajowan),  Pushkara  [Nelumbium  speciosuni),  Vyosha  (other¬ 
wise  called  ‘Trikatu’,  (or,  the  three  acrids,  viz.,  dry  ginger,  Piper 
longum,  and  black  pepper),  Dhanya  (coriander  seeds),  Amlavetasa 
( Rumex  vesicarius),  Kshara  (meaning  ‘Yavakshara’,  that  is,  the  ashes 
of  green  bla'des  of  barley  incinnerated  within  covered  vessels  of  earth), 
Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanicd ),  £athi  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet ),  VachS 
( Acorus  Calamus ),  AjagandhS  (otherwise  called  Vana-yamani,  that  is, 
Seseli  Indicum ),  ElS  ( Eletteria  cardamomum),  and  Surasa  ( Ocimum 
sanctum ), — these  should  be  reduced  to  a  paste. 

With  the  paste,  ghee  should  be  boiled,  along  with  curds  (of  four 
times  the  measure  of  ghee. 

The  ghee ,  thus  prepared,  cures  ‘£ula’  (deep-seated  pains)  and 
‘Anaha’  (epistasis)  of  persons  afflicted  with  wind-born  ‘Gulma.’  66-67 

*  The  group  of  five  roots,  and  that  of  the  ten  roots  have  been  set  forth  in  many  place* 
*Ht*.  — T. 


1178 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


HABUSHADYA-GHRITA. 

Habusha  (black  stalks  like  those  of  black  pepper),  Vyosha  (other¬ 
wise  called  Trikatu  or  the  three  acrids,  viz.,  dry  ginger,  Piper  longum, 
and  black  pepper),  Prithwika  (another  name  of  Elfisukshma,  i.  e., 
Elettaria  cardamomum ),  Chavya  {Chavica  officinaruiri),  Chitraka 
( Plumbago  Zeylanica),  Saindhava  (rock-salt),  Ajaji  (cumin  seeds), 
Pippalimula  (the  roots  of  Piper  longum ),  and  Dipyaka  ( Ptychotis 
Ajowan), — these  should  be  reduced  to’ a  paste. 

With  this  paste  ghee  should  be  boiled,  along  with  the  juice  of 
Matulunga  ( Citrus  medico. ),  curds,  milk,  the  juice  of  Kola  ( Zizyphus 
jujuba ),  that  of  Mulaka  ( Raphanus  sativus),  and  that, of  Dadima 
{Punic a  Granatuni). 

The  ghee,  thus  prepared,  cures  wind-born  ‘Gulma.’ 

It  also  relieves  ‘£ula’  (deep-seated  pains),  ‘Anaha’  (epistasis', 
diseases  of ‘Yoni’  (genital  organs  of  women),  piles,  lienteric  dysentery, 
asthma,  bronchitis,  disgust  for  food,  fever,  pains  in  the  pelvis,  pains 
in  the  chest,  and  pains  in  the  sides.  68- 70 

PIPPALADYA-GHITA. 

Of  Pippali  ( Piper  longum )  3  tolas  ;  from  Dadima  ( Punica  Grana¬ 
tuni)  take  two  palas  ;  from  Dhanya  (coriander  seeds)  take  one  pala  ; 
of  ghee  take  five  palas  ;  of  Sunthi  (dry  ginger)  take  a  ‘karsha’  (2  tolas)  ; 
add  milk  of  four  times  the  measure  of  ghee. 

Boiled  with  these,  the  ghee  that  is  thus  obtained  promptly  relieves 
wind-born  ‘Gulma’,  pains  in  the  genital  organs  of  women,  headache, 
piles,  and  intermittent  fever.*  71-72 

The  groups  of  drugs  mentioned  above,  that  enter  into  the  com¬ 
position  of  the  several  ghees  spoken  of  in  the  above  verses,  may  also 
be  used  in  the  form  of  powders,  or  of  sticks,  or  of  decoction,  by 
persons  afflicted  with  ‘Gulma.’  73 

With  the  following  articles,  viz.,  (dried)  Kola  {Zizyphus  jujuba ), 
Dadima  {Punica  Granatuni),  hot  water,  ‘manda’  of  wines,  and  sour 
‘Kanjika’, 


*  A  'pichu’  is  equal  to  2  tolas.  Hence  ‘pichuh  adhyardhah’  implies  2  tolas  and  half 
that  quantity,  i.  e. ,  3  tolas. 

A  ‘pala’  is  equal  to  8  tolas.  A  ‘karsha’  is  equal  to  2  tolas.  It  should  be  noted  here  that 
the  stated  measure  of  ghee  should  be  regarded  as  modified  by  the  general  instructions  about 
liquids  laid  down  in  pharmaceutical  works — T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA . 


ii  79 


Or,  with  the  juice  of ‘Vijapura’  {Citrus  acida), 

‘Peyas’  (weak  decoctions)  should  be  made  (of  the  groups  of  drugs 
mentioned  above). 

These  ‘peyas’  promptly  cure  ‘£ula’  (deep-seated  pains),  and 
‘Anaha’  (epistasis.  74 

Macerating  the  same  drugs  in  the  juice  of  Matulunga  {Citrus 
medico),  powders  may  be  made,  as  also  sticks  and  boluses  for  fhe 
relief  of  epistasis  and  ‘£ula’  pains  caused  by  ‘Gulinas.’  75 
HINGWADI  POWDERS  AND  BOLUSES. 

Hingu  (assafcetida),  Trikatuka  (the  three  acrids,  viz.,  dry  ginger, 
Piper  longum,  and  black  pepper),  Patha  {Stepkania  hemandifolia ), 
Habushs  (black  stalks  like  those  of  black  pepper),  Abhaya  (chebulic 
myrobalans),  £athi  {Curcuma  Zerumbet),  Ajamoda.  {Pimpinella  in- 
volucratd),  Ajagandha  ( Seseli  Indicum ),  Tintiri  {Tamarindus  Indicd), 
Amlavetasa  {Rumex  vesicarius),  Dadima  {Punica  Granatum ),  Pushkara 
(implying  Pushkaramula,  a  kind  of  root  that  is  not  available  ;  the  root 
of  Aplotaxis  auriculata  is  substituted  for  it),  Dhanya  (coriander  seeds), 
Ajaji  (cumin  seeds',  Chitraka  {Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  Vacha  {Acorus 
Calamus ),  the  two  Ksharas  {viz.,  Yavakshara,  meaning  the  ashes  of 
green  stalks  of  barley,  and  SarjjikshSra,  meaning  carbonate  of  soda), 
the  two  salts  {viz.,  rock-salt  and  Sanchsl  salt),  and  Chavya  {Chavica 
officinarutn') : 

These  should  be  reduced  to  powder  and  administered  to  the 
patient.  It  is  highly  beneficial  as  a  vehicle  (for  administering  other 
medicines,  such  as  any  of  the  ghees  mentioned  above). 

Or,  it  may  be  taken  with  wines,  or  warm  water,  before  meals.  76-78 
In  the  following  diseases,  viz., 

‘£ula’aor  pains  in  the  sides,  the  chest,  and  the  pelvis, 

‘Gulma’  born  of  excited  wind  or  phlegm, 
epistasis,  difficulty  of  micturition, 

‘£ula,’  pains  in  the  anus,  and  in  the  genital  organ  of  women, 
lienteric  dysentery, ‘piles,  enlargement  of  the  spleen,  chlorosis, 
disgust  for  food,  pressure  in  the  chest,  bronchitis,  hiccup,  asthma, 
and  choking  of  the  throat, 
this  powder  is  very  beneficial. 

Macerated  in  the  juice  of  Matulunga  {Citrus  medico),  the  powder 
should  be  made  into  boluses.  These  are  still  more  efficacious  than 
the  powder.  76-8i  • 


i  i8o 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  juice  of  Matulunga  ( Citrus  medico),  Hingu  (assafcetida), 
Dadima  ( Punica  Granatum),  Vit  salt,  and  Saindhava  salt,  should 
be  drunk  with  the  ‘manda’  of  wine. 

This  medicine  cures  the  pains  of. wind-born  ‘Gulma.’  82 

£athi  (1 Curcuma  Zerumbei),  Pushkara  (implying  Pushkaramula, 
a  root  that  is  not  available  ;  the  roots  of  Aplotaxis  auriculata  being 
used  as  substitute),  Hingu  (assafcetida),  Amlavetasa  ( Rumex  vesi- 
carius),  Kshfira  (YavakshSra  or  the  ashes  of  green  barley  blades), 
Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  Dhanyaka  (coriander  seeds),  Yamani 
( Ptychotis  Ajowari),  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes),  Saindhava  (rock-salt), 
Vacha  ( Calamus  Rotang ),  Chavya  ( Chavica  officinarum),  Pippalimula 
(the  roots  of  Piper  longuvi,  Ajagandha  ( Seseli  Indicuni),  Dadima 
(. Punica  Granatum ),  Ajaji  (cumin  seeds),  and  Ajamoda  ( Pimpinella 
tnvolucrata ) : 

These  should  be  reduced  to  powder  and  administered  to  the 
patient.  83-84 

Macerating  the  powder  in  the  juice  of  Matulunga  ( Citrus  medico), 
and  adding  honey  to  it,  it  should  be  kneaded  into,  a  soft  paste  or 
dough.  Boluses  should  then  be  made  of  the  dough  thus  obtained, 
each  of  the  size  of  a  Kola  (fruit  of  Zizyphus  jujuba).  85 

‘Gulma,’  enlargement  of  the  spleen,  epistasis,  asthma,  bronchitis, 
disgust  for  food,  hiccup,  diseases  of  the  chest,  piles  of  all  varieties, 
headaches,  chlorosis,  nausea  caused  by  excited  phlegm,  diarrhoea 
born  of  all  causes,  and  pains  in  the  sides,  the  chest,  and  the  pelvis, 
are  all  removed  by  these  boluses.  &>-%7 

Or,  half  a  pala  of  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  two  palas  of  husked 
sesame  seeds,  and  one  pala  of  treacle,  should  be  pounded  together, 
and  taken  with  hot  milk.  88 

This  medicine  cures  wind-born  ‘Gulma’,  suppression  of  urine  and 
stools,  and  pains  in  the  genital  organ  of  women. 

One  should  drink  the  oil  of  Eranda  ( Ricinus  Communis),  mixed 
with  the  ‘manda’  of  the  wine  called  ‘Varuni.’ 

A  person  afflicted  with  wind-born  ‘Gulma’  should  drink  the  same 
oil,  mixing  it  with  milk. 

If  wind-born  ‘Gulma’  be  accompanied  by  excited  phlegm,  the 
former  of  the  above  medicines  is  beneficial.  If  it  be  accompanied 
by  excited  bile,  the  latter  is  beneficial.  89-9° 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


LAgUNA-KSHIRA. 

Four  palas  of  Laguna  (garlics),  dry  and  well-husked,  should  be 
boiled  in  milk,  to  which  should  be  added  water  that  is  eight  times  the 
measure  of  the  milk.  Boiling  should  go  on  till  the  liquid  is  reduced 
to  the  measure  of  the  milk. 

A  person  should  drink  this  milk.  It  promptly  relieves  wind-born 
‘Gulma’,  suppression  of  urine  and  stools,  sciatica,  intermittent  fever, 
diseases  of  the  chSst,  deep-seated  abscesses,  and  inflammatory 
swellings.  91-92 


T  AI  LA-PAN  C  H  K  AM . 

(Sesame)  oil,  Prasanna  (a  variety  of  wine),  urine  of  the  cow, 
Aran&la  (a  variety  of  kanjika),  Yavagraja  (implying  Yavaksh&ra  or 
the  ashes  of  green  blades  of  barley),  compounded  together,  taken 
internally,  cures  ‘Gulma’,  abdominal  dropsy,  and  epistasis.  93 

QILAJATU  COMPOUND. 

(^ilajatu*  should  be  drunk,  compounding  it  with  the  decoction  of 
the  five  roots  (beginning  with  Vilwa  or  JEgle  marmelos)  and  milk.  By 
taking  this  compound,  one  becomes  freed  from  wind-born  ‘Gulma.’  94 

By  taking  V&tya  (manda  of  barley),  mixed  with  the  juice  of 
Pippali  ( Piper  longum )  or  that  of  Mulaka  (garden  radish),  and  with 
ghee ,  one  becomes  freed  from  suppression  of  urine  and  stools  as  also 
wind-born  ‘Gulma.’  95 

If  a  person  with  wind-born  ‘Gulma’  be  afflicted  with  ‘£ula,’  epis¬ 
tasis  and  constipation  of  the  bowels,  he  should  have  ‘Sweda’  adminis¬ 
tered  to  him  in  those  methods  which  are  known  by  the  names  of 
‘Nadi’,  ‘Prastara’, ‘^ankara’  and  which  have  been  described  among  the 
ordinances  on  ‘Sweda. ’f  96 

The  administration  of  enemata,  it  should  be  known,  is  highly 
efficacious  in  curing  ‘Gulma.’ 


*  A  bituminous  substance  supposed  to  be  exuded  by  rocks  in  the  hot  season. — T. 
t  The  different  methods  of  ‘Sweda’  have  been  described  in  Lesson  XIV  of  Sutras th5n». 
There  are  ^altogether  13  kinds  of  ‘Sweda’,  viz.,  Qankara,  Prastara,  Nadi,  Parisheka,  Ava- 
gahana,  Jentaka,  Agmaghna,  Karshu,  Kuti,  Bhu,  Kumbhi,  Kupa,  and  Holaka.  For 
particulars  about  (Jankara-sweda,  Nadi-sweda,  and  Prastara-sweda,  vide  pp.  159  and  169 
of  SutrasthSna,  ante. — T. 


1182 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SAM  HIT  A. 


The  administration  of  enemata,  subduing  at  the  outset  the  wind 
in  its  own  seat,  destroys  ‘Gulma.’  97 

Hence,  ‘Gulmas’  of  every  kind,  (viz.,  wind-born,  bile-born,  and 
phlegm-born)  are  relieved  if  constantly  treated  with  enemata  both 
dry  and  oily.  98 

As  regards  those  oils  which  relieve  ‘Gulmas’,  they  will  be  spoken 
of  in  the  Lesson  on  Diseases  of  Wind.*  99 

All  those  oils,  administered  in  wind-born  ‘Gulma’  in  the  form  of 
drink,  of  unguents  for  rubbing  the  body  with,  and  of  enemata, 
promptly  produce  successful  results.  Verily,  of  all  things,  oils  are 
very  efficacious  in  subduing  excited  wind.  T°° 

Any  of  the  several  ghritas  mentioned  above,  [viz.,  Tryusha- 
nadi,  &c.),  mixed  with  the  powders  of  Nilini  (Indigo  plant'',  should  be 
administered  to  a  person  suffering  from  wind-born  ‘Gulma’  and 
having  impurities  (in  his  system).  This  medicine  operates  as  a 
‘^odhana’  or  corrective.!  101 

NILINADYA  GHRITA. 

Nilini  (Indigofera  tincioria),  Trivrita  ( Convolvulus  Turpeth.mil', 
Danti  ( Baliospermum  montanum ),  Pathya  (chebulic  myrobalans),  and 
Kampillaka  ( Mallotus  philippensis ),  should  be  reduced  to  powder. 

This  powder  should  be  added  to  ghee  for  purifying  it.  Then 
‘Vit’  salt,  the  ashes  of  green  blades  of  barley,  and  dry  ginger,  should 
be  added  to  it.  102 

ANOTHER  VARIETY  OF  NILINADYA  GHRITA. 

Nilini  (Indigofera  tinctoria),  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans), 
Rfisna  ( Vanda  Roxburghii),  Bala  (Sida  ccrdifolia),  Katurohini  ( Picrorr - 
hiza  Kurroa),  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes),  and  Vyaghrx  ( Solanum 
Xanthocarpum ),  should  be  boiled  in  water.  The  measure  of  each  of 
these  drugs  should  be  one  pala,  and  that  of  water  should  be  an  adhaka 
(8  seers).  When  three-fourths  of  the  water  have  evaporated,  a 
prastha  (2  seers)  of  ghee  should  be  added  to  it.  It  should  then  be 
mixed  with  curds  of  the  measure  of  one  prastha  (2  seers),  and  one 


*  Vide  Lesson  XXVIII  of  this  Division.— T. 

t  ‘Mala’,  literally,  impurities,  is  used  here  in  the  sense  of  stools,  &c.  What  is  stated  in 
this  verse  is  that  any  of  the  ghees  mentioned  previously,  administered  with  the  powder 
named,  viz.,  that  of  the  Indigo  plant,  operates  as  a  purgative  and  expels  the  collected- 
•to  oil  in  the  bowels.  Hence,  the  medicine  is  called  a  ‘^odhana’  or  corrective, — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1183 

pala  of  the  milk  of  Sudha  ( Euphorbia  nerrifolia] 1.  [All  these  should  be 
boiled  together  till  the  measure  of  water  evaporating,  that  of  the 
ghee  only  remains  in  the  vessel.] 

From  the  ghee  thus  prepared,  a  small  measure,  viz.,  a  pala,  should 
be  given  to  the  patient  (every  day),  mixed  with  the  ‘manda’  of  the 
gruel  of  barley,  The  patient  should  take  it  only  after  the  food  he 
has  eaten  has  become  digested.  When  (through  the  effect  of  this  ghee 
so  taken)  the  patient  has  been  sufficiently  purged,  he  should  be  given 
food  with  meat-juice. 

This  ghee  cures  ‘Gulma’,  leprosy,  abdominal  dropsy,  brown  spots 
on  the  face  called  ‘Vyanga’,  inflammatory  swellings,  chlorosis,  fevers, 
leucoderma,  enlargement  of  spleen,  and  insanity.*  103-106 

The  meat-juice  of  the  flesh  of  the  cock,  the  peacock:  the  francoline 
partridge,  cranes,  and  the  variety  of  quails  called  Perdix  Olivacea , 
£ali  rice  (boiled),  wines,  and  ghee  are  excellent  regimen  for  wind-born 
‘Gulma.’  107 

Food  that  is  hot,  liquid,  and  oily,  is  beneficial  for  those  persons 
that  are  afflicted  with  wind-born  ‘Gulma.’  The  drink  that  is  beneficial 
for  them  is  ‘manda’  mixed  with  the  wine  called  ‘V&runi’,  or  water  in 
which  coriander  seeds  have  been  boiled.  108 

When  the  digestive  fire  becomes  mild,  the  ‘Gulma’  increases  j 
when  that  fire  becomes  kindled,  the  ‘Gulma’  decreases.  Hence,  a 
person  that  is  afflicted  with  ‘Gulma’  should  neither  gorge  himself 
with  food  nor  observe  absolute  fasts.  I09 

In  all  cases  of  ‘Gulma’,  treatment  that  is  followed  after  the  admi¬ 
nistration  of  oils  and  .‘Sweda’  becomes  successful.  No  treatment 
succeeds  in  the  case  of  a  patient  unto  whom  oils  have  not  been  admi¬ 
nistered  and  who  has  been  kept  on  dry  food  and  drink,  no 

If  the  physician  regards  a  bile-born  ‘Gulma’  to  be  fraught  With 
•  immediate  danger  to  life,  he  should  then  treat  it  with  either  milk  or 
ghee  which  has  been  boiled  with  drugs  having  purgative  virtues.  111 
ROHINYADYA  GHRITA. 

Take  a  ‘karshika’f  of  the  following,  viz.,  Rohinikatuka  (otherwise 


*  In  practice,  the  measures  of  the  liquids  are  always  doubled.  Thus  instead  of  taking 
an  adhaka  or  8  seers  of  water,  16  seers  are  taken  ;  so  oi ghee  ;  instead  one  prastha,  meaning 
2  seers,  4  seers  are  actually  taken  ;  of  curds  also,  the  measure  should  be  2  prasthas,  i.  t.,  four 
seers,  although  one  prastha  is  stated. — T. 
t  A  ‘karshika’  is  equal  to  2  tolas. — T. 

ISO 


charaka-samhitA. 


1184 

called  Katurohini,  that  is,  Picrorrhiza  Kurrod),  Nimva  ( Melia 
Azadirachta', )  Madhuka  (liquorice),  the  three  myrobalans,  divested  of 
seeds,  and  Trayamana  (Ficus  heterophylld) ;  two  palas  of  each  of 
these,  viz.,  Patola  ( Trichosanthes  dioicd),  and  Trivrit  (Convolvulus 
Turpethuni) ;  and  two  palas  of  Masura  seeds  (Vida  tens') : 

Reduce  these  to  paste,  and  boil  it  (in  the  usual  measure  Of  ghee), 
adding  water  -that  is  eight  times  the  measure  of  the  ghee-. 

-Boiling  should  go  on  till  the  water  evaporating,  the  measure  of 
the  ghee  only  remains  in  the  vessel. 

Of  this  ghee,  4  palas  should  be  drunk,  after  correcting  it  properly. 
This  medicine  alleviates  bile-born  ‘Gulma  also  fever,  thirst,  ‘£ula,’ 
(deep-seated  pains)  vertigo,  swoons,  and  disgust  for  food.  112-114 
TRAYAMANADYA  G'HRITA. 

Taking  4  palas  of  Trayam&na  (Ficus  heterophylld),  boil  it  in  water 
of  ten  times  that  measure  (viz.,  40  palas).  The  boiling  should  go  on 
till  a  fifth  of  the  measure  of  water  (that  is,  8  palas  only)  remain  in  the 
vessel. 

The  product  should  then  be  strained  (through  a  piece  of  clean 
cloth),  and  mixed  with  the  paste  of  the  measure  of  a  ‘karshika,’  of 
each  of  the  following  drugs,  viz.,  Rohinikatuka  (Picrorrhiza  Kurrod), 
Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  Trayamana  (Ficus  heterophylld ) 
and  DuralabhS  (Hedysarum  Alhagi),  and  with  that  of  TSmalaka 
(otherwise  called  Bhumyfimalaka,  that  is,  Phyllanthus  Niruri),  Vira 
(standing  here  for  Khirakfikoli  which  is  the  name  of  a  bulb  of  the 
onion  tribe  brought  from  the  Himavat  mountains),*  Jivanti  (Ccelogyne 
ovalis ),  Chandana  (Pterocarpus  santalinus )  and  Utpala  (Nymphcea 
stellata). 

To  this  should  be  added  the  expressed  juice  of  Amlaka  (Phyllan¬ 
thus  Emblicd),  milk,  and  clarified  butter,  each  of  the  measure  of  eight 
palas. 

The  whole  should  then  be  boiled  properly. 

This  foremost  of  ghees  cures  bile-born  ‘Gulma’,  blood-born  ‘Gulma,’ 
erysipelas,  fever  born  of  excited  bile,  diseases  of  the  chest,  jaundice, 
.and  leprosy,  -us-1 18 


*  ‘Vir5.’  is  a  name  that  is  applied  to  various  plants.  The  commentators  are  uncertain  as 
to  what  particular  plant  is  meant  by  it.  I  think  that  when  ‘Jivanti’  is  mentioned  imme¬ 
diately  after,  ‘VirS’  stands  here  for  ‘KshiralcSkoli’ ;  both  belong  to  the  same  group.— T. 


CHA  RA  KA  -  SA  MHITA. 


1185 


AMALAKADYA  GHRITA. 

One  part  of  clarified  butter  should  be  boiled  with  two  parts  of  the” 
expressed  juice  of  Amlaka  ( PhyllanthuswEmblica )  and  of  Ikshu 
( Saccharum  officinaruni),  and  one'part  of  the  paste  of  PathyS  (chebulic 
myrobalans). 

This  ghee  should  be  drunk.  It  is.  a,  well-tested  curative  of  bile- 
born  ‘Gulma.’  ri9 

D  RAKSHADYA  GHRITA. 

Draksha  (dried  grapes),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Kharjjura  (Arabian' 
■dates),  Vidari  (Batatus  paniculata ),  with  ^atSvari  ( Asparagus  race- 
mosus ),  Parushaka  ( Grewia  Asiatics},  and  the  three  myrobalans, 
should  be  boiled  in  an  Adhaka  (8  seers)  of  water,  taking^one  pala 
of  each. 

The  boiling  should  go  on  till  a  ‘pSda’'  or  quarter  of  the  mixture 
remains. 

After  this,  it  should  be  boiled  with  the  expressed  juice  of  Amlaka 
( Phyllanthus  Emhlica ),  clarified  butter,  the  Juice-  of  the  sugarcane, 
honey,  and  the  paste  of  Abhaya  (chebulic  myrobalans)  of  the  measure 
of  a  ‘p&da.’ 

To  the  ghee  thus  boiled  should  be  added  a  pada’  of  sugarj  and 
honey. 

Administered  internally,  it  cures  bile-born  ‘Gulma’,  as  also  all 
ailments  born  of  bile.*  120-122 


VASA-GHRITA. 

Take  some  plants  of  Vrisha  (otherwise  called  Vasaka  or  Justicia 
Adhatoda)  with  their  roots  (as  also  bark  and  leaves). 

Pounding  them  (in  a  mortar),  boil  in  water  of  eight  times,  the 
measure  (of  the  pounded  drug). 

When  one-eighth  of  the  compound  remains  in  the  vessel,  the 
paste  of  the  flowers  of  the  same  plant  should  be  added. 

Clarified  butter  should  then  be  boiled  with  the  product  thus 
obtained. 


*  Of  each  of  the  drugs  mentioned  at  the  outset,  viz.,  grapes,  &c.,  a  ‘pala’,  that  is  8  toISs, 
should  be  taken.  The  measure  of  water  should  be  2  adhakas  or  16  seers,  because  I  adhaka 
is  mentioned  and  the  rule  is  that  liquids  should  be  doubled.  Of  the  juice  of  Amalaka,  clari¬ 
fied  butter,  &c.,  the  measure  should  be  4  seers,  but  that  of  the  paste  of  chebulic  myrobalans 
the  measure  should  be  a  ‘pSda’  or  quarter,  that  is,  one  seer. _ T. 


1 1 86 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


When  cool,  honey  should  be  added  to  it.  This  ghee  is  capable 
of  curing  bile-bom  ‘Gulma.’  It  also  cures  blood-bile,  fever,  asthma, 
bronchitis,  and  the  diseases  of  the  ehest.  123-124 

TRAYAMANADYA  KSHIRA. 

Two  ‘palas’  of  TrSyamana  ( Ficus  heterophylla ),  should  be  boiled  in- 
two  ‘prasthas’  of  water. 

When  an  eighth  of  the  measure  remains  in  the  vessel,  it  should 
be  strained  (through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth). 

Milk  of  equal  measure  should  then  be  added,  and  the  mixture* 
while  lukewarm,  should  be  drunk. 

After  this,  one  should  drink  as  much  'warm  milk  as  one  is  able 
to  digest. 

By  this,  which  operates  as  a  purgative,  one’s  faults  are  dispelled,, 
in  consequence  of  which  bile-born  ‘Gulma’  becomes  alleviated.  125-126 

In  bile-born  ‘Gulma’,  the  patient,  for  purging  the  bowels,  should 
drink  the  decoction  of  Draksha  (grapes),  and  Abhaya  (chebulic 
myrobalans),  mixed  with  treacle  ; 

Or,  lick  the  powder  of  Kampillaka  ( Mallotus  pkilippensis )  mixed 
with  liquid  honey.  127 

Of  persons,  afflicted  with  bile-born  ‘Gulma’,  unguents  made  of  ghee 
or  those  made  of  the  oil  of  the  group  of  drugs  beginning  with 
Chandana  (sandal  wood  of  both  the  white  and  the  red  varieties),  or 
those  made  of  oil  mixed  with  the  decoction  of  Madhuka  (liquorice), 
alleviate  burning  of  the.  body.  128 

Those  enemata  made  of  milk  and  bitters,  which  are  laid  down  for 
persons  afflicted  with  bile-born  fever,  are  beneficial  for  bile-born 
‘Gulma’,  as.  also  those  enemata  of  the  same  kind  that  are  laid  down 
in  the  Division  (supra)  called  ‘Siddhi.’  I29 

Different  varieties  of  rice,  the  flesh  of  wild  animals,  the  milk  of 
the  cow  as  also  of  the  goat,  clarified  butter  (made  from  vaccine  milk), 
Kharjjura  (dates),  Amlaka  (fruit  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica),  Draksha 
(grapes),  Dadima  (fruit  of  Punica  Granatum ),  and  Parushaka  (fruit 
pf  Grewia  Asiatica),  should  be  given  as  food,  and  for  drink,  water 
boiled  with  BalS  {Si da  cordifolia ),  and  the  group  of  drugs  beginning 
with  Vidarigandha  {Hedysarum  Gangeticum). 

Even  this  is  the  treatment  of  persons  afflicted  with  bile-born 
'Gulma.’  130-131 


CHA  RAKA-  SA  MH1 TA . 


1 8  7 


In  bile-born  ‘Gulma’  accompanied  by  mucus  in  the  stools,  as  also 
in  phlegm-born  ‘Gulma’  and  wind-born  ‘Gulma’  accompanied  by 
mucus  in  the  stools,  the  patient  should,  after  undergoing  a  period  of 
fast,  have  his  digestive  fire  stirred  by  means  of  gruels  and  of  juices 
called  ‘Khadas.’*  ^2 

The  equality  and  excitement  of  all  the  faults  are  dependent  on 
the  digestive  fire.  Hence,  one  should  always  preserve  (the  strength 
of)  the  digestive  firej-  133 

Unto  a  person  afflicted  with  phlegm-born  ‘Gulma’  who  deserves 
emetics,  emetics  should  be  administered  after  oils  and  ‘Sweda.’ 

When  the  ‘Gulma’  becomes  softened  (by  this  treatment),  the 
physician  should  cause  the  patient  to  lie  down,  and  casting  some- 
blazing  blades  of  Valwaja  ( Saccharum  cylindricum)  and  Kuga  (Poa 
cynosuroides)  into  an  earthen  jar,  he  should  cause  the  ‘Gulma’  to  be; 
covered  by  that  vessel.  134-135 

When  in  consequence  of  this,  the  ‘Gulma’  becomes  prominently- 
localised,  it  should  then  be  covered  with  a  piece  of  cloth,  and  the 
physician  conversant  with  the  measurements  of  the  body  (Anatomy), 
should  then  pierce  the  ‘Gulma’  (with  a  needle).  136 

When  the  physician  sees  that  the  ‘Gulma’  has  swerved  from  its 
site,  he  should,  as  far  as  he  can  grasp  it,  press  it  (with  his  fingers.) 
He  should  squeeze  the  ‘Gulma’  only,  without  touching  other  parts.  r3? 

After  this,  plastering  the  ‘Gulma’  with  Tila  (sesame  seeds),  Eranda 
(seeds  of  Ricinus  Communis ),  Atasivija  (linseeds),  and  Sarshapa  (white 
mustard  seeds)  reduced  to  paste,  the  physician  should  apply  ‘Sweda1 
by  means  of  iron  dishes  heated  to  a  degree  that  is  easily  bearable.  *38 
DAgAMULAG  RITA, 

With  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids,  viz.,  Piper  tongutn ,  black  pepper, 
and  dry  ginger),  Kshara  (the  ashes  of  green  blades  of  barley),  Lavana 
(Saindhava  salt),  and  the  decoction  and  the  paste  of  the  ten  roots, 
should  ghee  be  boiled.  To  it  should  be  added  Hingu  (assafcetida), 


*  ‘Khada-yusha’  means  an  agreeable  preparation  that  operates  both  as  a  cooling  draught 
and  a  sauce.  It  stirs  the  digestive  fire.  The  ingredients  are  whey,  fruit  of  Feronia  elephantum. 
Changed  ( Oxalis  corniculata ),  black  pepper,  Ajaji  (cumin  seeds)),  and  Chitraka (Plumbago 
Zcylanicd). — T. 

t  The  word  ‘faults’  here  implies  all  the  ingredients  of  the  body  and  not  simply  wind,  bile, 
and  phlegm. — T, 


1 188 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Vit  (salt  of  that  name),  and  the  bark  of  Dsdima  (pomegranates), 
reduced  to  powder. 

Ghee  thus  prepared  promptly  conquers  phlegm-born  ‘Gulma.’  139 
BHALLATAKA  GHRITA. 

Two  palas  of  Bhallataka  (Semecarpus  anacardium),  and  one  pala 
of  (each  of)  the  five  roots,  having  Vidarigandha  for  their  first  (viz., 
Hedysarum  Gangeticum ,  Doodia  logopodioides,  Solatium  Indicum,  Sola¬ 
tium  Xantkocarpum,  and  Tribulus  lanuginosus)  :  pound  these  together 
and  boil  them  in  water  of  the  measure  of  an  adhaka.*  r4° 

Boiling  should  go  on  till  a  fourth  part  of  the  liquid  remains  in  the 
vessel.  Into  the  vessel  the  physician  should  throw  the  paste, 
weighing  2  palas,  of  each  of  these,  viz.,  Pippali  (Piper  longum), 
Nagara  (dry  ginger),  Vachfi  ( Acorus  Calamus)  Vidanga  ( Embelia 
Ribes),  Saindhava  (rock-salt),  Hingu  (assafoetida),  Yavacuka  (the  ashes 
of  green  blades  of  barley),  Vit  (salt  of  that  name),  £athi  ( Curcuma 
Zerumbet),  Chitraka  (Plumbago  Zeylanica),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  and 
Rasna  (  Vanda  Roxburghii ). 

Pouring  then  a  ‘prastha’  of  milk  and  a  ‘prastha’  of  clarified  butter, 
the  whole  should  be  boiled  together.^  141-142 

The  Ghrita  thus  prepared  is  called  ‘Bhallataka  Ghrita.’ 

It  is  the  foremost  of  all  medicines  that  are  curative  of  phlegm- 
born  ‘Gulma.’  It  cures  also  enlarged  spleen,  chlorosis,  asthma,, 
disease  of  the  Grahani,  and  bronchitis.  143 

PANCHAKOLA  GHRITA. 

Take  a  pala  of  each  of  these,  viz.,  Pippali  ( Piper  longum),  Pippali- 
mula  (the  roots  of  Piper  longum),  Chavya  (Chavica  officinarum), 
Chitraka  (Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  and  YavakshSra 
(the  ashes  of  green  blades  of  barley),  and  reducing  them  to  a  paste,, 
boil  it  with  a  ‘prastha’  of  clarified  butter  and  a  ‘prastha’  of  milk.j 

Ghee,  thus  prepared,  cures  phlegm-born  ‘Gulma.’  It  is  also  alle- 
viative  of  diseases  of  the  ‘Grahani’,  chlorosis,  enlarged  spleen,  cough 
or  bronchitis,  and  fever.  144- 145 


*  An  ‘adhaka’  implies  8  seers.  But,  being  a  fluid,  double  the  measure,  or  1 6  seers, 
should  be  taken. — T- 

t  Two  ‘prasthas’  cf  each  should  be  actually  taken. — T. 

+  Being  fluids,  double  the  measures  should  be  actually  taken. — T. 


CM  A  RA  KA -SAM HIT  A. 


1189 

MigRAKA  SNEHA. 

Take  a  ‘pala’  of  each  of  these,  viz.,  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpe- 
thum),.  and  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  Danti  [Baliospermunt 
montanum),  as  also  of  each  of  the  ten  roots  {viz.,  the  five  roots  men¬ 
tioned  in  verse  140  above,  and  the  following  five,  that  is,  Vilwa  or 
AEgle  Marmelos,  Syonaka  or  Bignonia  Indica ,  GSmbhari  or  Gmelina 
arborea ,  Patala  or  Steriospermum  suave-olens,  and  Ganikarika  or 
Premna  serratifolia). 

These  should  be  reduced  to  a  paste  and  boiled  with  four  times 
as  much  water.*  The  boiling  should  go  on  till  a  fourth  of  the 
measure  remains  in  the  vessel.  146 

Clarified  butter,  castor-oil,  and  milk,  (each  of  the  measure  of 
1 5  palas),  should  be  added,  and  the  whole  boiled  together. 

When  the  boiling  is  complete,  the  product  is  called  ‘Migraka 
Sneha.’  Honey  should  be  mixed  with  it  when  it  is  cool.  The  medi¬ 
cine,  thus  prepared,  is  curative  of  phlegm-born  ‘Gulma.’  H7 

This  ‘Migraka  Sneha’  should  be  administered  also  in  constipation 
caused  by  phlegm  and  wind,  in  leprosy  and  enlarged  spleen,  and  in 
abdominal  dropsy.  In  ‘£ula’  of  the  female  organ,  it  is  particularly 
efficacious.  h8 

The  purgative  called  ‘Nilini-Ghrita’  whose  composition  has  been 
already  explained  and  which  is  curative  of  wind-born  ‘Gulma,’ 
should  be  administered  in  double  measure  to  persons  afflicted  with 
phlegm-born  ‘Gulma’,  for  the  purpose  of  purging  them.  *49 

By  licking  a  ‘k&rshika’  of  powdered  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpe- 
thum)  macerated  in  the  liquid  milk  of  Sudha  (otherwise  called  Snuhi 
or  Euphorbia  neriifolia ),  mixed  with  honey  and  ghee ,  one  is  properly 
purged.f  iS° 

DANTI-HARITAKI. 

In  a  ‘drona’  of  water,  five  and  twenty  chebulic  myrobalans  should 
be  boiled,  as  also  as  many  ‘palas’  of  Danti  ( Baliospermum  montanum ), 
and  the  same  measure  of  Chitraka  (. Plumbago  Zeylanica).\  151 


*  The  total  weight  of  the  paste  being  15  palas,  that  of  water  should  be  60  palas.  This 
measure  should  not  be  doubled,  for  the  quantity  is  below  a  ‘prastha’  which  is  equal  to 
128  ‘palas’.  It  is  only  when  the  measure  of  a  fluid  is  stated  to  be  a  ‘prastha’  or  more,  that 
the  quantity  is  doubled. — T. 

+  A  ‘Karshika’  or  ‘Karsha’  is  equal  to  2  tolas. — T. 

i  A  ‘drona’  consists  of  32  seers.  Here  the  measure  should  be  doubled. — T. 


1190 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA . 


The  boiling  should  go  on  till  the  liquid  is  reduced  to  an  eighth 
•of  its  measure.  It  should  then  be  strained  (through  a  piece  clean 
cloth). 

Into  it  should  then  be  thrown  (old)  treacle,  well-strained,  of  the 
measure  of  Danti  ( Baliospermum  montanum ),  as  also  the  chebulic 
myrobalans  already  boiled.  J52 

Into  this  should  be  thrown  half  a  ‘KudavaV  of  (sesame)  oil,  four 
‘palas’  of  powdered  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethum ),  one  ‘pala’  of 
powdered  Pippali  ( Piper  longum )  and  Vigwaveshaja  (dry  ginger), f  and 
the  whole  should  be  boiled  down  to  the  consistence  of  what  may 
be  licked. 

When  cool,  honey  of  the  measure  of  the  oil  should  be  thrown,  as 
•also  a  ‘pala’  of  Tvach  (bark  of  Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum ),  Eli.  Elet- 
taria  cardamomuin),  Patra  (leaves  of  Cinnamomum  Tamala),  and 
Kegara  (otherwise  called  NSgakegara,  that  is,  the  flowers  of  Mesua 
ferrea)  reduced  to  powder.j 

Licking  a  ‘pala’  of  this  lickable  compound,  and  eating  at  the  same 
time  one  of  the  chebulic  myrobalans  (boiled  in  the  above  manner), 
the  person  afflicted  with  disease  becomes  well  oiled  and  agreeably 
purged  and  (thereby)  freed  of  his  disease.  J53-I55 

This  medicine,  duly  taken,  also  cures  ‘Gulma’,  dropsical  swellings, 
piles,  chlorosis,  disgust  for  food,  diseases  of  the  chest  diseases  of  the 
‘Grahani’,  anaemia,  intermittent  fever,  leprosy,  enlarged  spleen,  and 
epistasis. 

When  one,  after  taking  this  medicine  for  some  days,  becomes 
convalescent,  one’sregimen  should  be  rice  with  meat-juice.  156-157 

The  well-tested  unoily  (or  dry)  enemata  that  should  be  adminis¬ 
tered  .to  persons  afflicted  with  phlegm-born  ‘Gulma’  will  be  spoken  of 
in  the  Division  called  ‘Siddhi’  (of  this  treatise). 

The  well-tested  combinations  of  ‘Arishtas’  also  will  be  spoken  of 
in  the  Lesson  on  the  treatment  of  the  disease  of  the  ‘Grahani’  and 
piles.§  158 

All  those  powders,  and  all  those  pills  which  are  prescribable  for 


*  A  ‘Kudava’  is  equal  to  4  palas  ;  hence,  half  a  ‘Kudava’  is  equal  to  2  palas. 
t  Of  Piper  longum  and  dry  ginger  a  pala  is  directed  to  be  taken  ;  that  is,  half  a  pala  o 
each. 

t  Of  Twach,  Ela,  Patra,  and  Kegara,  a ‘pala’  is  to  be  taken;  that  is,  one-fourth  of  a 
‘pala’or  two  tolas  of  each. — T. 

S  ‘Arishtas’  are  vinous  liquors  manufactured  from  diverse  substances. — T 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1191 

persons  afflicted  with  wind-born  ‘gulma’  are  beneficial  in  phlegm* 
born  ‘gulma’  also ;  only  in  preparing  them  (for  administration  in 
phlegm-born  ‘gulma’)  the  measure  of  ‘ksh&ra,*  hingu  (assafcetida), 
and  amlavetasa  ( Rumex  vesicarius ),  should  be  doubled.  I59 

Those  ‘ksh&ras’  which  are  applicable  to  chronic  diarrhoea  and 
dysentery  may  very  well  be  used  in  the  case  of  persons  afflicted  with 
phlegm-born  ‘gulma.’  These  are,  indeed,  well-tested  remedies  for  such 
‘gulma,’  and  their  administration  is  free  from  danger. 

The  administration  of  ‘dahas’  also  is  highly  spoken  of  at  the  end 
(when  the  above  remedies  fail).f  160 

Diverse  kinds  of  very  old  rice,  the  flesh  of  animals  and  birds 
inhabiting  waterless  tracts, J  the  soup  of  kulattha  ( Dolickos  biflora ), 
mudga  ( Phaseolus  Mungo),  pippali  ( Piper  longum),  nagara  (dry 
ginger),  dry  mulaka  (garden  radish),  vilva  (raw  fruit  of  AEgle  Mar - 
i yfielo$\  varuna  (bark  of  Capparis  tnfoliata ),  and  of  the  sprouts  of 
chiravilva  (otherwise  called  Dahar  Karan j a,  that  is  Pongamia  glabra, 
syn.  Galedupa  Indica ),  yamani  ( Ptychotis  Ajowan ),  and  chitraka 
( Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  and  the  curries  made  with  the  juice  of 
vijapuraka  ( Citrus  acida),  hingu  (assafcetida),  amlavetasa  ( Rumex 
vesicaria ),  yavakshara  (salt  derived  from  the  ashes  of  green  blades  of 
barley),  the  juice  of  dficlima  (pomegranates),  whey,  oil  and  ghee, 
should  form  the  regimen  of  the  person  afflicted  with  phlegm-born 
‘gulma.’  161-163 

A  person  afflicted  with  phlegm-born  ‘gulma’,  when  thirsty,  should 
drink  water  in  which  have  been  boiled  the  five  roots,  as  well  as 
old  Varuni  and  Madhwika  wines. §  164 

He  should  also  drink  whey  mixed  with  powdered  yamani  ( Ptycho¬ 
tis  Ajowan),  and  rendered  saline  by  the  addition  of  ‘vit’  salt.  This 


*  Salts  derived  from  the  ashes  of  certain,  prescribed  plants,  such  as  ‘yava’,  ‘palSga’  &c. 

+  ‘Dahas’  are  burns  inflicted  by  means  of  heated  iron,  &c.  They  are  what  are  called 
‘cauteries’. — T. 

J  The  word  ‘jangala’  is  defined  in  the  Rajanirghanta  as  a  tract  of  country  dificient  in 
water  and  vegetation,  where  the  prevailing  diseases  are  those  arising  out  of  a  derangement 
of  the  bile  and  the  blood.  Cf. 

‘  ‘  AlpodakolpavrikshaQcha  pittaraktamayannitah  jnatavyo  jangalodegah.” 

In  the  text  it  is  used  adjectively  meaning  ‘beasts  and  birds  inhabiting  such  tracts.’  For  the 
list  of  animals  which  are  technically  called  jangala,  see  Atri  Samhita,  Chap.  20. — R.  S. 

§  ‘Varuni’  and  ‘Mridhvika’  are  wines  prepared  respectively  from  the  juice  of  palms  and 
the  flowers  of  the  ‘Madhuka’  tree,  known  ordinerily  as  ‘Mauya’. — R.  S. 

ISI 


1192 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


drink  kindles  the  digestive  fire  and  restores  the  wind,  phlegm,  and 
the  urine  to  their  normal  course.  165 

When  a  ‘gulma’  is  allowed  to  gradually  increase  in  size  until 
it  occupies  a  large  space  within  the  body,  when  its  roots  go  down 
deep,  when  it  becomes  covered  with  veins,  and  raised  (in  the  middle) 
like  (the  back  of)  a  tortoise  and  when  it  is  attended  with  loss  of 
strength,  aversion  to  food,  nausea,  cough,  vomiting,  cheerlessness, 
fever,  thirst,  drowsiness,  and  catarrh  in  the  nose,  the  disease  becomes 
incurable  or  does  not  yield  to  treatment.  166-167 

Dropsical  swelling  in  the  chest,  navel,  hands,  and  feet,  seizing  the 
man  suffering  from  ‘gulma’  accompanied  by  fever  and  difficulty  of 
breathing  and  afflicted  with  vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  drags  him 
(towards  his  end.)  *68 

In  the  ease  of  blood-born  ‘gulma’,  after  the  usual  period  of  gesta¬ 
tion  is  over,  oily  purgatives  should  be  given  to  the  patient  after  (the 
usual  preliminaries  of)  anointing  her  with  oil  and  subjecting  her  to 
dry  fomentation.*  l69 

Two  ‘patras’  of  PalSgakshSra,  and  two  ‘p&tras’  of  oil  and  clarified 
butter,  should  be  boiled  together,  and  the  mixture  should  be  admi¬ 
nistered  in  such  a  quantity  as  will  lead  to  the  softening  of  the 
‘gulma.f  *7° 

If  blood-born  ‘gulma’  does  not  burst  in  consequence  of  the 
administration  of  this  medicine,  medicines  which  cause  discharges 
from  the  female  organ  should  be  administered.  These  are  1.  a  piece 
of  meat  soaked  in  a  solution  of  the  ‘kshfiras,’  or  2.  a  piece 
of  meat  soaked  in  the  milk  of  Euphorbia  neriifolia,  or  3.  a  fish  of 
bitter  taste  (such  as  Cyprinus  Sophore  &c.),  macerated  in  either  a 
‘kshara-sol'ution’  or  the  milk  of  Euphorbia  neriifolia ,  or  4.  a  piece 
of  cotton  rag  well  macerated  in  the  gall  of  the  boar  or  fish  ;  or  5.  a 


*  Only  women  can  have  blood-born  ‘gluma’.  As  conception  may  be  mistaken  for 
this  type  of  ‘gulma’,  the  treatment  should  be  postponed  till  the  usual  period  of  gestationis  is 
over.— T.  • 

t  ‘Palafakshara’  means  the  salts  derived  from  ashes  of  PalSga  (j Suita  frondosa)  by 
filtering.  Water  in  which  these  ashes  have  been  dissolved  should  be  taken.  The  measure 
stated  is  2  ‘patras’  or  ‘adhakas’.  A  ‘patra’  or  ‘adhaka’  consists  of  8  seers.  Being  a 
liquid,  double  the  quantity  should  be  taken  ;  similarly,  of  oil  and  ghee,  double  the  quantity 
should  be  taken  ;  that  is,  32  seers  of  each.— T, 


CHAR  AKA  -  SA  MHITA.  1193 

piece  of  cotton  rag  soaked  in  honey  and  macerated  in  decoctions  of 
drugs  possessing  purgative  or  emetic  virtues. 

Suppositories  made  of  sesame  paste  mixed  with  ‘kshara’  and 
treacle,  which  have  the  property  of  causing  discharges  from  the  female 
organ,  may  also  be  administered.  171-173 

She  should  be  made  to  lick  ‘ksharas’  mixed  with  honey  and 
clarified  butter,  which  are  destructive  of  hsematemesis  and  should 
be  given  (as  food)  garlics,  or  strong  wines  and  fish.  !74 

So  long  as  no  discharge  of  blood  takes  place  milk  and  urine  of 
the  cow,  with  ‘kshara’  and  a  decoction  of  the  ten  roots,  may  also  be 
■administered  as  retentive  injection  per  rectum  with  the  object  of 
bursting  the  gulma. 

When  a  discharge  of  blood  takes  place,  rice  with  meat-juice 
should  form  her  regimen.  She  may  also  be  rubbed  with  (medicated) 
oils  and  ghees  and  given  newly-made  wines  for  a  drink.  *75 

If  the  discharge  of  blood  be  copious,  the  treatment  which  allevi¬ 
ates  hsematemesis  should  be  adopted. 

If  the  patient  suffers  from  pain  "caused  by  excited  wind,  then  all 
those  processes  which  alleviate  the  wind  should  be  adopted.  176 

The  patient’s  body  should  also  be  anointed  with  ghee  and 
oil  and  fat,  She  should  also  be  given  the  meat-juice  of  Tittira 
(francoline  partridge)  and  fowl  ;*  as  well  as  wines  mixed  with  ‘mandas.f 
She  should  first  be  given  ghee  mixed  with  sour  juices  (such  as  those  of 
pomegranates  and  other  fruits)  for  drink  ;  and  afterwards  ghee  boiled 
in  a  decoction  of  the  group  of  drugs  called  ‘Jivaniya’  should  be 
injected  through  the  urethra.^  J78 

If  the  discharge  of  blood  be  copious,  oily  enema  also  may  be 
administered,  mixed  with  bitter  ghee. 

( Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary .) 

Medicated  oils,  application  of  dry  heat,  ghee,  powders,  drugs  that 
nourish,  pills,  emetics,  purgatives,  and  blood-letting,  for  persons 
afflicted  with  wind-born  ‘gulma ;’ 


»  The  word  used  in  the  original  is  ‘Charanayudhan,’  that  is,  cocks  and  hens  which  fight 
with  their  claws.  — T. 

t  ‘Mand’ is  a  kind  of  barley  gruel.  For  the  preparation  of  ‘manda’  see  ChakrapSni 
Datta  on  the  treatment  of  fevers.— R.  S. 

t  ‘Vasti’  means  retentive  injection  per  rectum,  while  ‘uttara  vasti’  means  urethral 
injection. — R.  S. 


194 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


Ghee  cooked  with  bitter  drugs,  milk,  purgatives  that  expel  the 
contents  of  the  stomach  before  they  are  digested,  dry  enema,  dis¬ 
charge  of  blood,  diverse  combinations  for  promotion  of  strength, 
combinations  for  cooling  the  system  and  promoting  nutrition,  poul¬ 
tices  after  use  of  the  lancet,  correctives  and  palliatives  for  the  ‘gulma’ 
when  it  has  burst  after  maturation,  for  persons  afflicted  with  bile- 
born  ‘gulma  f 

Medicated  oils,  application  of  dry  heat,  purgatives  that  expel  the 
contents  of  the  intestines  without  liquefying  them,  fasts,  emetics, 
purgatives  that  expel  the  contents  of  the  intestines  after  liquefying 
them,  ghee,  enema,  pills,  powders,  fermented  liquors,  ‘ksharas’  blood¬ 
letting  first  and  then  cautery,  of  persons  afflicted  with  phlegm-bom 
‘gulma’ ; 

After  this  has  been  declared  the  course  of  treatment  of  blood-born 
‘Gulma’  which  women  only  have. 

Use  of  proper  food  and  drink,  and  avoidance  of  the  exciting 
causes,  in  respect  of  each  variety  of  ‘Gulma’,  continuous  preservation 
of  the  digestive  fire,  all  the  acts  which  are  proper  for  a  patient  who 
has  been  smeared  with  oil,  the  causes  which  produce  the  disease,  the 
symptoms,  the  course  of  treatment,  success  of  treatment,  (curability), 
and  remedies  for  supervening  ailments  ; 

All  these  have  been  declared  in  brief  hy^Agnivefa  in  this  lesson 
on  the  treatment  of  ‘gulma.’ 

Thus  ends  Lesson  V,  called  Treatment  of ‘Gulma,’  in  the  Division 
called  ‘Chikitsa’  of  the  treatise  of  Agniveca  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  VI. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  called  ‘Treatment  of  Pram  eh  a.” 
Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.*  * 

Punarvasu,  who  was  absolutely  free  from  delusion,  pride,  anger 
and  desire  (for  any  object),  and  who  was  great  by  reason  of  knowledge 


*  ‘Prameha’  is  of  twenty  varieties.  It  is  generally  rendered  ‘Gonorrhoea’,  but  the 
correct  rendering  seems  to  be  ‘Polyuresis.’  But  as  some  of  the  varieties  fall  under  ‘diabetes.’ 
It  has  been  thought  proper  to  retain  the  word  in  the  original  throughout  this  Lesson.— T. 


CHARA  KA-SA  MHITA . 


1195 


and  austerity,  declared  at  the  proper  time,  unto  Agnivega,  the 
diverse  kinds  of  ‘Meha’  with  their  causes,  symptoms,  and  the  means 
of  alleviation.  2 

Enjoyment  of  indolent  repose  or  of  (excessive)  sleep,  curds,  soup 
of  the  flesh  of  animals  that  are  domestic  or  acquatic  or  that  have 
marshes  for  their  habitat,  milk  of  different  varieties,  new  rice  and 
newly-made  drinks,  preparations  of  molasses  and  other  articles  that 
engender  phlegm,  are  the  causes  of  ‘Prameha.’* * * §  3 

Phlegm,  in  the  bladder,  vitiating  the  fatty  matter,  the  flesh,  and 
the  excretions  of  the  body  cause  the  different  varieties  of  ‘Meha.’f 

Bile  also,  greatly  excited,  by  the  use  of  things  with  heating 
properties,  vitiating  those  very  ingredients  causes  different  varieties 
of  ‘Meha.’  4 

When  the  ‘dosha’  {viz.,  phlegm  and  bile)  become  weakened,  the 
wind  also,  drawing  the  (same)  ingredients  into  the  bladder,  causes 
the  different  varieties  of  ‘Meha.’] 

The  vitiating  elements  {viz.,  wind,  bile  and  phlegm)  coming  to 
the  bladder,  and  vitiating  the  urine,  generates  the  varieties  of  ‘Meha’ 
known  by  their  respective  symptoms.  5 

The  ten  varieties  of  ‘Meha’  that  are  born  of  (excited)  phlegm  are 
curable  ;  the  six  varieties  that  are  born  of  (excited)  bile  are  suppress- 
ible  ;  the  four  that  are  born  of  (excited)  wind  are  incurable. 

This  is  so  in  consequence  of  the  action  of  medicine  in  the  first 
being  uniform  in  its  effects  ;  that  in  the  second  being  unequal,  and 
the  third  being  productive  of  extensive  mischief.  §  6 


*  The  expression  *  Asyasukham’  means  in  plain  English  want  of  physical  exercise, 
or  sedentary  habits,  while  ‘Svapna-Sukham’,  means  indulgence  in  too  much  sleep. — R.  S. 

‘NavannapSnam’,  implies  new  rice  or  food  consisting  of  new  articles,  and  drinks,  that  is, 
wines,  that  are  newly  made.  Old  rice  and  old  wines  are  always  beneficial. — T. 

f  Some  of  the  editions  read  ‘bastigatam’  in  place  of  ‘bastigatah’  which  is  found  in  some 
of  the  editions  of  Madhava’s  Nidana.  I  have  adopted  the  seeond  reading  as  making  a 
better  sense. — R.  S. 

t  ‘Dosha’  means  literally  the  vitiating  elements.  They  are  primarily  three  viz.,  ‘kapha’, 
‘pitta’  and  vayu,  which  have  been  rendered  in  the  translation  by  phlegm,  bile  and  wind 
respectively. 

‘Dusha’  means  literally  that  which  is  vitiated  viz. ,  blood,  flesh,  chyle,  semen  &c. 

§  When  the  action  of  a  medicine  is  uniform  in  regard  to  both  ‘dosha’  and  ‘dushya’ 
and  tends  to  cure  the  disease  as  well  as  to  put  down  the  disturbance  in  the  ‘<\ushyas’  k  is 


196 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  vitiators  are  three,  viz.,  phlegm,  bile,  and  wind.  Those 
(elements  of  the  body)  which  are  subject  to  vitiation  are  fat,  blood, 
semen,  (watery  sceretions),  ‘Vasa,*  LasikS,f  marrow,  chyle,  Ojas, 
and  flesh. 

There  are  twenty  varieties  of  ‘Meha’  that  afflict  human  beings.  1 

The  following  ten  varieties  of  ‘Meha’  should  be  known  as  phlegm- 
born  : 

1.  That  in  which  the  urine  is  like  water  ; 

2.  that  in  which  the  urine  is  like  the  expressed  juice  of  the 
sugarcane  ; 

3.  that  in  which  the  urine  is  thick  ; 

4.  that  in  which  the  urine  though  thick,  looks  clear  on  the  surface. 

5.  that  in  which  the  urine  is  white  in  colour  ; 

6.  that  in  which  the  urine  is  mixed  with  semen  ; 

7.  that  in  which  the  urine  is  cold  ; 

8.  that  in  which  the  urine  issues  slowly  and  in  drops  ; 

9.  that  in  which  the  urine  looks  slimy  like  secretions  from  the 
salivary  glands,  and 

10.  that  in  which  the  urine  is  mixed  with  grains  like  those  of  sand  J 

The  following  varieties  arise  from  (excited)  bile  : 

1.  That  in  which  the  urine  resembles  the  ‘ksharas’ ; 

2.  that  in  which  the  urine  is  of  a  dark  colour  ; 

3.  that  in  which  the  urine  is  of  a  blue  colour  ; 

4.  that  in  which  in  the  urine  is  yellow  ; 

5.  that  in  which  the  urine  is  of  the  colour  of  ManjisthS  ( Rubia 
cordifolid ),  and 

6.  that  in  which  the  urine  is  red  in  colour.f  8-9 


said  to  be  ‘samakriya  or  uniform  in  action.  When  the  same  action  is  dissimilar  in 
regard  to  ‘doshas’  and  ‘dushyas’  or  in  other  words  when  it  tends  to  put  down  the  one  at  the 
risk  of  aggravating  the  other,  the  medicine  is  called  ‘visamakriya’  or  dissimilar  or  contrary 
in  its  action. — R.  S. 

*  ‘Vasa.’  is  explained  by  commentators  as  the  oily  matter  present  in  the  flesh  or  the  oily 
substance  present  in  the  whole  body. — T. 

+  ‘LaSika’  is  the  liquid  matter  lying  between  the  flesh  and  the  outer  skin  Lymph. — T. 

t  The  ten  Sanskrit  names  are  I.  Udaka,  2.  Ikshu,  3.  Sandra,  4.  Sandra-pras3da, 
5.  (Jukla,  6.  (Jukra,  7,  Qita,  8.  (Janaih,  9.  Lala,  and  xo.  Sikata. — T. 

§  These  Six  varieties  are  named  1.  Ksh5ra,  2.  Kal5,  3.  Nila,  4.  HSridra,  5.  Manjiahtha, 
and  6.  RaktS. — T. 


CHA  RA  KA  -  SA  MHITA. 


7 


When  these  ingredients,  viz.,  marrow,  ‘Ojas’,  fat,  and  Lasika,’  are 
dragged  to  the  bladder  by  the  (excited)  wind,  it  causes  a  person  to 
pass  four  kinds  of  urine.  These  are  i.  urine  mixed  with  marrow, 
2.  that  mixed  with  ‘Ojas’,  3.  that  mixed  with  fat,  and  4.  that  mixed 
with  ‘Lasika.’*  10 

It  is  seen  that  ‘Prameha’  accords,  in  respect  of  colour,  taste,  touch, 
and  smell,  with  the  ‘dosha’  (vitiating  elements)  that  has  originated  it 
.Thus,  in  ‘Prameha’  brought  about  by  (excited)  wind,  the  colour  of  the 
urine  becomes  dark-red  ;  its  discharge  is  accompanied  by  severe  pain  ; 
and  it  acquires  the  six  attributes  of  marrow  and  the  other  elements 
named  above. j- 

Perspiration,  fcetid  smell  in  the  body,  flabbiness  of  the  flesh,  incli¬ 
nation  for  enjoying  the  pleasures  of  good  beds  and  seats  and  sleep, 
a  sense  of  the  chest,  the  eyes,  the  tongue,  and  the  tympanum,  being 
covered  with  a  plaster,  h'arshness  of  the  features,  excesssive  growth 
of  hair  and  the  nails,  love  of  cold,  dryness  of  the  throat  and  the 
palate,  sensation  of  sweetness,  in  the  mouth,  burning  of  the  palms 
and  the  soles,  and  the  attraction  of  ants  by  the  urine, ---these  are  the 
indications  which  manifest  themselves  in  a  person  who  is  about  to  be 
attacked  with1  Meha.’  ”-13 

Persons  attacked  with  ‘Prameha’  are  of  two  kinds  :  either  corpulent 
and  strong,  or  lean  and  weak. 

In  case  of  the  lean  and  the  weak,  the  treatment  consists  in  the 
administration  of  such  medicines  as  promote  nutrition  and  increase 
the  bulk  of  the  body. 

In  case  of  those  who  are  characterised  by  an  excess  of  ‘dosha’ 
and  physical  strength,  the  treatment  consists  in  the  administration 
of  correctives  (that  is,  purgatives  and  emetics  which  correct  the 
system).  J4 

After  the  oil  has  been  administered  to  a  person  afflicted  with 
‘Prameha,’  the  diverse  combinations  of  drugs  which  have  been  laid 


*  The  Sanskrit  names  of  these  four  varieties  of  ‘Meha’  are  I.  ‘Majjameha’,  2.  ‘Madhn- 
meha’,  3.  ‘Vasameha’,  and  4.  ‘Hastimeha’. — T. 

t  It  has  been  said  that  the  wind  excited,  vitiates  the  marrow,  ‘Ojas’,  fat,  and  ‘Lasika’. 
In  those  varieties  of  ‘Prameha’ which  are  caused  by  excited  wind,  the  urine,  in  respect  of 
colour,  taste,  touch,  and  smell,  accords  with  marrow,  ‘Ojas’  &c.-— T. 


Charaka-samhi-ta. 


1198 

down  in  the  Division  called  ‘Kalpa’  for  the  purpose  of  purging  the 
system  of  impurities,  should  be  applied. 

When  the  impurities  of  the  system  have  been  expelled  upward  or 
downward,  rich  and  nutritive  diet  should  be  directed  to  be  taken 
in  all  kinds  of  ‘Meha.’  15 

By  adopting  an  opposite  course  of  regimen,  viz.,  spare  diet  or 
fasts,  ‘gulma,’  consumption,  pains  in  the  male  organ  and  the  bladder, 
and  suppression  of  urine,  supervene  on  ‘Meha.’ 

Hence  rich  nutritive  diet  should  be  administered  to  a  person 
suffering  from  ‘Prameha’  after  a  careful  examination  of  his  power  of 
digestion.  16 

Those  persons  afflicted  with  ‘Prameha’  with  whom  correctives  do 
not  agree,  should  have  such  medicines  administered  to  them  as  restore 
the  harmony  of  the  system.* 

(They  should  take)  ‘Manthas’  (flour  of  barley  mixed  with  water 
or  decoctions  of  drugs  till  some  measure  of  consistence  is  attained), 
decoctions  (of  the  five  astringent  drugs),  electuaries  formed  with 
powdered  barley, f  and  light  diet.  *7 

The  food  of  such  a  person  should  also  consist  of  boiled  ‘Shastika’ 
rice  and  the  variety  of  rice  called  ‘Kango.’ 

With  the  tastefully  prepared  meat-juice  of  those  fowl  living  in 
jfingala  tracts,  which  scratch  the  ground  with  their  feet  in  search  of 
food  (such  as  cocks,  &c.),  and  of  those  birds  which  pick  up  their  food 
with  their  beaks,  food  made  of  barley,  unmixed  with  oil  or  ghee, 
Vfitya  {manda  made  of  barley  flour),  wines,  powders  of  fried  barley, 
and  cakes  of  diverse  kinds,  and  old  £ali  rice  boiled,  with  the  soup  of 
Mudga  ( Phaseolus  Mungo),  and  bitter  pot-  herbs,  as  also  with  the 
oil  of  Danti  {Baliospermum  montanum )  and  Ingudi  (. Ximenia  AEgyp- 
tiaca),  the  oil  of  Atasi  (linseed),  and  that  of  mustard  seeds,  should 
be  taken  by  one  afflicted  with  ‘Prameha.’  18-16 

Verily,  a  person  afflicted  with  ‘Prameha’  should  have  barley  for 
his  principal  food. 

One  afflicted  with  phlegm-born  ‘Prameha’  should  take  diverse 
kinds  of  edibles  made  of  barley,  mixed  with  honey.  20 


*  Drugs  which  restore  the  harmony  of  the  system  are  called  ‘Sam$amanas\  — T. 
t  GangSdhara  takes  ‘yavachurna-lehah’  as  implying  ‘yava’  (barley),  ‘churna’  (powder), 
and  ‘lehSh’  that  is,  diverse  kinds  of  linctus. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1199 


Powdered  barley,  drenched  for  the  whole  night  (in  an  exposed 
place)  in  the  decoction  of  ‘Triphala’*  and  mixed  with  honey,  would 
form  a  Tarpana. 

This,  mixed  with  the  wine  called  ‘Sidhu,’  a  person  afflicted  with 
‘Prameha’  should  drink  habitually  for  the  cure  of  his  disease.  21 

Of  barley  successively  macerated  in  each  of  the  astringent  decoc¬ 
tions  which  have  been  mentioned  as  remedies  for  ‘Prameha’  born 
of  phlegm,  ‘£aktu,’  cakes  and  ‘Dhana’  should  be  made,  which  the 
patient  should  take  with  treacle.  Other  preparations  made  of  such 
barley  should  form  the  food  of  the  patient.f  22 

Diverse  kinds  of  food  made  of  barley  passed  undigested  with  the 
excreta  of  asses,  horses,  kine,  ducks,  and  porcine  deer,  should  be  given 
to  the  patient.* 

Also  food  made  of  wheat,  and  of  (rice-like)  grains  obtained  from 
bambus,  treated  after  the  manner  of  barley,  should  be  given.  23 

Correctives,  emetics,  and  fasts,  administered  and  observed  at 
proper  times,  conquer  such  varieties  of  ‘Prameha’  as  are  born  of 
phlegm.  Purgatives,  cooling  and  nutritive  food  and  drink,  and  alle- 
viatives  produce  the  same  effect.  24 

One  afflicted  with  ‘Prameha’  should  drink  the  decoction,  strain¬ 
ing  it  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth,  of  Darbi  (otherwise  called  Dfrru- 
haridrS,  that  is,  Berberis  Asiatica ),  Surahva  (Cedrus  deodara ),  the 
three  myrobalans,  and  Musta  (tubers.of  Cyperus  rotundus). 

Or,  he  should  take  the  paste  of  Haridra  (turmeric)'  with  the 
expressed  juice  of  the  fruits  of  Amalaka  ( Phyllanthus  Emblica),  and 
honey.  25 

The  following  ten  decoctions,  mixed  with  honey,  are  laid  down 
for  persons  afflicted  with  phlegm-born  ‘Meha  :’ 

1.  Haritaki  (chebulic  myrobalans),  Katphala  (Myrica  sapida), 
Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus ),  and  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racemosa ) ; 

2.  Patha  ( Stephania  hernandifolia ),  Vidanga  (Embelia  Ribes ), 
Arjuna  ( Pentaptera  Arjuna\  and  Dharmana  ( Grewia  Elastica)  ; 

3.  The  two  kinds  of  Haridra  (vis.,  Berberis  Asiatica  and  Curcuma 


*  ‘Triphala’ — the  three  fruits  named  ‘Haritaki’,  ‘Bahera’  and  ‘Amalaka.’ 
t  ‘Qaktu’  means  fried  barley  reduced  to  powder.  ‘Dhana’  means  fried  grains  of 
barley.— T. 

t  Some  texts  read — ‘barley  macerated  in  the  meat 
horses,  kine,  ducks,  and  porcine  deer’. 

IS2 


t-juice  obtained  from  the  flesh  of  asses, 


1200 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


longa),  Tagara  ( Taberncemontana  coronaria ),  and  Vidanga  ( Embelia 
Ribes ) ; 

4.  Kadamva  ( Nauclea  Cadamba ),  £ala  ( Shorea  robust  a),  Arjuna 
( Pentaptera  Arjuna ),  and  Dipyaka  ( Ptychotis  Ajowan)  ; 

5.  Darbi  ( Berberis  Asia  tied,  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes),  Khadira 
(Acacia  catechu),  and  Dhava  {Conocarpus  latifolia)  ; 

6.  Surahva  ( Cedrus  deodara),  Kushtha  (Aplotaxis  auriculata), 
Aguru  ( Aquilaria  Agallocha).  and  Chandana  (Pterocarpus  santalinus)  ; 

7.  Darbi  (Berberis  Asiatica),  Agnimantha  (Premna  integrifolia ), 
the  three  myrobalans,  and  Patha  (Stephania  hernandifolia) ; 

8.  Patha  (Stephania  hernandifolia ),  Murva  (Sansevieria  Zeylanicci) 
and  £wadangshtra  (Tribulus  lanuginasus ) ; 

9.  YamSni  (Ptychotis  Ajowan),  Ushira  (the  roots  of  Andropogon 
muricatus ),  Abhaya  (chebulic  myrobalans),  and  Guduchi  (Tinospora 
cordifolid) ;  and 

10.  Chavya  (Chavica  officinaruni),  Abhaya  (chebulic  myroba¬ 
lans),  Chitraka  (Plumbago  Zeylanicci),  and  Saptapama  (Alstonia 
scholaris).  26-28 

The  following  ten  decoctions,  mixed  with  honey,  are  seen  to  be 
•  applicable  to  all  ‘Mehas’  born  of  bile  : 

1.  Ushira  (roots  of  Andropogon  muricatus),  Lodhra  (Symplocos 
racemosd),  Arjuna  (Pentaptera  Arjund,  and  Chandana  (Pterocarpus 
santalinus) ; 

2.  Ushira  (roots  of  Andropogon  muricatus),  Musta  (tubers  of 
Cyperus  rotundus),  Amalaka  (fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica),  and 
Abhaya  (chebulic  myrobalans) ; 

3.  Patola  (Trichosanthes  dioied,  Nimva  (Melia  Azadirachta),  Ama¬ 
laka  (fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblicd,  and  Amrita  (Tinospora  cordifolid) ; 

4.  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  Abhaya  (chebulic  myro¬ 
balans)  Padmaka  (a  fragrant  wood  of  that  name  resembling  toon, 
brought  from  Malwa  and  Southern  India),  and  Vrikshaka  (bark  of 
Holarrhena  antidysenteried) ; 

5.  Lodhra  (Symplocos  racemosd),  Ambu  (otherwise  called  Bala 
that  is,  Pavonia  odorata),  Kaliya  (ajvariety  of  sandal  wood,  dark  in 
colour),  and  Dhataka  (Woodfordia floribunda) ; 

6.  Nimva  (Melia  Azadirachtd,  Arjuna  (Pentaptera  Arjund), 
Amr&taka  (Spondias  mangiferd,  Niga  (Curcuma  longa),  and  Utpala 
(Nymphcea  stellata)  \ 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1201 


7.  £irisha  (. Mimosa  Sirissd ),  Sarja  (gum  of  Shorea  robusta), 
Arjuna  ( Pentaptera  Arjuna ),  and  Kejara  (otherwise  called  Nfigkejara, 
that  is,  Mesua  f erred)  ; 

8.  Priyangu  (Aglaia  Roxburghiana ),  Padma  ( Nymphcea  lotus), 
Utpala  ( Nymphcea  stellata ),  and  Kingguka  ( Butea  frondosa ) ; 

9.  Aawattha  ( Ficus  religiosa ),  Yfisa  (otherwise  called  Dur&labhS, 
that  is,  Alhagi  Maruorum ),  Asana  ( Terminalia  tomentosa },  and  Vetasa 
( Calamus  Rotang) ;  and 

xo.  Katakankateri  (otherwise  called  DaruharidrS,  that  is,  Ber¬ 
ber  is  Asiatica ),  Utpala  ( Nymphcea  stellatd,  and  Mustaka  (tubers  of 
Cyperus  rotundus).  29-3* 

The  two  decoctions  mentioned  firsts  (viz.,  those  which  are  referred 
to  in  verse  25  above),  are  regarded  as  applicable  to  all  varieties  of 
‘Meha.’  All  the  decoctions,  (viz.,  these  two,  as  also  the  twenty  others 
mentioned  in  verses  26  to  31  above),  should  be  taken  with  any 
‘Mantha’  which  the  patient  may  drink  :  or  they  may  be  administered 
by  causing  wheat  to  be  macerated  in  them  ;  or,  they  may  be  taken 
as  drink  after  meals  ;  or,  as  drink  only*  32 

Or,  they  may  be  administered  by  boiling  oils  and  ‘ghrita’  with 
them,  in  cases  of  wind-born  ‘Prameha.’ 

The  fat,  and  phlegm,  and  wind,  of  persons  afflicted  with  wind- 
born  ‘Meha’,  become  alleviated  by  the  decoctions  of  these  groups, 
boiled  with  oils  and  ‘ghrita.’  The  deranged  fat  and  phlegm  are 
restored  to  their  normal  condition  by  the  above-said  decoctions, 
while  oil  and  ‘ghrita’  soothe  the  agravated  wind.  33 

A  person  that  is  afflicted  with  ‘Meha’  bom  of  bile  and  phlegm 
should  lick  the  following  drugs  reduced  to  powder  and  mixed  with 
honey  :  they  are  Kartipillaka  (Mallotus  Philipp ensis),  Saptachcchada 
(Alstonia  scholaris ),  £alaja  (bark  of  Shorea  robusta ),  Vaibhita  (bark 
of  Terminalia  Bellerica),  Rauhitaka  (bark  of  Andersonia  Rohitaka ), 
Kautaja  (bark  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica ),  and  flowers  of  Kapittha 
(Fernia  elephantm n).  34 


*  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  the  two  decoctions  mentioned  first  are  capable  of  being 
administered  in  all  varieties  of  ‘Meha’.  These  two,  as  also  the  other  twenty,  are  then 
directed  to  be  taken  in  particular  ways.  These  are  I.  with  ‘manthas’  or  emulsions  of  other 
drugs  in  fine  powder  with  about  4  parts  of  water  ;  2.  by  macerating  grains  of  wheat  in  them, 
3.  as  drinks  after  meals  ;  or  4.  as  drinks. — T. 


1202 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


A  person  afflicted  with  ‘Meha’  should,  at  the  proper  time,  drink 
an  ‘aksha’  of  the  expressed  juice  of  Amalaka  (fruits  of  Phyllanthus 
Emblica ). 

When  this  is  digested,  he  should  eat  old  rice  (boiled)  with  meat- 
juice  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  such  wild  animals  as  may  be 
agreeable.  35 

If  the  physician  sees  the  co-existence  of  wind  with  phlegm  or 
bile  (in  cases  of  ‘Meha'),  he  should  prescribe  those  oils  and  ‘ghritas’ 
which  may  be  suitable.  Oils  are  prescribable  in  phlegm,  boiled 
with  such  decoctions  as  are  fit  for  phlegm  ;  while  in  bile,  ‘ghritas’ 
should  be  prescribed  boiled  with  such  decoctions  as  are  destructive 
of  bile.  36 

In  those  varieties  of  ‘Prameha’  that  are  born  of  phlegm  and 
wind,  oils  should  be  administered,  boiled  with  the  decoctions  or 
pastes  of  the  following  (five)  groups  of  drugs  :  they  are, - 

1.  Trikantaka  (otherwise  called  Gokshura,  that  is  7 ribulus 
lanuginosus'),  Agmantaka  (a  species  of  Oxalis),  and  Somavalka  ( Acacia 
catechu ) ; 

2.  Bhallataka  ( Semecarpus  anacardium ),  Ativisha  ( Aconitum 
fteterophylluni),  and  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racetnosa) ; 

3.  Path  a  ( Stephania  hernandifolia ),  Patola  (leaves  of  Trichosanthes 
dioica),  Arjuna  ( Pentaptera  Arjunci),  Nimva  ( Melia  Azadirachta),  and 
Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundas)  ; 

4.  HaridrS  ( Curcuma  longed,  Padmaka  (a  fragrant  wood  resem¬ 
bling  toon,  brought  from  Malwa  or  Southern  India),  and  Dipyaka 
( Ptyckotis  A jowan) ;  and 

5.  Manjisththa  ( Rubia  cordifolia ),  Aguru  ( Aquilaria  Agallocka), 
and  Chandana  ( Pterocarpus  santalinus). 

To  each  of. these  groups,  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundas)  should 
be  added. 

In  ‘Prameha’  that  is  born  of  bile  and  wind,  ‘ghrita’  boiled  with 
the  decoctions  and  pastes  of  the  above  groups  should  be  administered. 

In  ‘Prameha’  born  of  all  the  three  ‘doshas’,  both  oils  and  ‘ghritas’ 
mixed  together  and  boiled  with  the  decoctions  and  pastes  of  the 
above  groups  of  drugs  should  be  administered.  38 

The  decoction  of  these,  viz.,  the  triple  fruits  (z.  e.,  the  three  myro- 
balans),  Daru  (viz.,  Devadaru,  that  is,  Cedrus  deodara ),  Niga  (otherwise 
called  Haridra,  that  is,  Curcuma  longa ),  Vigala  ( Cucumis  Colocynthis), 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


1203 


Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundas',  mixed  with  the  paste  of  Niga 
( Curcuma  longa )  and  honey,  should  be  drunk  in  all  varieties  of 
‘Prameha’  when  they  become  intense.  39 

LODHRASAVA. 

Take  a  ‘karsha’  (2  tolas)  of  each  of  these,  viz.,  Lodhra  ( Symplocos 
racemosa ),  £ati  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet),  Pushkaramula  (this  root  not 
being  available  that  of  Aplotaxis  auriculata  is  substituted),  Ela 
{Elettatia  cardamomuni),  Murva  ( Sanseviera  Zeylanica),  Vidanga  {Ern¬ 
ie  Ilia  Ribes )  TriphalS  (the  three  myrobalans),  Yamani  ( Ptychotis 
Ajowari),  Chavya  ( Chavica  officinarum),  Priyangu  {Aglaia  Roxbur- 
ghiana),  Kramuka  (betel  nuts),  VigSla  {Cucumis  Colocynthis ),  Kirata- 
tikta  (1 Ophelia  Cherayta),  Katurohini  (. Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ),  Bhargi 
(1 Clerodendron  siphonanthus ),  Nata  (otherwise  called  Tagaramula,  that 
is,  roots  of  Taberncemontana  coronaria ),  the  roots  of  Chitraka  (. Plum¬ 
bago  Zeylanica ),  the  roots  of  Pippali  {Piper  longurri),  Kushtha  ( Aplo¬ 
taxis  auriculata :),  Ativisha  {Aconitum  heterophylluvi),  Patha  {Stephania. 
kernandifolia),  Kalingaka  (otherwise  called  Indrayava,  that  is,  seeds 
of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica ),  Kegara  {Mesua  ferrea ),  Indra  (seeds  of 
Holarrhena  antidysenteiica ),  Nakha  (an  aromatic  substance  of  that 
name,  probably,  Unguis  odoratus ),  Patra  (leaves  of  Cinnamomum 
Tamala),  Maricha  (black  pepper),  Plava  (otherwise  called  Kaivarta- 
mustaka,  that  is,  a  large  variety  of  Cyperus  rotundas). 

Boil  these  drugs  in  a  ‘drona’  of  water.*  When  three-fourths  of 
the  measure  of  water  have  evaporated,  the  product  should  be 
strained  (through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth). 

Into  this  liquid  should  be  poured  honey  of  half  its  measure  ;  and 
then  it  should  be  kept  for  a  fortnight  in  a  vessel  (which  has  been 
allowed  to  soak  a  sufficient  quantity  of  ghee). 

This  medicine  is  called  ‘LodhrSsava’.  It  promptly  destroys  all 
varieties  of  ‘Meha’  that  are  born  of  phlegm  and  bile.  The  dose 
should  be  2  ‘palas’. 

It  also  cures  chlorosis,  piles,  non-relish  for  food,  disorders  of  the 
‘Grahani’,  ‘Kil&sa’  (white  leprous  spots),  and  diverse  varieties  of 
leprosy .f  40-43 


*  A  ‘drona’  is  equal  to  32  seers.  Actually,  double  that  measure  should  be  taken. — T. 
t  ‘Kushtham’  is  a  generic  term  and  includes,  besides  leprosy,  such  skin  diseases  as  ring 
worm,  eczema,  etc. 


1204 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


If  to  the  decoction  of  the  drugs  mentioned  above  be  added 
8  ‘palas’  of  the  powder  of  Danti  (Baliospermum  montanum),  white 
sugar  of  the  measure  of  8  ‘palas’,  and  honey  of  the  measure  of  the 
decoction  taken,  the  product  is  called  ‘Dantyasava’. 

If,  again,  to  the  decoction  of  the  same  drugs  be  added  4  ‘palas’ 
of  BhallStaka  ( Semecarpus  anacardiuni],  8  ‘palas’  of  white  sugar, 
and  honey  of  the  measure  of  the  decoction,  the  product  is  called 
‘Bhallatakasava’.  44 

A  person  afflicted  with  ‘Prameha’  should  drink  ‘Sarodaka’  (decoc¬ 
tion  of  the  wood  of  Acacia  catechu ),  or  ‘Kugodaka’  (decoction  of  the 
roots  of  Poa  cynosuroides ),  or  Madhudaka  (water  mixed  with  honey), 
or  the  decoction  of  the  three  myrobalans,  or  the  wine  called  ‘Sidhu’, 
or  the  drug  called  ‘Nigada,’  or  the  wine  called  ‘Madhwika’  that  is 
old  and  the  best  of  its  kind.  45 

One  afflicted  with  ‘Prameha’  arising  from  indulgence  in  cooling 
and  oily  and  nutritive  food  and  drink,  should  check  it  by  eating  the 
meat,  roasted  on  sticks,  of  animals  and  birds  of  different  kinds, 
as  also  diverse  kinds  of  food  made  of  barley,  and  by  means  of 
correctives,  and  various  spirits,  and  decoctions  and  lickables  (that 
are  laid  in  the  Division  called  Kalpa).  46 

One  who  eats  fried  barley  and  the  diverse  edibles  prepared  with 
barley,  and  dried  ‘£aktu,’  never  gets  any  kind  of  ‘Meha.’  Nor  does 
such  a  man  get  any  kind  of  white  leprosy,  or  tubercular  leprosy  born 
of  phlegm.  One  that  eats  diverse  kinds  of  food  also  that  are  pre¬ 
pared  with'Mudga  ( Phaseolus  Mungo),  or  Amalaka  (fruits  of  Phyllan- 
thus  Emblica),  does  not  get  these  diseases.  47 

Those  medicinal  preparations,  which  have  been  laid  down  by  me 
for  drying  up  the  system  in  diseases  arising  from  indulgence  in  cool¬ 
ing  and  oily  food  as  also  in  diseases  to  which  persons  having  excess 
of  fat  are  subject,  are  highly  efficacious,  and  should,  therefore,  be 
administered  in  all  those  varieties  of  ‘Prameha’  which  arise  from 
(excited)  phlegm  and  bile.  48 

All  kinds  of  ‘Meha’  may  be  kept  off  by  diverse  kinds  of  physical 
exercise,  by  having  one’s  body  strongly  rubbed,  by  baths  and 
washing  of  the  body,  and  by  the  use  of  unguents  made  of  the  roots 
of  Sevya  ( Andropogon  muricatus),  Tvach  ( Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum ), 
ElS  {Elettaria  cardamomum),  Aguru  ( Aquilaria  Agallocha ),  Chandana 
(red  sandal  wood),  and  other  articles  of  the  kind.  49 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


[205 


Seeing  that  impurities,  fat,  and  phlegm,  when  increased,  are 
the  causes  of  ‘Prameha,’  the  physician  should,  at  the  outset,  admi¬ 
nister,  in  those  varieties  of  ‘Prameha’  that  are  born  of  phlegm  and 
bile,  those  drugs  (including  food  and  drink)  which  are  known  by  the 
name  of  ‘Apatarpana’.*  5° 

That  treatment  which  has,  before  this,  been  laid  down  for  ‘Pra- 
meha’  born  of  wind  is  ordained  also  for  those  kinds  of  phlegm-born 
and  bile-born  ‘Prameha’  which  are  distinguished  by  inordinate  excite¬ 
ment  of  the  wind.  In  persons  who  are  greatly  attenuated  (by 
(‘Apatarpana’)  when  afflicted  with  ‘Meha,’  the  wind  becomes  greatly 
excited. 

As  regards  those  varieties  of  (phlegm-born  and  bile-born)  ‘Pra¬ 
meha’  which  are  incurable,  there  is  no  need  of  puzzling  the  brain 
about  their  treatment.  51 

Persons  should  not  indulge  in  (or  expose  themselves  to)  those 
causes  from  which  arise  the  kinds  of  ‘Meha’  that  afflict  them.  Verily, 
non-indulgence  in  (or  non-exposure  to)  that  cause  is  the  treatment 
ordained  for  that  disease  which  arises  from  it.  52 

When  a  person,  without  manifesting  the  incubatory  symptoms  of 
‘Prameha’,  passes  such  urine  as  is  either  of  a  yellow  or  red  colour, 
that  disease  should  not  be  called  ‘Prameha’.  It  is  only  an  excite¬ 
ment  of  the  blood  and  bile.  S3 

When  the  urine  is  seen  to  be  slimy  and  is  as  sweet  as  honey, 
there  should  arise  two  kinds  of  consideration  :  when  the  ‘doshas’ 
(meaning,  these  ingredients  of  the  body  which  are  subject  to  vitiation, 
viz.,  blood,  adeps,  flesh,  marrow,  &c.,)  are  greatly  attenuated,  the 
disease  should  be  regarded  as  having  the  excited  wind  for  its  cause  ;  if 
(on  the  other  hand)  the  result  has  been  brought  about  by  indulgence 
in  ‘Santarpana’  (or  food  and  drink  that  are  cooling,  oily,  and  nutritive), 
it  should  be  set  down  as  born  of  (excited)  phlegm.  54 

Those  cases  of  ‘Meha’  born  of  phlegm,  as  also  those  born  of  bile, 
which  linger  on  with  their  incubatory  symptoms  manifested,  also 
those  cases  of  ‘Meha’  born  of  wind  that  present  the  same  peculiarity, 
are  not  curable. 


*  ‘Apatarpana’  is  the  reverse  of  ‘Santarpana’.  The  latter  is  used  to  mean  cooling,  oily, 
and  nutritive  food  and  drink.  Hence  ‘Apatarpana’  means  fasting,  or  such  drugs  and  such 
regimen  as  have  attenuating  properties. — T. 


1206 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SA  M  HIT A . 


As  regards  those  cases  of  ‘Meha’  born  of  bile  which  do  not  present 
the  peculiarity  noted  above  (viz.,  the  presence  of  the  incubatory 
symptoms  even  after  their  development),  they  are  suppressible.  If, 
however,  the  fat  be  not  vitiated,  then  even  those  cases  become 
curable.  55 

A  person  suffering  from  congenital  ‘Prameha1  owing  to  the  fact  of 
his  birth  from  a  father  afflicted  with  ‘Madhumeha,’  cannot  be  cured 
for  the  primary  defect  in  the  seed.  Similarly  all  other  hereditary  or 
congenital  maladies  do  not  yield  to  treatment.  56 

The  seven  kinds  of  eruptions,  which  persons  afflicted  with 
‘Prameha’  get,  and  which  have  been  spoken  of  by  me  in  the  Lesson 
on  diseases  in  general  (vide  Lesson  XVII,  Sutrasth&na,  ante),  should 
be  treated  by  experienced  surgeons  by  means  of  the  lancet  and 
other  instruments  as  also  by  dressings  and  plasters.  57 

{Here  occur  some  verses  containing  a  summary). 

Causes,  the  ‘doshas’  ( viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm),  those  constituent 
elements  of  the  body  that  are  vitiated  (in  order  to  produce  the 
disease),  as  regards  ‘Meha,’  as  also  its  curability  (or  otherwise),  and  its 
subsequent  symptoms,  the  two  kinds  of  persons  afflicted  with  ‘Meha,’ 
the  three  kinds  of  treatment,  the  indications  that  determine  either 
course  of  treatment,  the  regimen  that  should  be  taken,  viz.,  the 
various  preparations  of  barley,  ‘Manthas,’  and  decoctions  that  are 
alleviative  of  ‘Meha,’  the  preparations  of  oils  and  ghees  and  lickables, 
the  kinds  of  food  that  may  be  prescribed  (for  those  to  whom  the  oils, 
&c.,  are  administered),  wines  of  excellent  and  well-tried  virtues,  various 
kinds  of  physical  exercise,  baths,  strongly  kneading  the  body  (with 
oils  and  other  unguents),  and  scents, — these  have  been  declared  by 
me  for  the  alleviation  of  these  ten  kinds  of  ‘Meha,’  in  this  Lesson  of 
the  Division  called  ‘ChikitsS.’ 

Thus  ends  Lesson  VI,  called  ‘Prameha,’  in  the  Division,  called 
‘Chikitsa,’  of  the  treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland,  U.  S.  A. : — You  have  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  .  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  age.s  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California: —  . ...As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work'  is  apparent.  ...  . . 

there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  See. ,  and  one  of  the  first  to  he  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Ohio,  U.  S.  A.  : — The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge: — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  ^translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York  : — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 

E.  P.  Dams 'Esq.,  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia-. — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  of  Cashmere  : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  educationjannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Pdan  of  the  Faculty,  North-  Western 
University,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World's  Columbian  Exposition  : — I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  : — Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  i  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  ig,  East 38th  Street,  New  York: — Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  D erselhofber  Praise,  Dramstadt : — The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,-  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist  .-—I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and -as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere,  174,  Boulevatse,  Saint  Germain  : — Beg 
t-o  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq. ,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  yourTaborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write.. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  : — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  I 
arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop 
from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients 
according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and 
fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of 
the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street,  Calcutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
'  whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
[about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after. — 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . .  ...  considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector ,  Mymensing: — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector : — Your  patriotic, 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  A.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C,  S.  I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hypocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the.  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gya  : — It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt..  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  Wales  : — The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  : — Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  fa  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the' treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is 
a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji,— The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


PART  XXXIX. 


47;]  5  7 


GHARAKA-SAMHITA 


(TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH). 


PARESHNATH  SARMA, 


KAVIRAJ  AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

rORjQF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  Original)  WITH  COMMENT- 


11  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  1 
STSTKM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C., 


200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved. ) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters.) 

Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says,— .  I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention. 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  M oilier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  .to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office — . Your 

excellent  translation  ...  . .  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

. Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden:—!  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  considerit  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams'  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A. — I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing,  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

■  Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches, 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris: — I  praise  you  ort  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany : — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsbuigh,  Germany  !■ — English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal: — I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life, 
cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


'"'toUKffr 

TREATMENT  OF  LEPROSY. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  treatment  of  Leprosy. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri. 

Hear  me  discourse,  O  Agnivega,  on  the  causes,  the  diverse  symp¬ 
toms,  the  seats,  and  the  means  of  alleviation,  particularly  and  in  their 
entirety,  of  the  different  varieties  of  Leprosy  which  are  all  destructive 
of  the  sense  of  touch.  1 

Of  persons  who  take  food  and  drink  made  of  incompatible  in¬ 
gredients,  as  also  food  and  drink  that  are  liquid,  oily,  and  heavy, 

Of  persons  who  check  the  urgings  of  vomiting  as  also  the  other 
urgings  (of  nature),  2 

Of  persons  who  indulge  in  physical  exerci^s,  or  expose  them¬ 
selves  to  great  heat,  after  having  overloaded  the  stomach  with  food 
(and  drink), 

Of  persons  who  expose  themselves  to  cold  and  heat,  or  indulge 
in  fasting  and  gorging,  in  violation  of  proper  sequence,  3 

Of  persons  who,  when  afflicted  with  excessive  perspiration,  or 
toil,  of  terror,  quickly  indulge  in  cold  water, 

Of  persons  who  eat  before  the  food  previously  taken  has  been 
digested, 

Of  persons  who  injudiciously  indulge  in  the  five  well-known  acts 
{viz.,  the  administration  of  emetics,  purgatives,  enemata  that  is  oily, 
enemata  that  is  dry,  and  errhines),  4 

Of  persons  who  take,  in  excessive  measures,  rice  that  is  new, 
curds,  fish,  salt,  and  things  that  are  sour, 

Of  persons  who  eat  (in  excessive  measures)  the  seeds  of  Masha 
(Pkaseolus  radiatus),  Mulaka  (garden  radish),  cakes,  treacle  (raw 
sugar),  milk,  and  sesame  seeds,  5 

Of  persons  who  indulge  in  sexual  congress  at  a  time  when  the 
food  taken  by  them  has  not  been  digested,  and  of  those  who  indulge 
in  sleep  at  daytime, 

Of  persons  who  humiliate  Brahmans  and  seniors,  and  of  those 
who  perpetrate  sinful  acts,  6 

The  three  faults,  viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  becoming  vitiated, 
vitiate  the  skin,  the  blood,  the  flesh,  and  the  watery  substance  which 
lies  next  to  the  skin  (called  Lasika). 


1208 


CHARAKA-SAMH1 TA. 


These  seven  are,  in  brief,  the  ingredients  which  (when  vitiated) 
produce  the  diverse  varieties  of  Leprosy.  7 

From  these  causes  arise  the  seven  and  eleven  varieties  of  Leprosy. 
There  is,  again,  no  variety  of  Leprosy  that  is  born  of  only  one 
fault.  8 

Loss  of  touch,  excessive  perspiration  or  the  entire  absence  of 
perspiration,  discolouration  (of  the  body),  elevation  of  the  eruptions, 
horripilation,  itching,  pains  (pins  and  needles),  a  sense  of  fatigue 
and  lassitude  (without  having  undergone  any  labour),  excessive 
pain  in  the  ulcers  that  appear,  prompt  appearance  of  ulcers  charac¬ 
terised  by  protracted  stay,  a  burning  sensation  and  stupefaction  of 
the  limbs, — these  are  the  symptoms,  at  the  outset,  of  Leprosy.  9-i° 
After  this,  we  shall  expound  the  symptoms  of  the  eight  and  ten 
varieties  of  Leprosy.  These  are  i.  Kap5la,  2.  Audumvara,  3,  Mandala, 
4.  Rishyajihbha,  5.  Pundarika,  6.  Sidhma,  7.  Kakanaka,  8.  Eka- 
kushtha,  9.  Charma,  10.  Kitima,  11.  Vipadika,  12.  Alasaka, 
13.  Dadru,  14.  CharmadaJa,  15.  PamS,  16.  Vishphotaka,  17.  £ataru 
and  18.  Vicharchika.*  11 

That  variety  of  leprosy  in  which  the  eruptions  are  partly  of  a 
dark  and  partly  of  a  red  colour,  which  resemble  in  shape  a  broken 
piece  of  a  water-)ar,  which  are  dry,  rough  to  the  touch,  and  accom¬ 
panied  by  pain  resembling  what  is  caused  by  one’s  being  pierced 
with  innumerable  needles,  is  called  KapSla.  The  outer  coating  is 
thin.  It  is  regarded  as  difficult  of  cure.f  12 

That  variety  of  leprosy  is  called  ‘Audumvara’  in  which  the  erup¬ 
tions  are  like  the  fruits  ofUdumvara  (Ficus  glomerata )  in  size  and 
colour,  and  which  are  accompanied  by  a  sense  of  burning  and  itching, 
and  in  which  the  hair  on  the  swellings  assume  a  tawny  colour.  *3 
That  variety  of  leprosy  is  called  ‘Mandala’  in  which  some  of  the 
patches  are  white  and  some  are  red,  which  is  always  moist,  in  which 
the  eruptions  are  non-shifting,  oily,  elevated,  and  circular,  and  in  which 
the  pimples  are  confluent.  It  is  difficult  of  cure.  H 


*  Of  these,  the  first  seven  are  called  ‘MahSkusbtha’  or  seven  forms  of  Leprosy  ;  the 
remaining  eleven  are  called  ‘Kshudra-kushtha’,  or  minor  forms  of  Leprosy.  These  eleven 
are  really  skin  diseases. — T. 

t  ‘KapSla’  means  a  broken  half  of  a  water-jar.  The  fact  is,  in  this  variety  of  leprosy, 
the  swollen  spots  are  elevated  in  the  middle. — T. 


CHAR  AKA -SAM HIT  A. 


1209 


That  variety  of  leprosy  is  called  ‘Rishyajihva’  in  which  the  erup¬ 
tions  assume  the  shape  of  the  deer’s  tongue.  They  are  coarse  or 
rough  to  the  touch.  The  edges  are  red,  and  the  middle  portions  are 
dark.  They  are  accompanied  by  pain.  !5 

That  variety  of  leprosy  is  called  ‘Pundarika’  in  which  the  eruptive 
patches  are  elevated  and  take  the  form  of  the  flowers  of  Pundarika 
(. Nymphcea  lotus).  The  edges  are  red  in  colour,  mixed  with  white.  It 
is  accompanied  by  a  burning  sensation.  >6 

That  variety  of  leprosy  is  called  ‘Sidhma’  in  which  the  eruptions  are 
partly  of  a  white  and  partly  of  a  coppery  colour.  The  outer  coating 
is  thin.  If  the  afflicted  parts  are  rubbed,  a  pulverous  substance  comes 
out.  The  general  aspect  of  the  eruptions  is  that  of  flowers  of  Alavu 
( Cucurbita  lagenarid).  It  appears  very  generally  on  the  chest  *7 

That  variety  of  leprosy  is  called  ‘Kakana’  in  which  the  eruptions 
look  like  the  fruits  of  KakanantikS  ( Abrus  precatorius ,  i.  e.,  [the 
middle  portions  are  dark  while  the  edges  are  red).  It  is  accompanied 
by  severe  pain.  The  eruptions  do  not  ripen  and  suppurate.  It  dis¬ 
covers  the  symptoms  of  all  the  three  faults.  It  is  incurable.  18 

That  variety  of  leprosy  is  called  ‘Ekakushtha’  (Icthyosis)  in  which 
no  perspiration  appears,  and  in  which  the  eruptions  occupy  a  large 
space,  and  have  the  form  of  the  scales  of  a  fish. 

The  leprosy  known  as  ‘Charma’  (Hypertrophy  of  the  skin)  is 
characterised  by  the  eruptive  patches  being  rough  as  the  skin  of  the 
elephant,  and  thick.  19 

The  leprosy  known  as  ‘Kitima’  (Keloid)  is  characterised  by  spots 
that  are  of  a  dark  colour.  The  ulcerations  are  rough  to  the  touch 
and  hard. 

The  leprosy  known  as  ‘Vaipadika’  (Psoriasis  of  hand  and  feet) 
is  characterised  by  the  bursting  of  the  hands  and  the  feet.  It  is 
accompanied  by  severe  pain.  20 

The  leprosy  known  as  ‘Alasaka’  (Lichen)  is  characterised  by  the 
patches  being  accompanied  by  severe  itching,  and  covered  with  red 
pimples. 

The  leprosy  called  ‘Dadru’  (Ringworm)  is  characterised  by  the 
spots  being  elevated,  circular,  accompanied  by  itching,  and  covered 
with  reddish  pimples  2* 

That  leprosy  is  called  ‘Charmadala’  (Impetigo)  in  which  the  erup¬ 
tions  are  of  a  reddish  hue,  accompanied  by  itching  and  a  pain  as 


1210 


CHAR  AKA-  SAM  HIT  A. 


intense  as  that  in  ‘£ula,’  covered  with  large  pimples,  and  incapable 
of  being  touched  without  giving  severe  pain.  The  eruptions  burst 
in  time.  22 

That  leprosy  is  known  by  the  name  of  ‘Pgm5  (Eczema)  in  which 
the  eruptions  are  either  white  and  red  or  dark  in  colour,  covered  with 
pimples,  and  accompanied  by  severe  itching. 

That  leprosy  is  known  by  the  name  of  ‘Vishphotaka’  (malignant 
boils)  in  which  the  eruptions  have  a  white  or  dark-red  colour,  and  a 
coating  that  is  thin.  23 

That  leprosy  is  known  by  the  name  of  ‘£ataru’  (Furuncle)  in 
which  a  large  number  of  inflammatory  pimples  appear  that  are  either 
red  or  dark  in  colour,  and  that  are  accompanied  by  burning  and  pain. 

That  variety  of  leprosy  is  called  ‘Vicharchika’  (Psoriasis)  in  which 
pimples  appear  that  are  dark  in  colour  and  that  are  accompanied  by 
itching.  Discharges  also  take  place  from  them  of  foetid  matter  in 
copious  measure.  24 

When  the  wind  is  exceedingly  excited,  the  leprosy  called  ‘Kapala’’ 
appears.  When  the  phlegm  is  similarly  excited,  the  variety  called 
‘Mandala’  appears.  The  variety  called  ‘Audumvara,’  it  should  be 
known,  arises  from  excitement  of  the  bile.  The  variety  called 
‘Kakana’  results  from  the  excitement  of  all  the  three  faults.  25 

When  the  wind  and  the  bile  are  excited  together,  the  result  is 
that  variety  of  leprosy  which  is  called  ‘Rishyajihva’ ;  when  the 
phlegm  and  the  bile  are  excited,  the  variety  called  ‘Pundarika’  is  the 
result ;  and  when  the  wind  and  the  phlegm  are  excited  together,  the 
variety  called  ‘Sidhma’  appears.  26 

The  varieties  known  as  ‘Charma’  (Hypertrophy  of  the  skin),  ‘Eka- 
kushtha  (Ichthyosis),  ‘Kitima’  (Keloid),  ‘Vidarika’  (Psoriasis  Of  hands 
and  feet),  and  ‘Masaka’  (Lichen),  should  be  known  as  arising  very 
often  from  excitement  of  wind  and  phlegm.  27 

The  varieties  known  as  ‘Dadru’  (Ringworm\  ‘Charmadala’ 
(Impetigo),  ‘Pama’  (Eczema),  ‘Vishphota’  (malignant  boil),  ‘£ataru’ 
(Furuncle),  are  very  generally  the  result  of  excited  bile  and  phlegm. 
‘Vicharchika’  (Psoriasis)  is  generally  the  result  of  excited  phlegm.  28 
All  varieties  of  leprosy  arise  from  excitement  of  the  three  faults. 
Ascertaining,  however,  the  predominance  or  otherwise  of  the  faults 
by  their  respective  indications,  the  course  of  treatment  is  determined 
of  leprosy.  29 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


I2II 

In  (the  treatment  of)  all  varieties  of  leprosy,  the  physician  should 
first  alleviate  that  particular  symptom  which  arises  prominently.  He 
should  next  take  up  the  other  symptoms  which  accompany  the 
predominant  one.  3° 

The  faults  excited  should  be  known  by  the  varieties  (of  leprosy), 
and  the  varieties,  again,  should  be  known  by  the  faults  excited.  The 
varieties  indicate  the  causes  {viz.,  the  faults  excited),  and  the  causes, 
viz.,  the  faults  excited)  indicate  the  varieties.*  3* 

Dryness,  emaciation,  piercing  pain,  violent  and  deep-seated  jpain, 
shrinking  of  the  skin,  sense  of  fatigue  without  having  undergone  toil, 
hardness,  roughness,  horripilation  over  the  whole  body,  darkness  and 
redness  of  hue  (as  regards  the  eruptions  or  patches  that  appear  on 
the  body), — these  are  the  indications  of  (excited)  wind  in  all  varieties 
of  leprosy.  3 2 

Burning  sensation,  redness  of  complexion,  discharges  of  foetid 
matter,  suppuration,  smell  like  that  of  raw  meat,  filthy  secretions, 
falling  off  of  the  limbs, — these  are  the  indications  of  (excited)  bile 
(in  all  varieties  of  leprosy).  33 

Whiteness,  coldness,  itching,  immobility  (of  the  eruptions)1,  eleva¬ 
tion  (of  the  patches),  heaviness  of  the  limbs,  unctuousness  of  the 
body,  worms  that  eat  away  the  flesh  of  the  afflicted  parts,  appearance 
of  filthy  secretions, — these  are  the  indications  of  (excited)  phlegm 
(in  all  varieties  of  leprosy).  34 

One  who  is  afflicted  with  leprosy  presenting  all  these  symptoms, 
and  who  is  divested  of  strength,  should  be  avoided  by  a  physician 
possessed  of  intelligence. 

He  should  also  avoid  one  afflicted  with  leprosy  accompanied  by 
thirst  and  a  burning  sensation,  or  by  loss  of  digestive  fire,  or  by 
eruptions  and  patches  in  which  the  flesh  is  being  eaten  away  by 
worms.  35 

That  leprosy  which  is  characterised  by  excitement  of  wind  and 
phlegm,  or  that  in  which  only  one  fault  has  been  greatly  excited,  is 
not  difficult  of  cure.  ~ 


*  This  is  a  very  important  aphorism.  In  the  previous  aphorisms,  the  particular  faults 
that  cause  particular  varieties  have  been  laid  down.  Here,  the  direction  is  given  that  the 
varieties  help  in  ascertaining  the  faults  excited,  and  the  faults  excited  help  in  the  diagnosis  of 
the  varieties. — T. 


1212 


CHARAKA-SAMHJTA. 


Those  varieties  of  leprosy  in  which  phlegm  and  bile  are  predomi¬ 
nant,  are  difficult  of  cure.  36 

In  those  varieties  of  leprosy  in  which  the  wind  predominates,  the 
drinking  of  ghee  is  beneficial. 

In  those  varieties  of  leprosy  in  which  the  phlegm  predominates,, 
emetics  are  beneficial. 

In  those  varieties  of  leprosy  in  which  the  bile  predominates,, 
purgatives  first,  and  blood-letting  next,  are  beneficial.  37 

Those  combinations  of  drugs,  possessed  of  emetic  and  purgative 
virtues,  which  have  been  spoken  of  in  that  Division  of  this  treatise 
which  is  called  ‘Kalpa’,  deserve  to  be  administered  to  persons  afflicted 
with  leprosy. 

In  those  cases  of  leprosy  in  which  the  patches  are  superficial, 
shallow  incisions  are  beneficial.  In  those  cases  in  which  the  patches- 
are  large  and  elevated,  incisions  that  are  deep  are  beneficial.  3s 

The  physician,  keeping  up  the  strength  of  a  patient  who  is 
afflicted  with  leprosy,  and  in  whom  the  faults  have  been  greatly 
excited,  should  administer  to  him  repeatedly  those  drugs  that  are 
known  as  correctives. 

If,  however,  the  excited  faults  be  attenuated  (by  a  course  of 
correctives)  to  a  great  extent,  a  patient  that  is  weak  is  soon  deprived 
of  his  life  by  the  wind.  39 

If  the  intestines  be  cleared  and  the  blood  let  out,  the  drinking 
of  oils  is  beneficial  for  persons  afflicted  with  leprosy. 

It  should  be  remembered,  however,  that  a  patient  who  is  afflicted 
with  leprosy  and  whose  strength  has  been  reduced  in  consequence 
of  his  intestines  being  cleared  by  purgatives,  is  quickly  killed  by 
the  wind.  4° 

If  the  patient’s  chest  be  afflicted  by  the  faults  (wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm),  and  if  the  patches  appear  in  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  he 
should  then  have  emetics  administered  to  him. 

The  emetics  should  be  made  of  these  drugs,  viz.,  the  seeds  of 
Kutaja  (Holarrhena  antidysenterica ),  Madafia  (fruits  of  Randia  dume- 
torum ),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Patola  ('leaves  of  Trichosanthes  dioica), 
mixed  with  Nimba  ( Melia  Azadirachta ). 

The  infusion  of  these,  or  their  decoction,  should  be  taken. 

.  Liquorice  (powdered)  and  honey  should  be  added. 

These  are  the  emetics  prescribed. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


121* 

In  all  varieties  of  leprosy,  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethum ),  Danti 
( Baliospermum  montanum ),  and  the  three  myrobalans,  are  regarded 
as  approved  purgatives.  41-42 

‘Sauviraka’,  ‘Tushodaka’,  diverse  kinds  of  ‘Asavas’,  and  ‘Sidhu’ 
and  other  wines,  are  said  to  be  proper  for  being  mixed  with  the 
purgatives  (that  should  be  administered  to  persons  afflicted  with 
leprosy). 

The  regimen  that  has  been  laid  down  for  observance  after  the 
administration  of  purgatives  is  beneficial  (to  persons  afflicted  with 
leprosy,  after  purgatives  have  been  administered  to  them.)*  43 

Darvi  (otherwise  called  Daruharidra,  viz.,  Berberis  Asiatica), 
Vrihati  (Solanum  Indicuin),  Sevya  ( roots  of  Andropogon  muricatus), 
Patola  (leaves  of  Trichosanthes  dioica ),  Pichumardda  (bark  of  Melia 
Azadirachta ),  Madana  (fruits  of  Randia  dumetorum),  Kritam&la 
( Cassia  fistula),  with  Kalinga-yava  (seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysen- 
terica),  and  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  mixed  with  oils, 
should  form  a  dry  enemata  for  persons  afflicted  with  leprasy.f  44 

One  afflicted  with  leprosy  in  whom  the  wind  is  predominant, 
should  first  have  purgatives  administered  to  him.  Next,  dry 
enemata  should  be  administered.  If  the  physician  sees  that  oily 
enemata  should  also  be  applied,  then  the  oil  to  be  used  should  be 
cooked  with  Phala  (fruits  of  Randia  dumetorum),  Madhuka  (liquorice), 
Nimba  (bark  of  Melia  Azadirachta ),  Kutaja  (bark  of  Holarrhena 
antidysenterica),  and  the  leaves  of  Patola  ( Trichosanthes  dioica ).  45 
Danti  ( Baliospermum  montanum ),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Saindhava 
(rock  salt),  Phanijjhaka  (a  variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum),  Pippala  {Piper 
longum ),  fruits  of  Karanja  (Pongamia  glabra),  with  Vidanga  ( Embelia 
Ribes),  form  a  snuff ‘that  alleviates  worms,  leprosy,  and  vitiated 
phlegm.  46 


*  ‘Sauviraka’  is  a  kind  of  very  light  wine.  ‘Tushodaka’  is  of  the  same  kind.  ‘Asavas’ 
are  vinous  spirits.  ‘Sidhu’  is  a  kind  of  sweet  wine.  For  these  and  other  kinds  of  wine,  vide 
SutrasthSna.  ‘Alo4ana’  is  an  article,  generally  a  liquid,  which  is  mixed  with  a  drug  or 
combination  of  drugs.  The  mixture  is  effected  by  repeated  and  violent  stirring  with  a  ladle 
or  stick.  For  instructions  regarding  the  regimen  prescribable  after  administration  of  purga¬ 
tives,  vide  Sutrasth5na. — T. 

+  GangS dhara  says  that  the  decoction  should  be  taken  of  the  drugs  mentioned  and  that 
this  should  be  mixed  with  oils. — T. 


[214 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


By  administering  the  purgative  fumes  spoken  of  in  the  Division 
called  ‘Sutrasthana’,  worms,  leprosy,  and  ‘Kilfisa’  (Leucoderma), 
appearing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  are  alleviated.  47 

In  those  varieties  of  leprosy  which  are  characterised  by  circular 
patches  that  are  fixed  (immobile)  and  hard,  ‘Sweda’  (fomentation) 
should  be  applied  by  the  methods  called  Trastara’  or  ‘NacU.’  The 
patches  should  then  be  rubbed  with  a  bundle  of  pointed  blades  (of 
Kuga  grass).  In  this  way  should  blood  be  let  out  from  them.*  48 
Repeatedly  fomenting  the  patches  by  means  of  the  flesh,  enclosed 
in  bags  of  cloth,  of  animals  that  are  aquatic  or  that  reside  in  marshy 
regions,  and  that  is  heated  in  an  agreeable  measure,  a  sharp  lancet 
should  be  used  for  making  incisions  on  them.  49 

Or,  by  using  a  horn  or  the  dried  husk  of  an  Alfibu  ( Cucurbita 
lagenaria),  blood  may  be  let  out. 

As  regards  mild  varieties  of  leprosy  (that  is,  those  in  which  the 
patches  are  small  in  extent  and  not  elevated),  these  should  be 
scratched,  and  blood  should  then  be  let  out  by  means  of  leeches.  5° 
Plasters  applied  to  leprosy  after  letting  out  blood  (from  the 
patches),  checking  the  faults  excited,  and  purging  the  intestines,  yield 
prompt  success.  51 

In  those  cases  of  leprosy  in  which  the  lancet  is  not  used,  and  in 
which  the  sensation  of  touch  is  destroyed,  caustics  should  be  applied, 
after  letting  out  blood  and  checking  the  excited  faults.  52 

In  those  cases  of  leprosy  in  which  the  eruptions  are  as  hard  as 
stone,  and  rough,  and  fixed,  and  old,  and  dead  to  touch,  the  patient 
should  first  be  made  to  drink  the  medicines  called  ‘Agada.’  After 
this,  the  eruptions  should  be  burnt  by  means  of  applying  particular 
kinds  of  ‘Agada.’f  S3 

Those  varieties  of  leprosy  in  which  the  eruptions  are  paralysed 
or  dead  to  the  touch,  endued  with  an  itching  sensation,  and  marked 
by  complete  absence  of  unperspiration,  should  be  treated  as  follows : 


*  Gangadhara  observes  that  ‘Sweda’  or  rubbing,  and  not  ‘Sweda’  and  rubbing,  should  be 
had  recourse  to:  as  preliminaries  for  letting  out  blood. — T. 

t  It  is  difficult  to  ascertain  what  medicines  were  called  by  the  name  ‘Agada’.  The  word 
means  ‘antidote,  i.  e.,  ‘destructive  of  poison’.  What,  again,  were  those  ‘Agadas’  which 
were  used  as  caustics  is  difficult  to  determine.  The  commentators  throw  no  light  upon  the 
word. — T. 


CHA  RAKA-  SAM  HIT  A. 


215 


The  eruptions  should  be  scratched  with  bundles  of  Ku$a  blades, 
or  with  the  leaves  of  Danti  ( Baliospermum  montanum ),  Trivrit  (Con¬ 
volvulus  Turpethuin),  Karavira  ( Nerium  odorum),  Karanja  (Pongamia 
glabra ),  Kutaja  (. Holarrhena  antidysenterica),  )ati  (Jasminutn  grandi- 
floruni',  Arka  ( Calatropis  gigantea),  and  Nimba  ( Melia  Azadirachta), 
or  with  (blunted)  instruments,  or  with  sea-foam,*  or  with  (dried) 
cow-dung. 

After  this,  plasters  (made  of  proper  drugs)  should  be  applied  to 
them.  54-55 

That  ,  treatment  which  has  been  laid  down  for  the -cure  of  leprosy 
born  of  excited  wind  and  phlegm,  should  be  adopted  for  all  varieties 
•of  leprosy. 

The  discharge  of  phlegm,  and  bile,  and  blood,  should  also  be 
■caused.  Alleviation  should  also  be  sought  by  means  of  decoctions 
that  are  bitter  in  taste.  56 

Bitter  ghees,  and  all  those  courses  of  treatment,  external  and 
internal,  which  are  alleviative  of  blood-bile,  should  first  be  adopted 
in  cases  of  leprosy  caused  by  excited  bile.  57 

Agreeably  to  distinctions  determined  by  the  predominance  of  the 
faults,  the  courses  of  treatment  (of  leprosy)  are  thus  laid  down. 

The  common  feature  of  all  varieties  of  leprosy  is -the  vitiation  of 
the  skin.  Keeping  this  in  view,  I  shall  now  lay  down  the  methods 
■of  alleviating  this  disease.  5s 

Darbi  {.Berberis  Asiatica,  or  Rasanjana  (Galena,  or  the  vegetab  le 
.produce  called  Rasot),*  mixed  with  the  urine  of  the  cow,  administered 
for  a  month,  checks  leprosy. 

Abhayfi  (chefeulic  myrobalans),  with  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids, 
viz.,  dry  ginger,  Piper  longum ,  and  black  pepper),  treacle,  and  oil, 
administered  for  the  same  period,  (with  cow’s  urine  added  to  the 
■compound),  produces  the  same  result.  59 

The  roots  of  Patola  ( Trichosanthes  dioiap,  and  of  Gavakshi 
'{Cucumis  Colocynthis),  each  of  the  measure  of  a  ‘pala’,  Triphala  (the 
three  myrobalans,  viz.,  chebulic,  belleric,  and  emblic),  and  Trivrit 
( Convolvulus  Turpethuvi),  each  of  the  measure  of  a  ‘pala1,  Trfiyamana 


*  Bengal  physicians  understand  ‘Rasanjana’  to  mean  Galena.  In  the  N.  W.  Provinces;, 
■‘Rasanjana’  is  taken  to  be  the  vegetable  produce  known  by  the  name  of  ‘Rasot’. — T. 


121 6 


CHARA  KA-SA  M HIT  A. 


(Ficus  heterophylla )  and  Katurohini  (. Picrorrhiza  Kurrod),  each  of  the 
measure  of  half  a  ‘pala’,  with  Nagara  (dry  ginger)  of  the  measure  of 
-a  fourth  of  a  ‘pala’,  should  be  powdered  together. 

Of  the  pounded  product,  take  a  ‘pala’  and  boil  it  in  water. 

One  afflicted  with  leprosy  should  drink  this. 

It  alleviates  the  (excited)  faults. 

After  this  has  been  digested,  the  patient  should  take  old  £ali  rice 
(boiled),  with  the  me'at-juice  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  animals  and 
birds  living  in  the  wilderness. 

This  course  of  treatment  cures  the  several  varieties  of  leprosy, 
swellings,  diseases  of  the  Grahani  (lienteric  diarrhoea),  piles,  strangury, 
jaundice,  ‘£ula’  pains  in  the  chest  and  the  pubic  region,  and  chronic 
intermittent  fever.  60-62 

Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus ),  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids, 
viz ,  dry  ginger,  Piper  longum,  and  black  pepper),  Triphala  (the  three 
myrobalans),  Manjistha  ( Rubia  Munjista),  Dfiru  (otherwise  called 
Devadaru  i.  e.,  Cedrus  deodard),  the  twice  five  roots  (i.  e.,  the  ten 
roots),  Saptachcchada  ( Echites  scholaris),  the  bark  of  Nimba  ( Melia 
Azadirachta),  Vi  cal  a  (otherwise  called  Rfikhal-sasha,  i.  e.,  Cucumis 
Colocynthis'),  Chitraka  (the  roots  of  Plumbago  Zeylanicd,  and  Murva 
(the  roots  of  Sanseviera  Zeylanicd},  should,  each  be  pounded  into 
fine  pulv. 

Mix  the  powders  together,  taking  equal  quantities  of  each.  Add 
to  the  product  flour  of  barley  (that  is  nine  times  the  measure  of  each 
pulv).  Add  also  honey  and  ghee. 

This  medicine  is  a  very  superior  alleviative  of  leprosy.  It  should 
be  taken  every  day  (till  cure  is  affected).  Dropsical  swellings,  chlo¬ 
rosis,  white  leprosy,  diseases  of  the  ‘Grahani’,  piles,  syphilis,  fistula- 
in-ano,  pimples  and  other  eruptions  of  the  kind,  itching,  and  urticaria 
evanida,  are  cured  by  it.  63-65 

Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  AtivishS  {Aconitum  hetero- 
phyllum ),  KatukS  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurrod),  Nimba  {Melia  Azadirachta ), 
Kalingaka  (otherwise  called  lndrayava,  i.  e.,  seeds  of  Holarrhena 
antidysentrica ),  VachS  {Acorus  calamus ),  Patola  {Trichosanthes  dioica ), 
Magadhika  {Piper  longmn),  the  two  varieties  of  Rajani  (otherwise 
called  HaridrS,  i.  e.,  Curcuma  longa,  and  Berberis  Asiatica),  Padmaka 
(a  fragrant  wood  known  by  that  name),  Murva  {Sanseviera  Zeylanicd), 
Vig&la  (otherwise  called  ‘R&kh&l-sashS,’  i.  e.,  Cucumis  Colocynthis ), 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


121; 


Bhummba  ( Ophelia  Cherayta ),  and  Palaga  ( Butea  frondosd)  should  be 
pounded,  each  separately. 

Of  each  powder  take  2  palas,  (and  mix  them  together).  Add 
powdered  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethum ),  of  measure  that  is  twice 
that  of  the  total  compound.  Then  add  powdered  Br&hmi  ( Gratiola 
Monnieria ),  of  a  measure  twice  that  of  Trivrit. 

The  powder  thus  made  is  a  highly  efficacious  remedy  for  curing 
that  variety  of  leprosy  which  is  characterised  by  loss  of  touch.  66-67 

The  administration  of  Navanitaka  (sulphur  of  a  particular  variety), 
with  the  (expressed)  juice  of  Jati  (otherwise  called  Amalaka,  i.  e., 
fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica )  and  honey,  is  highly  efficacious  in 
curing  the  seven  and  ten  varieties  of  leprosy. 

This  may  be  said  also  of  iron  pyrites  and  administered  with 
cow’s  urine.*  68 

One  afflicted  with  leprosy  should  take  mercury  corrected  by 
means  of  sulphur  as  also  iron  pyrites.  Such  mercury  is  capable  of 
curing  all  diseases.  69 

One  afflicted  with  leprosy  should  take,  every  day,  for  the  allevia¬ 
tion  of  all  his  ailments,  diamond  corrected  by  ‘^ilajatu,’  or  mercury 
that  is  properly  corrected  and  that  is  mixed  with  that  foremost  of 
combinations  (called  ‘Yogar&ja’).f  7° 

Boil  the'  pith  of  Khadira  ( Acacia  Catechu)  and  that  of  Devadaru 
{Cedrus  deodara ),  and  mix  with  the  decoction  two  ‘prasthas’  of  honey  : 


*  Leprosy  has  eighteen  varieties.  The  medicine  here  mentioned  cures  seventeen  of  them. 
The  eighteenth,  called  ‘Iiakanaka,’  is  incurable. 

‘Makshika  dhatu’  is  iron  pyrites.  The  following  from  U.  C.  Dutt’s  Materia  Medica  of 
the  Hindtis  may  be  interesting  : 

“Iron  pyrites  is  met  with  in  many  parts  of  India,  and  has  been  used  in  medicine  from  a 
very  remote  period.  It  occurs  in  two  forms,  viz.,  in.  dark  yellow  nodules  with  a  golden 
lustre,  and  in  silvery  radiated  crystals.  The  former  is  called  ‘Suvarna-makshika’  and  the 
latter  ‘Tara-makshika’.  The  ancients  supposed  that  they  contained  gold  and  silver  respect¬ 
ively,  in  combination  with  other  ingredients,  and  possessed  in  part  the  properties  of  those 
precious  metals.  Chemically  iron  pyrites  consists  of  bisulphide  of  iron.” 

t  ‘Vajra’  is  a  common  name  applied  to  diamonds.  It  enters  into  the  composition  of 
many  medicines.  ‘Qilajatu,’  literally,  stone-lac,  is  a  name  applied  to  certain  bitumenous 
substances  said  to  be  exuded  by  rocks.  It  is  a  dark,  sticky,  unctuous  substance. 

Yogaraja’  is,  literally,  a  combination  that  is  regarded  as  the  very  best.  The  comment¬ 
ators  do  not  explain  what  the  combination  was. — T. 


.1218 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


This  should  be  done  for  obtaining  the  liquid  (wherewith  other 
drugs  should  be  compounded). 

The  measure  of  Khadira  pith  and  of  Devadaru  pith,  should  be 
8  palas  each. 

Into  the  liquid-  should  be  cast  8  palas  of  powdered  iron  :  also' 
these  :  viz., 

TriphalS  (the  three  myrobalans\  Ela  (Elettaria  cardamomum ), 
Twach  (bark  of  Cinamomum  Z eylanicuwi),  Maricha  (black  pepper),. 
Patra  (leaves  of  Cinamomum  Tamala ),  Kanaka  (otherwise  called 
NSgakegara,  i.  e.,  Mesua  f erred,  each  of  the  measure  of  2  ‘karshas.’ 

Further,  sugar-candy,  of  the  measure  of  Honey,  should  be  added,- 
All  these  should  be  kept  in  an  iron  vessel  for  a  month. 

This  preparation  is  called  ‘Madhwasava’  (wine  of  honey). 

Of  one  who  takes  this  medicine,  both  leprosy  and  leucoderma 
are  alleviated..*  71-73- 

Placing  in  a  jar,  which  has  sucked'  ghee  sufficiently,  a  drona; 
(64  seers)  of  the  decoction  of  the  pith  of  Khadira  ( Acacia  Catechu), 
6  palas  of  the  powder  of  the  following  drugs  should  be  added,  viz.,. 
Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans\.  Vyosha  (the  three  pungents,  that  is, 
dry  ginger,  black  pepper,  and-  Piper  longum),  Vidanga  ( Embelia 
Ribes ),  Rajani  ( Curcuma  longd),.  M-usta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus ),. 
Atarushaka  (Justicia  Adhatoda \  Indrayava  (seeds  of  Holarrhena 
antidysenterica ),  and-  Sauvarni  (otherwise  called  Sondalu,  i.  e.,  Cassia 
fistula)  : 

Also  Twach  (bark  of  Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum),  and  Cchinnaruha; 
(otherwise  called  Golancha,  i.  e.,  Tinospora  cordifolia)  : 

These  should  be  added  (after  reducing  each  to  pulv). 

The  jar  should  be  kept  for  a  month  within  a  paddy-heap: 

The  medicine,  thus  prepared,  should  be  taken  in  judicious  mea¬ 
sure,  every  morning. 

It  cures  the  severer  forms  of  leprosy  in  a  month  ;  the  milder  forms- 
in  a  fortnight. 


t  The  measures  are  thus  set  forth  :  8  palas  of  Khadira  pith,  and  8  palas  of  Devad5ru 
pith,  should  be  boiled  in  water  of  the  measure  of  16  seers  down  to  4  seers.  Into  this  water 
or  decoction,  honey,  4  seers,  should  be  thrown.  Iron  dust,  of  the  measure  of  8  palas,  should 
be  added.  Of  each  of  the  other  drugs,  a  karsha  or  2  tolas  should  be  added.  Of  sugar- 
candy,  the  measure  should  be  4  seers.  A  kind  of  ‘Asava’  or  vinous  liquor  will  be  the 
result. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


1219 

It  cures  other  diseases  also,  such  as  piles,  fistula-in-ano,  cough, 
leucoderma,  ‘Prameha,’  and  consumption. 

By  drinking  this  vinous  liquor  which  is  called  ‘Kanakavindu,’ 
a  person’s  complexion  becomes  like  that  of  gold.  74-76 

Thus  is  explained  the  method  of  preparation  of  the  medicine 
called  ‘Kanakavindu-Arishta.’ 

In  cases  of  leprosy  which  are  caused  by  excitement  of  wind  and 
phlegm,  the  above  medicine  should  be  drunk. 

The  same  treatment  is  prescribed  for  cases  of  leprosy  which  are 
caused  by  excited  bile. 

In  cases  caused  by  excited  phlegm,  the  distinctive  treatment  is 
the  administration  of  the  decoction  of  Kritamala  ( Cassia  fistula).*  77 

The  vinous  liquor  of  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  with  treacle, 
Chitraka  (. Plumbago  Zeylanica \  Kramuka  (betel  nuts),  Dagamula 
(the  ten  roots),  Danti  ( Baliospermum  montanum ),  Varanga  (bark  of 
Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum ),  and  honey,  is  capable  of  curing  white 
and  other  varieties  of  leprosy.  78 

In  cases  of  leprosy,  all  varieties  of  light  food,  and  bitter  pot-herbs,, 
should  be  known  to  be  beneficial.  Food  and  ghee,  mixed  with  Bhallfc- 
taka  {Semecarpus  Anacardiuni),  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  and 
Nimba  ( [Melia  Azadirachta ),  are  beneficial. f  79 

Old  rice  (boiled\  the  flesh  of  animals  residing  in  forests,  and  soup 
of  Mudga  (. Phaseolus  Mungo),  and  Patola  ( Trichosanthes  dioicci),  are 
beneficial  (in  leprosy). 

All  kinds  of  heavy  food,  milk,  and  curds  are  baneful. 

Fish  living  in  marshes  is  also  baneful. 

Raw  sugar  and  sesame  seeds  also  are  so.| 

ElS  ( Eleitaria  cardamomum ),  Kushtha  (Aplotaxis  auriculata ),  Darbi 


*  It  should  be  noted  that  ‘Kritamala’  {Cassia pstula )  enters  into  the  composition  of 
the  medicine  named  above,  viz.,  ‘Kanakavindu  Arishta.’  It  would  seem  that  what  is 
said  here  is  that  the  decoction  of  Kritamala  is  especially  beneficial  in  phlegm-born  cases 
of  leprosy. — T. 

t  The  expressed  juice  of  Bhall5taka  and  the  other  drugs  mentioned  is  required  to  be 
added  to  the  food  which  the  patient  should  take. — T. 

J  The  mention  of  ‘Anupamatsyah’,  meaning  fish  taken  from  marshy  regions,  would  seem 
to  imply  that  other  kinds  of  fish,  viz.,  those  taken  from  rivers  and  seas  or  from  tanks  and 
lakes,  is  not  forbidden. — T. 


220 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


{Berber is  Asiatica) ,  £atapushpa  (otherwise  called  Salupha,  i.  e.,  DiU 
seeds),  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica),  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Rides), 
Rasanjana  (Galena,  according  to  the  Bengal  physicians),  extract  of 
the  wood  of  Berberis  Asiatica ,  according  to  the  physicians  of  the 
N.  W.  Provinces),  and  Abhay&  (chebulic  myrobalans), — these,  reduced 
to  paste,  form  a  beneficial  plaster  for  leprosy.  81 

Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanicd),  Ela  {Elettaria  cardamomum), 
Vimbi  ( Moinordica  monodelphd),  Vrishaka  (otherwise  called  Vasaka, 
i.  e.  Justicia  Adhatodd),  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethuni),  Arka  ( Cala - 
tropis  gigantea ),  and  Nagaraka  (dry  ginger),  reduced  to  powder, 
should  be  macerated  for  eight  days  in  the  urine  of  the  cow  in  which 
has  been  dissolved  the  ashes  of  Palaja  {Butea  frondosa). 

Applied  as  plasters  to  leprosy  characterised  by  circular  patches,, 
it  quickly  causes  those  patches  to  burst  and  then  disappear,  if  the 
patient  be  exposed,  with  the  plasters  on  him,  to  the  sun.  82-83 

Mangsi  (. Nurdostachys  Jatamansi ),  Maricha  (black  pepper',  Lavana 
(‘Saindhava’  salt),  Rajani  (otherwise  called  HaridrS,  i.  e.,  Curcuma 
longa ),  Tagara  ( Taberncemotitana  coronaria ),  SudhS  (otherwise  called 
‘Snuhi’  or  ‘Manasasija,’  i.  e.,  the  milk  of  Euphorbia  neriifolia )  domestic 
soot,  urine  (of  the  cow),  bile  (of  the  cow),  ashes  of  Palana  {Butea 
frondosa ),  form  a  plaster  that  cures  leprosy.  84 

Trapu  (otherwise  called  Vanga,  i.  e.,  tin),  lead,  and  pulv  of  iron, 
(mixed  together  and  used  as  a  drink)  are  curative  of  leprosy. 

Phalgu  {Ficus  kispida,  Linn,  fil.,  syn.  Ficus  oppositifolia,  Roxbi), 
Chitraka  {Plumbago  Zeylanicd,  Vrihati  {Solanum  Indicum),  Godhfirasa 
(meat-juice  of  iguana  flesh),  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  Daru  {Finns  deodara ), 
and  cow’s  urine,  are  curative  of  leprosy  characterised  by  circular 
patches.  8S 

Take  the  ashes  of  Kadali  (plantain  plants),  Palaga  {Butea  fron- 
dosd),  Patali  {Bignonia  Suave-olens ),  and  Nichula  {Eugenia  acutangula ). 

Dissolve  them  in  water,  and  purify  that  water.  Taking  those 
kinds  of  meat  that  are  destructive  of  the  particular  fault  that  has- 
been  excited,  cook  them  with  the  aid  of  the  water  thus  prepared  (and 
not  with  ordinary  water). 

Take  also  powdered  rice  and  the  drugs  that  produce  fermentation 
in  the  manufacture  of  spirits  from  sugar. 

Cook  these  also  with  the  kind  of  water  indicated  above. 

When  the  meat,  the  rice,  and  the  drugs  mentioned,  [united  to- 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA . 


[221 


gether,  form  a  paste  from  which  boluses  may  be  easily  made,  the 
paste  should  be  dried. 

The  dry  paste  forms  an  approved  plaster  which  cures  those 
varieties  of  leprosy  which  are  characterised  by  circular  patches.  It 
should  be  noted  that  after  applying  the  plaster,  the  patient  should  be 
exposed  to  the  sun. 

The  plaster  possesses  the  virtue  also  of  killing  worms.  86-87 

Take  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  Madana  (fruit  of  Randia 
dumetoruni),  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  Karanja  ( Pongamia 
glabra ),  Aragbadha  ( Cassia  fistula],  Kalingayava  (otherwise  called 
Indrayava,  i.  e.,  the  seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidys enter ica),  Darbi 
( Berberis  Asiatica ),  and  Saptaparna  {Echites  scholaris ). 

Cause  the  patient  to  bathe  in  the  decoction  of  the  above  drugs. 
This  bath  is  called  ‘Siddharthaka’.  88 

This  decoction  operates  as  an  emetic,  and  also  as  a  purgative. 
It  improves  also  the  complexion. 

These  drugs,  reduced  to  powder  and  rubbed  on  the  body,  check 
faults  of  the  skin,  leprosy,  and  swellings. 

They  cure  chlorosis  also.*  89 

Kushtha  (Aplo taxis  auriculatd),  Karanjavija  (the  seeds  of  Ponga¬ 
mia  glabra ),  and  Edagaja  ( Cassia  Tora ),  form  a  plaster  that  cures 
leprosy. 

The  seeds  of  Prapunn&ra  ( Cassia  Tora),  Saindhava  salt,  Rasanjana 
(Galena  or  the  extract  of  the  wood  of  Berberis  Asiatica),  Kapittha 
(Eeronia  elephantuni),  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racemosus),  the  bark  of  the 
roots  of  Karavira  ( Nerium  odoruvi),  the  fruits  of  Kutaja  (. Holarrhena 
antidysenterica ),  as  also  of  Karanja  {Pongamia  glabra),  the  bark  of 
Darbi  ( Berberis  Asiatica),  and  the  buds  of  Sumanas  (otherwise  called 
Malati,  i.  e.,  Echites  Caryophyllata ),  form  a  plaster  whose  virtues  have 
been  well  tried  in  curing  leprosy.  9°-9i 

Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racemosus),  Dhataki  ( Woodfordia  fioribunda), 
Vatsakavija  (seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica),  Naktamala  (other¬ 
wise  called  Karanja,  i.  e.,  Pongamia  glabra ),  and  Malati  ( Echites 
Caryophyllata),  should  be  pounded  together  into  a  paste. 


*  Gangadhara  correctly  points  out  that  the  decoction  also  checks  the  faults  of  skin, 
leprosy,  swellings,  and  chlorosis.  Only  the  decoction  should  be  used,  for  bathing  the 
patient.— T, 


222 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA. 


This  paste,  applied  either  as  a  plaster  or  rubbed  over  the  body, 
cures  leprosy.  92 

The  bark  of  £irisha  ( Mimosa  Sirissa),  the  flowers  of  KSrp&si  (the 
cotton  plant),  the  leaves  of  Rajavriksha  (otherwise  called  Sondalu, 
i.  <?.,  Cassia  fistula ;,  and  Kakam&chi  ( Solanum  nigrum ),  form  a  plaster 
that  cures  leprosy. 

These  are  the  four  kinds  of  plasters  that  are  curative  of  leprosy.*  93 

The  decoctions,  numbering  six,  of  Darbi  ( Berberh  Asiatica )  and 
Rasanjana  (Galena^,  of  Nimba  ( Melia  Azadirachta )  and  Patola 
( Trichosanthes  dioicd,  of  the  stem  of  Khadira  ( Acacia  Catechu ),  of 
Aragbadha  ( Cassia  fistula )  and  Vrikshaka  (Holarrhena  antidysenterica\ 
of  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  and  of  Saptaparna  ( Echites 
scholaris),  have  been  laid  down  as  curative  of  leprosy.  The  seventh 
decoction,  possessing  the  same  virtues,  is  that  of  Tinish  {Dalbergia 
oojeinensis ). 

The  decoctions  should  be  used  for  purposes  of  bath  as  also  of 
drink. 

The  eighth  is  that  of  Agwamara  (bark  of  the  roots  of  Karavira, 
i.  £?,,  Nerium  odoruni).  94-65 

For  the  Belief  of  leprosy,  these  eight  decoctions  may  by  ad¬ 
ministered  as  plasters,  or  for  rubbing  the  body  with,  or  as  powders  ; 

They  may  also  be  used  in  combination  with  the  oils  and  the  ghees 
that  are  cooked.  96 

Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans\  Nimba  ( Melia  Azadirachta') 
Patola  ( Trichosanthes  dioica ),  Manjishtha  ( Rubia  cordifolia)  Rohini 
( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ),  Vacha  ( Acorus  Calamus ),  Rajani  (1 Curcuma 
longa), — the  decoction  of  these,  taken  daily,  cures  leprosy  born  of 
phlegm  and  bile.  97 

Ghee  boiled  with  these  decoctions  checks  leprosy  characterised  by 
predominance  of  wind. 

Ghee  boiled  also  with  Khadira  ( Acacia  Catechu ),  Asana-daru  (Ter- 
minalia  tomentesa ,  syn.  Pentaptera  tomentosa ),  and  Nimba  ( Melia 
Azadirachta'.,  is  seen  to  produce  the  same  effects.*  98 


*  Gangadhara  misinterprets  the  last  verse.  He  thinks  that  each  of  the  four  drugs  men¬ 
tioned  in  verse  92,  viz.,  (Jirisha  and  the  rest,  forms  a  plaster  by  itself  that  is  beneficial  in 
leprosy.  The  meaning,  however,  is  that  Qirisha  and  the  three  other  drugs  mentioned  in 
verse  92,  together  form  a  plaster  beneficial  in  leprosy,  and  that  this  is  the  fourth  plaster 
mentioned,  the  three  others  occurring  above. — T. 


CHARAKArSAMHITA. 


1223 


Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis  auriculata),  Arka  {Calatropis  giganteci),  Tuttha 
(sulphate  of  copper),  Katphala  (. Myrica  sapida ),  seeds  of’Mul&ka 
( Raphanus  sativus ),  Rohini-katuka  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ),  Kutajaphala 
(seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidy  sent  erica),  Utpala  {Nymphcea  stellata ),  Musta 
(tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  Vrihati  {Solatium  Indicum),  Karavira 
Nerium  odoruui),  Kagiga  (sulphate  of  iron),  Edagaja  (otherwise  called 
Chakundia,  i.  e.,  Cassia  Tora),  Nimba  {Melia  Azadirachta ),  Patha 
{Stephania  hernandifolia),  Duralabha  {Hedysarum  Alkagi),  Chitraka 
{Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  Vidanga  {Embelia  Ribes ),  seeds  of  Tikta-Ikshaku 
(bitter  gourds),  Kampillaka  ( Mallotus pkilippensis ),  Sarshapa  (mustard 
seeds),  Vacha  {Acorus  calamus ),  Darbi  {Berberis  Asiatica ) ;  99-ioo 

Oils  cooked  with  these  are  curative  of  leprosy.  These  drugs  are 
also  combined  for  making  plasters,  ointments,  pastes  for  rubbing 
the  body  with,  and  powders.  The  combination,  in  all  these  forms, 
is  desirable. 

The  expressed  juice  of  the  white  variety  of  Karaviraka  {Nerium 
odoruui),  cow’s  urine,  Chitraka  {Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  and  Vidanga 
{Embelia  Ribes),  should  be  ccroked  with  oil.  This  combination  is 
approved  by  physicians.  In  leprosy,  the  efficacy  of  the  medicine 
has  been  tested.  102 

This  is  the  composition  of  the  oil  called  “White  Kafaviradya.” 

The  leaves  and  root-bark  of  the  white  variety  of  Karavira  {Nerium 
odoruui),  Vatsaka  (Justicia  Adhatoda),  Vidanga  (■ Embelia  Ribes), 
Kushtha  {Aplotaxis  auriculata),  the  roots  of  Arka  {Calatropis  giganteci), 
mustard  seeds,  bark  of  £igru  {Moringa  pterygospenna),  and  Katurohini 
{Picrorrhiza  Kurroa),  should  be  reduced  to  a  paste.  ro3 

Oil  should  be  cooked  with  this  paste  the  measure  whereof  should 
be  a  fourth  (of  the  oil). 

Adding  cow’s  urine  the  measure  whereof  should  be  four  times 
that  of  the  oil,  an  ointment  is  made  that  cures  the  itching  sensation 
of  leprosy.  I04 

This  is  the  composition  of  the  (second  variety  of)  oil  called 
“White  Karaviradya.” 

The  seeds  of  Tikta-Ikshaku  (bitter  gourds),  the  two  varieties  of 
Tuttha  {viz.,  sulphate  of  copper,-  and  galena  or  sulphate  of  lead), 
RochanS  (concretions  found  in  the  gall-bladder  of  the  ox),  the  two 
varieties  of  HaridrS  {viz.,  Curcuma  longa  and  Berberis  Asiatica ),  the 
fruits  of  Vrihati  {Salanum  Indicum),  Eranda  {Ricinus  Communis ), 
155 


1224 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


Vigala  ( Cucumis  colocynthis ■),  Chitraka  (. Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  Murva 
(, SlanseHiera  Zeylanica ),  Kfigiga  (sulphate  of  iron),  Hingu  (assafcetida), 
£igru  ( Moringa  pterygosperma ),  Tryushana  (the  three  acrids,  viz.,  dry 
ginger,  Piper  longum ,  and  black  pepper),  Suradaru  ( Pinus  deodar  a), 
Tumvuru  ( Zanthoxylum  alatum ),  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes ),  Langalikft 
( Gloriosa  superba),  the  bark  of  Kutaja  ( Holarrhena  a ntidysen t ericci) ,  and 
Katurohini  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurtoa ), — these  should  be  reduced  to  a  paste. 

The  paste  should  be  cooked  with  mustard  oil.  Cow’s  Urine,  of 
four  times  its  measure,  should  then  be  added  to  the  oil. 

The  oh  thus  prepared  is  curative  of  the  itching  sensation  of 
leprosy.  Rubbed  on  the  body,  this  oil  alleviates  excited  wind  and 
phlegm.  105-107 

This  is  the  composition  of  “Tikta  Iksaku  Oil.”  • 

Kanaka-Kshiri  (otherwise  called  Svarna-kshiri,  i.  e.,  Cleome  felina), 
£aila  (otherwise  called  Manah^ila,  i.  e-.,  realgar),  Bhargi  ( Clerodendron 
siphonanthus ),  the  fruits  and  roots  of  Danti  [Baliospermum  monta- 
num),  the  leaves  of  Jati  (Jasminum  grandiflorum ),  mustard  seeds, 
garlics,  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes),  the  bark  of  Karanja  ( Pongamia 
glabra),  Saptacchada  ( Echites  scholarly,  the  leaves,  roots,  and  bark  of 
Arka  ( Calatropis  gigantea),  Nimba  {Me Ha  Azadirachta),  Chitraka 
( Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  Asphota  (otherwise  called  Aparajita,  i.  e., 
Clitoria  Ternatea,  of  the  wite  variety),  Gunja  ( Abrus  precatorius), 
Eranda  ( Ricinus  Communis),  Vrihati  ( Solanum  Indicum),  Mulaka 
(garden  radish),  the  seeds  of  Surasa  and  Arjjaka  (varieties  Ocimum 
Sanctum ),  Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis  auriculata ),  Pfitha  ( Stephania  hernandi- 
folia),  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus ),  Tumvuru  {Xanthoxylum 
alatuni),  Murva  ( Sanseviera  Zeylanica),  Vacha  ( Acorus  Calamus ), 
Shadgrantha  (a  variety  of  Acorus  Calamus ),  Edagaja  ( Cassia  Tora ), 
Kutaja  ( Holarrhena  antidysentetica),  £igru  ( Moringa  pterygosperma }, 
Tryushana  (the  three  acrids,  viz.,  dry  ginger,  Piper  longum,  and  black 
pepper),  Bhallataka  ( Semecarpus  anacardiuni),  Kshavaka  {Dregea 
volubilis ),  Haritala  (orpiment  or  yellow  arsenic),  Avfikpushpi  (Sulpha 
in  Bengali,  dill  seeds  or  Peucedanum  Sowa),  Tuttha  (sulphate  of 
copper),  Kampillaka  ( Mallotus  philippensis),  Amritasajna  (otherwise 
called  Kharpara,  i.  e.,  zinc  or  zinc  ore),*  Saurashtri  (otherwise  called 


*  “The  article  used  under  this  name  by  the  physicians  of  Upper  India  is  a  sort  of  cala¬ 
mine  or  zinc  ore.  Most  of  the  physicians  of  Bengal  are  not  acquainted  with  this  ore,  and 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1225 


Sphatik&ri,  i.  e.,  alum),  Kagiga  (sulphate  of  iron),  the  bark  of  Darbi 
( Berberis  Asiatica),  and  Sarjjika-lavana  (carbonate  of  soda) : . 

Reduce  these  to  a  paste.  . 

Cook  the  paste  in  oil  (of  sesame),  mixing  therewith  the  decoction 
of  the  roots  and  leaves  of  Karavira  ( Nerium  odorum ) ;  or  in  mustard 
oil  with  which  is  mixed  cow’s  urine  of  four  times  its  measure. 

The  oil  thus  cooked  should  be  placed  in  a  vessel  made  of  the 
husk  of  a  bitter  gourd. 

By  rubbing  them  with  this  oil,  the  physician  may  quickly  cause 
the  circular  patches  of  leprosy  to  melt.  He  may  also  kill  the  worms 
and  the  itching  sensation  of  leprosy  therewith.  108-113 

This  is  the  composition  of  “Kanakakshira  Oil. 

Kushtha  (Aplotaxis  anriculata),  the  leaves  of  Tamala  ( Cinna - 
momum  Tamala ),  Maricha  (black  pepper),  Manahgila  (realgar),  and 
Kagiga  (sulphate  of  iron),  should  be  pounded  together.  The  product 
should  be  mixed  with  oil  and  kept  in  a  vessel  made  of  copper,  for 
seven  days.  ”4 

The  patches  of  leprosy  of  the  variety  called  ‘Sidhma,’  rubbed  with 
this  oil  and  exposed  to  the  sun,  disappear  in  course  of  a  week.  Of 
one  unto  whom  correctives  have  been  administered,  new  Kil&sa 
(leucoderma)  disappears  by  use  of  this  oil  for  a.  month,  provided  the 
patient  avoids  bathing  for  that  period.  Ir5 

This  is  the  composition  of  “Sidhma-lepa.” 

The  oil  of  Sarshapa  (mustard  seeds),  of  the  seeds  of  Karanja 
(Pongamia  glabra ),  of  the  seeds  of  Koshataka  (Luffa  amara),  of 
Ingudi  ( Balanites  Roxburgkii),  as  also  of  Khadira  ( Acacia  Catechu ), 
is  beneficial  in  all  varieties  of  leprosy.  116 

Even  these  are  the  oils  (that  are  beneficial  for  leprosy). 

Jivanti  ( Ccelogyne  ovalis),  Manjishta  ( Rubia  cordifolia \  Darbi  (Ber¬ 
beris  Asiatica ),  and  Kampillaka  (Mallotus  philippensis)  : 

Reduce  these  to  paste  ;  and  add  milk  of  the  same  measure. 

Add  ghee  of  cow’s  milk  and  mustard  oil,  or  one  only  of  these. 


substitute  zinc  for  Kharpara  ;  that  is,  they  consider  Kharpara  as  a  mere  synonym  of  zinc  or 
Yasada.  *  *  *  Kharpara,  as  sold  by  Hindustani  medicine-vendors,  occurs  in  greyish, 

or  greyish  black,  porous,  earthy  masses  composed  of  agglutinated  granules.  On  chemical 
analysis  it  was  found  to  consist  of  carbonate  and  silicate  of  zinc,  with  traces  of  other  metals, 
as  iron,  baryta,  &c.”— U.  C.  Dutt’s  Materia  Medica  of  the  Hindus . 


[226 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


Boil  all  these  together  (and  strain  the  product  through  a  piece  of 
clean  cloth). 

After  the  boiling  is  over,  add  the  exudation  of  Shorea  robusta , 
and  wax. 

Applied  as  a  plaster,  it  cures  Vipadikfi  (Psoriasis  of  foot),  Charma- 
kushtha  (Hypertrophy  of  skin),  Eka-kushtha  (Iethyosis),  Kitima 
(Keloid),  and  Masaka  (Lichen).  ”7-118 

Take  the  blood  of  the  boar,  and  throw  into  it  Prithvika  (Krishna- 
jiraka,  i.  <?.,  Nigella  saliva),  and  Saindhava  salt,  till  the  liquid  becomes 
like  soft  clay. 

This  clay  forms  a  plaster  that  cures  leprosy  characterised  by 
circular  patches. 

To  the  clay  thus  prepared,  add  Kustumburu  ( Coriandrum  sati¬ 
vum),  and  Kushtha  (Ap  lot  axis  auriculata ).  This  preparation  also 
cures  the  same  variety  of  leprosy.  ”9 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  the  plasters  applied  to  leprosy 
characterised  by  circular  patches. 

Putika  (a  variety  of  Pongamia  glabra).  Daru  ( Pinus  deodara ), 
Jatila  (otherwise  called  Jatamansi,  i.  e.,  Nardostachys  Jatamansi ). 
Pakka-surS  (wine  duly  distilled  through  bent-tubes),  honey,  Mudga- 
parni  (Phaseolus  trilobus),  and  Kskanasa  (otherwise  called  Kaka- 
jangha  or  Kakatundi,  i.  e.,  Leea  hirta)  : 

Reduce  these  to  a  paste.  This  paste  has  been  known  to  cure 
leprosy  with  circular  patches.  120 

x.  Chitraka  (Plumbago  'Leylamca)  and  (^obhanjana  (Moringa 
pterygosperma) ;  2.  Guduchi  (Tinospora  cordifolia),  ApSmarga 

(Achyranthes  aspera),  and  Devadaru  (Pinus  deodara );  3.  Khadira 
(Acacia  Catechu )  ;  4.  Dhaba  ( Conocarpus  latifolia)  ;  5.  SyamS  (used 
for  Trivrit  of  dark-coloured  roots,  i  e.,  a  variety  of  Convolvulus 
Turpetlium),  Danti  ( Croton  polyandrum )  and  Dravanti  (Danti  having 
small  roots,  i.  e.,  a  variety  of  Convolvlus  Turpethum )  ;  and  6.  LakshS 
(shell-lac),  Rasanjana  (galena),  Els  ( Elettaria  cardamomum),  and 
Punarnava  ( Boerhavia  diffusa )  : 

Plasters  made  of  each  of  these  six  groups  of  drugs  are  beneficial 
in  leprosy. 

These  six  should  be  applied,  mixed  with  the  ‘manda’  of  curds. 
Every  one  of  them  is  alleviative  of  wind  and  phlegm.  121-122 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  the  six  (well-known  plasters). 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1227 


Ed&gaja  ( Cassia  Tore t),  Kushtha  (Aplo  taxis  auriculata),  Saindhava 
salt,  Sauviraka  (a  wine  of  that  name),  mustard  seeds,  and  Krimighna 
(otherwise  called  Vidanga,  i.  e.,  Embelia  Ribes),  form  a  plaster  which 
relieves  ‘Krimi-kushtha’  (leprosy  characterised  by  worms),  ‘Mandala- 
kushtha’  (leprosy  characterised  by  circular  patches),  and  ‘Dadru- 
kushtha’  (Ringworm).  I23 

This  is  the  composition  of  the  plaster  called  ‘EdagajSdi.’ 

Edagaja  ( Cassia  Tor  a),  Sarjjarasa  (exudation  of  Shorea  robusta], 
and  the  seeds  of  Mulaka  (garden  radish), — these  should  be  reduced 
into  a  paste  with  the  aid  of  ‘Kanjika’  (fermented  gruel  of  rice). 

The  paste  should  at  first  be  used  for  rubbing  and  then  applied 
as  a  plaster  in  the  case  of  ‘Sidhma-kushtha’  (Pityriasis  versicolor).  124 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  the  plaster  for  Pityriasis  versicolor. 

Vasa  (Jsuticia  Adkatoda ),  and  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans), 
are  useable  in  drinking,  bathing,  and  plastering.* 

Vrihati  (Solatium  Indicum ),  Sevya  (the  roots  of  Andropogon 
muricatus),  Patola  (leaves  of  Trichosantkes  dioica ),  £5riva  (Echites 
frutescens ),  Rohini  (Picrorrhiza  Kurroa),  Khadira  (Acacia  Catechu ), 
Avaghata  (otherwise  called  Vyadhighataka  or  Aragbadha,  i.  e.,  Cassia 
fistula ),  Kakubha  (otherwise  called  Arjuna,  i.  e.,  Pentaptera  Arjuna ), 
Rohitaka  (otherwise  called  HarinharS,  i.  <?.,  Andersonia  Rokitaka), 
Lodhra  (Symplocos  racemosus ),  Kutaja  (Holarrhena  antidysenterica ), 
Dhava  (Conocarpus  latifolid,  Nimba  (Melia  Azadirachta ),  Sapta- 
chcchada  (Alstonia  scholatis ,  syn.,  Echites  scholaris ),  and  Karavira 
(Nerium  odorum ),  are  regarded  beneficial  in  baths  and  drink.  I25-126 

This  is  the  composition  of  the  liquid  for  baths  and  drinking. 

Jala  (otherwise  called  BalS,  i.  e.,  Pavonia  odorata),  VSpya  (other¬ 
wise  called  Kushtha,  i.  e.,  Aplotaxis  auriculata ),  Loha  (otherwise 
called  Aguru,  Aquilaria  Agallocha ),  Kegara  (Mesua  ferrea ),  Patra 
(leaves  of  Cinnamomum  Tamald),  Plava  (otherwise  called  Kaivarta- 
mustaka,  i.  e.,  a  variety  of  Cyperus  rotundus ),  Chanda  (otherwise  called 
Chorepuspi,  i.  e.,  Andropogon  acicularis'fi  and  Mrinala  (roots  of 
Andropogon  muricatus) : 

Combine  these  in  such  a  way  that  the  measure  of  each  may  be 


*  The  decoction  is  used  as  a  drink  as  also  for  bathing.  For  rubbing  and  plastering, 
these  should  be  reduced  to  paste. — T. 

t  Some  texts  read  ‘Chandana,’  meaning  red  sandal  wood. — T. 


i228 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


larger  than  that  of  the  one  mentioned  before,  and  reduce  them  to  a 
paste. 

This  paste  forms  a  beneficial  plaster  for  leprosy  caused  by  excited 
bile  and  phlegm.  *27 

Yashtyahva  (liquorice),  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racemose i},  Padmaka 
(a  fragrant  wood  brought  from  Malvva,  &c.),  Patola  ( Trichosanthes 
dioied ),  Pichumardda  (otherwise  called  Nimba,  i.  e.,  Melia  Azadi- 
rachta ),  and  Chandana  (red  sandal  wood) : 

The  decoction  of  these,  when  cooled,  is  beneficial  fpr  baths  and 
drink  as  regards  persons  afflicted  with  leprosy  born  of  excited  bile.  128 

Priyangu  ( Aglaia  Roxburghiana ),  HarenukS  ( Piper  aurantiacum \ 
Vatsaka-phala  (seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysentrica ),  Ativisha  ( Aconi - 
turn  hetetophy Hum),  Sevya  (roots  of  Andropogon  muricatus ),  Chan¬ 
dana  (red  sandal  wood),  Katurohini  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurrod) ; 

Reduce  these  to  a  paste.  This  paste  forms  a  beneficial  plaster  in 
leprosy  born  of  excited  bile. 

In  those  varieties  of  leprosy  which  are  characterised  by  a  burning 
sensation,  the  patient’s  body  should  be  rubbed  with  the  ‘bitter- 
ghritas’  (viz.,  ‘Pancha-tikta,’  ‘Shatpala,’  and  ‘Mahatikta’  ghees,  &c.\ 

‘Washed -Ghritas'  also  are  equally  beneficial  in  such  cases.  129 

Even  these  are  the  ointments  that  should  be  rubbed  on  the 
body. 

Other  ointments  that  are  beneficial  are  the  oils  of  Chandana 
(red  sandal  wood),  Madhuka  (liquorice)1,  Prapaundarika  (a  fragrant 
wood  brought  from  Malwa),  and  Utpala  (. Nymphcea  stellata ).  *3® 

In  those  cases  of  leprosy  in  which  the  patches  become  filthy  or 
develop  into  sores,  or  in  which  the  limbs  begin  to  fall  off,  or  in  which 
there  is  a  burning  sensation,  in  malignant  boils,  as  also  in  Charma-  . 
dala  (Impetigo),  cooling  plasters,  cooling  decoctions  for  sprinkling, 
opening  of  the  veins  for  letting  out  blood,  purgatives,  and  the  bitter 
‘ghritas’  (mentioned  below)  are  beneficial.  *3* 

‘Khadira-ghrita,’  ‘Nimba-ghrita,’  ‘Darbi-ghrita,’  and  ‘Patola-ghrita’ 
are  productive  of  excellent  results  in  those  varieties  of  leprosy  in 
which  blood-bile  is  predominant.  Each  of  these  is  a  well-tried 
medicine.  132 

Take  the  husk  of  Triphala  (viz.,  the  three  myrobalans)  of  the 
measure  of  half  a  ‘pala.’  Take  the  leaves  of  Patola  (Trichosanthes 
dioica)  of  the  measure  of  half  a  ‘pala  ; 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHITA. 


;229 


Take  Katurohini  (. Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ),  Nimba  ■■(. Melia  Azadi- 
rachta),  Yashty&hva  (liquorice),  and  Try5m5na  (otherwise  called 
Bala-ud  urn  vara,  i.  e.,  Ficus  heterophylla ),  of  the  measure  of  a  kfirshika 
(2  tolas). 

Add  2  ‘palas’  of  the  seeds  of  Masura  ( Vida  lens ) ; 

Boil  all  these  together  in  water  of  the  measure  of  an  Adhaka 
(8  seers)  till  an  eighth  only  remains  of  the  liquid. 

Strain  the  contents  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth. 

With  the  strained  decoction,  thus  obtained,  of  the  measure  of 
8  palas,  ghee  of  the  measure  of  4  palas  should  be  boiled. 

When  it  is  boiled  down  to  8  palas,  it  should  be  taken  down,  and 
drunk  in  a  lukewarm  state.  *33-i35 

This  medicine  cures  those  varieties  of  leprosy  which  are  charac¬ 
terised  by  excitement  of  wind  and  bile,  erysipelas,  all  violent  forms 
of  leprosy  knoyvn  as  ‘Vatarakta,’  fever,  burning  of  the  skin,  abdominal 
and  other  tumours,  deep-seated  abscesses,  vertigo,  and  malignant 
boils.  !36 

Nimba  ( Melia  Azadirachta ),  Patola  ( Trickosanthes  dioica),  Dfirbi 
( Berberis  Asiatica ),  Duralabha  ( Hedysarum  Alhagi),  Tiktarohini 
( Picrorrhiza  Kurtoa ),  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  Parppataka 
(1 Oldenlandia  biflora ),  and  Trayamana  ( Ficus  heterophylla ) : 

Take  half  a  pala  of  each  of  these.  Boil  them  in  an  Adhaka  of 
water  till  an  eighth  of  the  liquid  remains.  Strain  it  through  a  piece 
of  clean  cloth. 

Throw  into  it  Chandana  (red  sandal  wood),  KirStatiktaka  ( Ophelia 
Cherayta),  Maghadhika  ( Piper  longum ),  Trayamana,  ( Ficus  hetero- 
phylla ),  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus ),  and  Vatsakavija  (seeds 
of  ( Holarrhena  antidysentericd). 

The  whole  should  be  reduced  into  a  paste,  taking  half  a  ‘karsha’ 
of  each  of  the  latter. 

Six  palas  of  new  ghee  should  then  be  added  to  it.  Boil  the  paste 
with  the  ghee. 

The  virtues  of  this  ghee,  as  a  drink,  are  well  tested  (in  leprosy).  137-139 

This  bitter  ghee  cures  leprosy,  fever,  abdominal  and  other  tumours, 
piles,  diseases  of  the  Grahani  (lienteric  diarrhoea),  chlorosis,  dropsical 
swellings,  eczema,  erysipelas,  pimples,  itching,  diseases  of  intoxi¬ 
cation  (includihg  delirium  tremens),  and  bronchocele.  140 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  the  ‘ghrita  called  ‘Tikta-Shatpala. 


1230 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Saptachcchada  ( Echitis  sckolaris),  Ativisha  ( Aconitum  hetero- 
phylluni),  (^ampaka  (otherwise  called  Sondalu,  i.  e.,  Cassia  fistula ), 
Tiktarohini  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurroci },  Path  a  ( Stephania  hernandifolia), 
Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundas),  Ushira  (roots  of  Andropogon 
muricatus),  TriphalS  (the  three  myrobalans),  Patola  ( Tricho~santh.es 
dioica),  Pichumardda  (otherwise  called  Nimba,  i.  e.,  Melia  Azadi- 
rackta),  Parppataka  ( Oldenlandia  biflora ),  Dhanya-yavasa  (otherwise 
called  Duralabha,  i.  e.,  Hedysaram  Alhagi),  Chandana  (red  sandal 
wood),  Upakulya  (otherwise  called  Gajapippali,  i.  e.,  Pothos  officinalis), 
Padmaka  (a  fragrant  wood  of  that  name),  the  two  varieties  of  Rajani 
(Haridra — Curcuma  longa,  and  Daruharidra — Berberis  Asiatica), 
ShadgranthS  (otherwise  called  Vacha,  i.  e.,  Acorus  Calamus),  Vigala 
(otherwise  called  IndravSruni,  i.  e.,  Cucumis  Colocynthis),  Catavari 
(otherwise  called  (^atamuli,  i.  e.,  Asparagus  racemosus),  both  varieties 
of  £ariva  (£yamalats — Ichnocarpus  frutescens,  and  Anantamula — 
Asclepias  pseudosarsa),  Vatsakavija  (seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysen- 
terica),  Vasa  (Justicia  Adhatoda ),  Murva  ( Sanseviera  Zeylanica ), 
AmritS  ( Tinospora  cordifolia),  Kiratatikta  ( Ophelia  Cherayta ),  Yash- 
tyahva  (liquorice'),  and  Trayamana  ( Ficus  heterophylla )  : 

These  should  be  reduced  to  a  paste  by  the  physician  possessed  of 
intelligence.  141-143 

The  measure  of  this  paste  should  be  a  fourth  of  the  ghee  (to  be 
cooked). 

The  measure  of  the  water  should  be  eight  times  that  of  the  ghee. 

The  expressed  juice  of  the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica,  should 
be  of  twice  the  measure  of  the  ghee. 

Boiling  all  these  together,  the  physician  should  administer  it  as 
a  drink  (to  the  person  afflicted  with  leprosy).  144 

Drunk  at  proper  times  and  in  doses  suited  to  the  strength  of  the 
digestive  fire,  it  promptly  ‘cures  all  varieties  of  leprosy,  blood-bile, 
violent  varieties  of  piles  characterised  by  copious  discharges  of  blood, 
erysipelas,  sour  bile,  that  variety  of  leprosy  which  is  known  by  the 
name  of  ‘Vstarakta,’  chlorosis,  malignant  boils,  eczema,  insanity, 
anaemia,  fever,  itching,  diseases  of  the  chest,  abdominal  and  other 
tumours,  pimples,  bloody  leucorrhcea,  and  goitre. 

This  ‘ghrita,’  which  is  known  by  the  name  of  ‘Mahatiktaka’ 
conquers  very  severe  diseases  that  are  incapable  of  being  conquered 
by  even  hundreds  of  medicinal  compounds.  145- 147 


CHA  RAKA -SA  MHITA. 


.1231 


Even  this  is  the  composition  of  the  Ghrita  called  ‘Mahatikta.’ 

If  the  faults  are  removed,  if  the  blood  be  let  out  externally  and 
internally  (by  means  of  leeches  and  phlebotomy),  and  if  correctives 
are  applied  and  oils  and  ghees  administered  at  the  proper  time, 
then  those  varieties  of  leprosy  wbich  are  curable,1  do  not  remain 
.uncured.  148 

Five  Tulas  (62^  seers)  of  Khadira  ( Acacia  Catechu),  one  Tula 
(12  Yz  seers)  of  £ingcapa  ( Dalbergia  Sissoo),  one  Tula  of  Agana  ( Pen - 
taptera  tomentosa ),  and  half  a  Tula  of  each  of  these,  viz.,  Karanja 
(Pongamia  glabra),  Arishta  (bark  of  Nimba,  i.  e.,  Melia  Azadirachta ), 
Vetasa  ( Calamus  rotang ),  Parpata  ( Oldenlandia  biflora ),  Kutaja 
Halarrhena  antidysenterica),  Vrisha  (otherwise  called  \£asaka,  i.  ,e., 
(Justicia  Adhatoda),  Krimihara  (otherwise  called  Viclanga,  i.  e., 
(Embelia  Ribes),  the  two  varieties  of  Haridra  (viz.,  Curcuma  longa 
and  Berberis  Asiatica),  KritamSla  (otherwise  called  Sondalu,  i.  e.. 
Cassia  fistula ),  Guduchi  (Tinospora  cordifolia),  TriphalS  (the  three 
•myrobalans),  Trivrit  (Convolvulus  Turpethuui)  and  Saptaparna 
(Echites  sckolaris) : 

Pound  these  together,  and  boil  the  compound  in  water  of  the 
measure  of  ten  dronas  (a  ‘drona’  =  64  seers). 

When  the  liquid  has  been  boiled  down  to  an  eighth  ofiits  measure 
(*.  e.,  80  seers),  the  vessel  should  be  taken  down. 

Into  the  liquid  thus  obtained  should  be  thrown  ‘Dhattri-rasa’ 
(expressed  juice  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica),  of  measure  equal  to  that 
of  th z  ghee  which  should  be  added  and  which  should  be  of  the  mea¬ 
sure  of  an  Adhaka  (8  seers). 

Further,  the  paste  should  be  added  of  each  of  the  ingredients 
:that  compose  the  ‘ghrita’ called  “Mahatikta”  (mentioned  above,  vide 
verses  141  to  .147). 

This  medicine,  called  ‘Mahakhadira  Ghrita,’ cures  all  varieties  of 
leprosy,  by  use  as  drink  and  ointment. 

This  is  the  foremost  of  all  medicines  that  cure  the  disease  called 
leprosy.  H9-JS3 

In  those  varieties  of  leprosy  in  which  the  ‘Lasika’  .begins  to  ooze 
out  and  the  limbs  begin  to  be  eaten  away  by  parasites,  covyr’s  urine 
with  Nimba  (Melia  Azadirachta )  and  Vid,anga  (Embelia  Ribes), 
should  form  a  liquid  in  which  the  patient  should  bathe,  which  he 
should  drink,  and  which  should  be  used  also  as  a  plaster.  rS4 


1232 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Vrisha '(otherwise  called  Vfisaka,  i.  e.,  Justicia  Adhatoda ),  Kutaja 
'(Holarrhena  antidysenterica ),  Saptaparna  ( Echites  scholar  is),  Karavira 
( Nerium  0  do  rum),  Karanja  ( Pongamia  glabra),  Nimba  ( Melia  Azadi - 
rachta ),  and  Khadira  ( Acacia  Catechu)  : 

These  should  be  pounded  together  into  a  paste  and  its  decoction 
boiled  with  cow’s  urine. 

The  liquid  thus  prepared  should  be  used  for  bath,  drink,  and 
plaster.  It  cures  that  variety  of  leprosy  which  is  characterised  by 
parasites.  155 

In  prescribing  a  diet  and  drink,  and  a  liquid  for  sprinkling  over 
the  body,  and  a  plaster,  and  the  means  also  for  fumigation,  Vidanga 
( Embelia  Ribes),  which  is  destructive  of  parasites,  is  the  foremost  of 
drugs. 

Khadira  (Acacia  Catechu)  also,  which  is  curative  of  leprosy, 
Is  another  foremost  of  drugs  ( for  administration  in  the  same 
ways).  J56 

The  roots  of  Edagaja  ( Cassia  Tora),  of  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes), 
and  of  Aragbadha  (Cassia  fistula),  may  each  be  used  as  a  plaster  in 
leprosy.  These  plasters  cure  the  disease. 

Dog’s  teeth,  as  also  the  teeth  of  the  cow,  the  horse,  the  boar,  and 
the  camel,  may  each  be  used  for  the  same  purpose  and  with  the  same 
results.  iS7 

Edagaja  (Cassia  Tora),  Vidanga  (Embelia  Ribes),  the  two  varieties 
■of  Rajani  (viz.,  Haridra — Curcuma  longa,  and  D&ruharidra — Berberis 
Asiatica),  and  the  roots  of  Rajavriksha  (otherwise  called  Aragbadha, 
i.  e.,  Cassia  fistula),  mixed  with  Pippali  (Piper  longum),  and  Pskala- 
kushtha,  i,  e.,  Aplotaxis  auriculata),  form  the  foremost  of  all  drugs 
that  eradicate  leprosy. 

As  regards  all  varieties  of  £itra  (white  leprosy),  the  medicines  for 
its  cure  should  be  administered  after  purifying  the  patient  by  means 
of  correctives  (i.  e.,  emetics,  purgatives,  enemata,  errhines,  &c.)  rs8 

In  white  leprosy,  purgatives  called  ‘Sramsana’  are  the  foremost 
remedy.  The  expressed  juice  of  Malapu  (otherwise  called  Kakadum- 
vura,  i.  e.,  Ficus  oppositifolia ),  mixed  with  treacle  proves  beneficial. 

Having  drunk  the  juice  in  a  measure  that  suits  his  digestion,  and 
becoming  thereby  sufficiently  oiled,  the  patient  should  expose  himself 
to  the  heat  of  the  sun. 

After  being  sufficiently  purged  by  this  means,  the  patient  should, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA, 


233 


when  thirsty,  drink,  for  three  days,  the  preparation  called  ‘Peyfi’  (that 
is  laid  down  for  the  alleviation  of  thirst). 

The  boils  that  appear  on  the  body  of  the  patient  (in  consequence 
of  his  drinking  the  juice  of  Ficus  oppositifolia  as  mentioned  above) 
should  be  pierced  by  means  of  thorns.  After  tde  boils  have  been 
pierced  and  the  matter  within  them  let  out,  the  decoction  of  the 
following  drugs  should  be  drunk  every  day  for  the  space  of  a 
fortnight. 

Malapu  ( Ficus  oppositifolia ),  Agana  (. Pentaptera  Tomentosa ,  syn. 
Terminalia  Tomentosa ),  Priyangu  (Aglaia  Roxburghiana ),  and  £ata- 
pushpi  (otherwise  called  Micreya,  i.  e.,  Pucedanum  sowa — dill  seeds) : 

These  drugs  should  be  boiled  in  water  for  obtaining  their 
decoction. 

Or,  the  patient  may  drink,  in  measure  that  suits  his  digestion,  the 
alkaline  ashes  of  PalSga  ( Butea  frondosa ),  dissolved  in  ‘Phanita’ 
(inspissated  juice  of  the  sugarcane). 

All  other  medicines  that  have  been  laid  down  as  capable  of  curing 
leprosy  are  beneficial  in  White  leprosy. 

Drinks  mixed  with  catechu  water,  or  catechu  water  alone,  are  the 
foremost  of  remedies  in  this  disease. 

Plasters  made  of  Manahgila  (realgar),  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes ), 
Kagiga  (sulphate  of  iron),  Rochana  (concretions  found  in  the  gall¬ 
bladder  of  the  ox),  and  Kanakapushpi  (flowers  that  are  of  a  yellow 
hue),  with  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  should  be  applied  for  the  alleviation  of 
White  leprosy  of  every  variety.  159-163 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  the  plasters  prescribable  in  White 
leprosy. 

Burnt  bones  of  the  ass,  mixed  with  the  ashes  of  the  plaintain 
plant  and  the  blood  of  the  cow,  form  a  beneficial  plaster  for  White  . 
leprosy. 

The  essence  of  the  ashes  of  Malati  ( Echites  caryophillata),  mixed 
with  ichor  of  the  elephant,  forms  another  plaster  that  is  beneficial 
in  White  leprosy.  164 

Nilotpala  ( Nympcea  stellata ),  Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis  auriculata ),  and 
‘Saindhava’  salt,  reduced  to  paste  with  the  urine  of  the  elephant, 
forms  a  good  plaster  for  White  leprosy. 

The  seeds  of  Mulaka  (garden  radish)  and  those  of  Avalguja 
(otherwise  called  Somr&ji,  i.  e.,  Serratula  anthelmintica ),  reduced  to  a. 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


*2  34 

paste  with  the  urine  of  the  cow,  form  a  beneficial  plaster  for  White 
Leprosy.  l65 

Kakodumvarika  ( Ficus  oppositifolid),  Vasa;  (Justicia  A dhatoda), 
Avalguja  (seeds  of  Serratula  antkelmintica),  and  Chitraka  {Plumbago 
Zeylanica ),  reduced  to  a  paste  with  the  urine  of  the  cow,  form 
another  plaster  that  is- beneficial  in  this  disease. 

Manahgila  (realgar),  reduced  to  a  paste  with  the  bile  of  the 
peacock,  forms  another  plaster  that  is  beneficial  in  this  disease.  166 

The  seeds  of  Avalguja  ( Serratula  anthelmentica ),  lac,  the  bile  of 
the  ox,  the  two  Anjanas  (Rasanjana,  i.  e.,  galena  or  sulphide  of  lead 
ore,  and  Tuttha,  i.  <?.,  sulphate  of  copper),  Pippali  ( Piper  longuni), 
and  the  dust  of  black  iron,  reduced  to  a  paste,  (and  applied  as  a 
plaster),  cure  leucoderma.  167 

Sometimes  of  a  patient  whose  sins"  have  been  washed  off  (by 
■expiatory  rites),  White  leprosy  is  cured  by  administration  of  the 
usual  correctives,  by  the  letting  out  of  blood,  and  by  eating  those 
sorts  of  flour  that  are  regarded  as  dry.  168 

KilSsa  (leucoderma)  is  known  to  be  of  three  varieties,  having  three 
names,  viz.,  1.  Darana,  2.  ChSrana,  and  3.  £itra. 

Each  of  these  is  characterised  by  excitement  of  the  three  faults.  169 

When  the  faults  affect  the  blood,  the  colour  of  the  disease  becomes 
red.  When  they  affect  the  flesh,  the  colour  becomes  coppery.  When 
they  affect  the  adeps,  the  colour  becomes  white.  Each  succeeding 
variety  of  the  disease  is  more  difficult  of  cure  than  the  .preceding 
one.  17° 

That  variety  of  White  leprosy  in  which  the  patches  are  many 
and  have  a  tendency  to  unite  with  one  another,  in  which  many  hairs 
of  a  red  colour  appear,  and  which  is  of  many  years’  standing,  is 
incurable.  x7i 

The  causes  of  leucoderma  are  untruthful  speech,  an  ungrateful 
disposition,  evil  speaking  in  respect  of  the  deities,  and  humiliating 
seniors  ;  as  also  sinful  acts  (committed  in  this  life),  and  (similar)  acts* 
of  previous  lives.  Inharmonious  food  also  is  another  cause.  172 

( Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary ). 

The  causes  (of  leprosy),  the  articles  of  food  (from  which  it  arises). 


CHAR  AKA- SA  MBIT  A. 


*235 


its  symptoms,  the  faults,  in  brief,  which  characterise  different  varieties 
of  the  disease,  the  considerations  of  curability  and  incurability, 
those  varieties  that  are  difficult  of  cure,  the  well-tried  combinations 
of  drugs  which  cure  the  disease,  the  causes  of  leucoderma  and  its 
symptoms,  the  severity  and  lightness  of  the  different  varieties  of  this 
disease,  and  the  methods  of  alleviation, — these  have  been  compiled, 
in  this  Lesson  on  the  cure  of  Leprosy,  by  the  great  Rishi,  viz., 
Hutagavega,  and  declared  unto  his  pupils  for  improving  their  memory 
and  understanding.*  12 

Thus  ends  Lesson  VII,  called  Kushtha-chikitsa  (treatment  of 
Leprosy),  in  the  Division  called  ‘Chikitsita’  of  the  treatise  of  Agnivega 
as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  VIII. 

TREATMENT  OF  PHTHISIS. 

We  shall,  after  this,  expound  the  treatment  of  ‘R&ja-Yakshma’  or 
Phthisis. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri. 

Of  the  deities  who  conversed  with  one  another  the  conversation, 
which  took  place  in  days  of  yore,  and  which  related  to  lust  and 
calamity,  on  the  subject  of  £agin  (the  deity  of  the  moon),  was  heard 
by  the  Rishis.  1 

Of  Indu  (the  deity  of  the  moon),  who  was  excessively  attached  to 
Rohini  one  of  his  seven  and  twenty  wives  who  were  all  daughters  of 


*  ‘Hutagavega,’  that  is  ‘Agnivega.’  The  fact  is,  all  the  synonyms  of  the  word  ‘Agni’  or 
fire  may  be  used  in  indicating  the  Rishi.  Thus  ‘Hastinapura’,  the  capital  city  of  the  Kurus, 
is  called  ‘Gajasahvayam’,  ‘Nagasahvayam,’  &c.  The  Rishi  named  ‘Parvata’ — a  near  rela¬ 
tion  of  Narada — is  called  ‘Adri’.  All  the  synonyms  of  the  word  ‘Parvata’  which  means  a 
mountain,  are  applied  to  indicate  this  sage. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1236 

Daksha),  and  who  took  no  care  for  preserving  his  body,  the  body 
became  diminished,  in  consequence  of  the  loss  of  oily  ingredients.  2 
At  the  neglect  by  Indu  of  the  other  daughters  of  that  Lord  of  all 
creatures,  {viz.  Daksha),  the  latter’s  wrath,  in  the  shape  of  his  breath, 
came  out,  in  an  embodied  form,  of  his  mouth.*  3 

Angumat  (he  of  bright  rays)  had  taken  for  wives  the  seven  and 
twenty  daughters  of  that  Lord  of’  creatures  {viz.,  Daksha),  but  did 
not  love  and  live  with  all  of  them.  4 

Into  (^agin  who  behaved  unequally  towards  his  wives,  who  had 
been  blinded  by  the  quality  of  Passion,  and  who,  cursed  by  his 
father-in-law,  had  become  cheerless,  phthisis  entered.  5 

Overwhelmed  by  the  excessive  wrath  of  his  father-in-law,  he; 
deprived  of  splendour,  with  the  other  deities  and  the  celestial  Rishis 
(in  his  company),  threw  himself  upon  the  mercy  of  the  great  Rishi.  6 
.  The  Lord  of  creatures  {viz.,  Daksha),  convinced  that  Chandramas’s 
mind  had  been  purified  (by  a  conviction  of  his  offence  accompanied 
by  repentance),  showed  him  grace.  After  this,  Soma  was  treated 
by  the  celestial  physicians,  viz.,  the  twin  Agwins.  7 

Freed  from  calamity,  Chandra  once  more  shone  with  brilliance, 
and  increasing  in  energy,  obtained  from  the  Acwins  a  purified  life.f  & 
Wrath,  ‘Yakshma,’  Fever,  Disease,  and  also  Woe,  as  it  is  called, 
are  words  having  the  same  meaning. 

And  as  this  disease  appeared  first  in  the  person  of  the  king,  there¬ 
fore  has  it  come  to  be  known  as  ‘Raja-yakshma’  {viz.,  the  royal 
disease,  or,  rather,  the  king  of  diseases).!  9 

This  disease,  forcibly  dispelled  from  the  body  of  Chandramas  by 
the  Agwins,  came  to  the  world  of  men. 

Obtaining  four  kinds  of  causes  it  enters  into  the  bodies  of  human, 
beings.  1° 

Exertions  in  which  strength  beyond  the  ordinary  measure  is  put 


*  The  celestial  Rishi,  Daksha,  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  Prajapatis  or  Lords  of  the 
creation.  In  the  Puranas,  he  is  represented  as  one  of  those  will-begotten  sons  of  Brahman 
that  married  for  propagating  offspring,  the  other  sons  of  Brahman  betaking  themselves  to 
penances  in  a  state  of  celebacy. — T. 

t  ‘Sattwa’  here  means  life  or  existence.— T. 

t  Chandramas  or  the  deity  of  the  moon  is  regarded  as  the  king  not  only  of  the  stars  but 
also  of  the  twice-born  orders.  He  is  called  ‘Dvvijapati’  or  lord  of  the  regenerate  ones.-T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


23  7 


■forth,  suppression  of  the  urgings  of  nature,  waste  (of  semen  and  blood 
and  other  constituent  elements  of  the  body),  are  causes  of  phthisis. 
The  fourth  is  inharmonious  food  and  drink.  11 

Inconsequence  of  fighting,  of  loud  recitation,  of  bearing  heavy 
weights,  of  travelling  great  distances,  of  jumping,  of  swimming,  and 
the  rest,  of  falls  from  high  places,  of  wounds  (received),  and  of  other 
acts  of  rashness,  12 

Verily,  in  consequence  of  such  exertions  in  which  strength  beyond 
the  ordinary  measure  is  put  forth,  the  chest  is  hurt,  and  the  wind 
becoming  provoked,  excites  the  other  two  faults  (viz.,  bile  and 
phlegm)  and  moves  in  the  body.  T3 

Thus  excited,  the  wind,  when  seated  in  the  head,  produces  head¬ 
ache  ;  when  seated  in  the  throat,  it  produces  a  tickling  sensation 
there,  as  also  cough,  hoarseness  of  voice,  and  disgust  for  food.  14 

When  seated  in  the  flanks,  it  produces  pains  in  those  parts  of 
the  body. 

When  seated  in  the  anal  canal,  it  produces  watery  motions. 

When  seated  in  the  joints,  it  produces  yawns  and  fever. 

And  when  seated  in  the  chest,  it  producos  diseases  of  the  chest.  *5 
£  In  consequence  of  (repeated)  coughing,  one’s  chest  becomes  torn. 
The  chest  being  thus  torn,  one  becomes  afflicted  by  pains  in  that 
organ,  with  the  result  that  one  emits  phlegm  (mucus)  mixed  with 
blood.  16 

Thus  phthisis  born  of  rashness  becomes  characterised  by  these 
one  and  ten  .indications.  For  this  reason  one  possessed  of  wisdom, 
should  never  indulge  in  acts  of  rashness.* l7 

When,  in  consequence  of  modesty,  or  sense  of  abomination,  or 
fear,  a  person  suppresses  the  urgings,  that  have  become  pronounced, 
of  wind,  urine,  and  stools,  18  then,  owing  to  such  suppression  of  these 
urgings,  the  wind,  becoming  provoked,  excites  the  phlegm  and  the 
bile,  and  causes  the  following  diseases  in  the  upper,  the  transverse 
(middle),  and  the  lower  parts  of  the  body.  19 

Catarrh  in  the  nose,  cough,  hoarseness  of  voice,  disgust  for 
food,  pains  in  the  flanks,  headache,  fever,  pains  in  the  shoulders, 
langour  of  the  body,  repeated  vomiting,  and  watery  motions,  by 
these  one  and  ten  symptoms,  which  are  characterised  by  the  excite- 


*  The  one  and  ten  indications  are  mentioned  in  verses  14  to  16.— T. 


1238 


CHARAKA-SAMH1 TA. 


ment  of  all  the  three  faults,  that  severe  disease  called  phthisis  is 
known.  2°-21 

Through  excessive  waste  induced  by  malice,  anxiety,  terror, 
apprehension,  wrath,  and  grief,  as  also  through  excessive  indulgence 
in  sexual  congress  and  fasts,  the  vital  seed  and  the  ‘Ojas’  become 
wasted.  22 

In  consequence  of  the  waste  of  oily  matters,  the  wind,  becoming 
excited,  causes  the  two  other  faults  to  be  excited,  and  induces  these 
one  and  ten  body-wasting  symptoms,  viz.,  catarrh  in  the  nose,  fever, 
cough,  langour  of  the  body,  headache,  asthma,  watery  motions, 
disgust  for  food,  pains  in  the  flanks,  loss  of  voice,  and  pains  in  the 
shoulders.*  23-24 

When  that  severe  disease  called  Phthisis  has  become  developed, 
it  puts  forth  the  one  and  ten  symptoms  mentioned  above. 

In  consequence  of  the  waste  it  induces,  it  takes  away  life  itself.  25 

Of  a  person  who  takes  diverse  kinds  of  food  and  drink  that  are 
inharmonious,  the  wind  and  other  faults  produce  many  severe  dis¬ 
eases  each  of  which  is  characterised  by  hostile  symptoms. f  26 

In  consequence  of  inequalities  (in  their  measure  or  degree),  the 
•wind  and  the  rest,  becoming  inharmonious,  obstruct  the  ducts  of  £he 
blood  and  the  other  ingredients  (of  the  body),  and  brings  about  the 
••disease  (phthisis). 

The  ingredients  of  the  body  do  not,  in  consequence,  grow.  27 

Catarrh  in  the  nose,  spitting  of  phlegm,  cough,  vomiting,  disgust 
Cor  food,  pains  in  the  shoulders,  spitting  of  blood,  pains  in  the  flanks, 
headache,  and  hoarseness  of  voice, — these  symptoms,  it  should  be 
•known,  are  caused  by  (excited)  phlegm,  bile,  and  wind.z8-29 

These  are  the  one  and  ten  kinds  of  symptoms,  arising  from  the 
•causes  (mentioned)  of  that  king  of  diseases  which  is  characterised 
ifcy  a  collection  of  ailments. 

The  four  kinds  of  causes  also  have  been  laid  down. 

The  incubatory  symptoms  are  catarrh  in  the  nose,  weakness. 


*  Gangadhara  reads  ‘mahagraha’  at  the  end  of  verse  24.  Other  texts  have  ‘angahrit’. 
The  sense  is  the  same. — T. 

t  ‘Vishaman,’  as  an  adjective  of  ‘amayan’  (in  the  second  line),  means  ‘characterised  by 
hostile  symptoms,’  so  that  if  the  physician  seeks  to  alleviate  one  symptom,  another  becomes 
aggravated. — T. 


jaifles  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland ,  V.  S.  A.: — You  have  Undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought-  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California: —  . '.As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent . 

there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn... . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia-,  U  S.  A.  : — You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management— will 
begin  to  review  hooks,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  he  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq;,  St.  Louis,  Ohio,  U.  S.  A.  : — The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it-  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge : — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  Can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished; 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York  : — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me.  - 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Seiences,  Phila¬ 
delphia-. — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  <jf  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  op  Cashmere  : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-Western 
University,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition  : — I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  .-—Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  it),  East  38th  Street,  New  York : — Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  ^praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Praise,  Dramstadt  i— The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting ’out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist : — I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere,  1J4,  Boulevatse,  Saint  Germain  : — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H,.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia-. — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  I 
arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop 
from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients 
according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and 
fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of 
the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street,  Calcutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  ICabiratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
[about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,-  sometime  after. — 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mytnensing: — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E .,  Magistrate  and  Collector : — Your  patriotic, 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve  the.  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  A.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hypocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gy  a  : — It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt.  Bangor,  North  Wales  : — The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  Indi' 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  ’C.  I.  E.  : — Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  fa  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the' treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is 
a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji, — The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


PART  XL. 


4  i  C>  Kj, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 

( TRANSLA  TED  INTO  ENGLISH). 

PUBLISHED  BY 

PARESHNATH  SARMA, 


KAVIRAJ  AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA.(in  Original)  WITH  COMMENT¬ 
ARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 
-journal  in  Bengali) ;  PRACTITIONER  OF  the  HINDU 
SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C„  &C.,  &C. 


CALCUTTA  : 

200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N.  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRATNA  PRESS, 
12,  SIMLA  STREET,  BYE-LANE. 

1906. 

(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved. ) 


OPINION  OP  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters.) 

Professor  Max  Mutter  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

In  any  way  you  thay  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — . .  I  am 

.  surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention, 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office — .  Your 

'  excellent  translation  . a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

. Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College ,  New  York,  U.  S.  A.— I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing,  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris: — -I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice- in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany : — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr,  R.  Garbe,  Primenstram  Konigsbursth,  Germany  .-—English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most'important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal : — I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  60  life, 
cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


CHARAKA-SAMHIT  A. 


1239 


seeing  faults  in  things  that  are  faultless,  seeing  repulsive  sights  in 
one’s  own  body,  entertaining  a  sense  of  abomination  for  food  and 
drink  while  eating  and  drinking,*  waste  of  strength  and  flesh,  fond¬ 
ness  for  women,  wine,  and  meat,  fondness  for  keeping  the  body  well- 
wrapped  and  hidden  from  other’s  view,  the  frequent  appearance  o.f 
flies  and  little  worms  and  hair  and  bits  of  straw  in  food  and  drink, 
the  excessive  growth  of  hair  and  nails,  dreams  of  attacks  by  birds 
and  insects  and  beasts  of  prey,  ascending,  in  dreams,  upon  heaps  of 
hair  and  bones  and  ashes,  and  the  sight,  in  dreams,  of  lakes  and 
tanks  as  also  of  hills  and  forests  and  luminous  bodies,  drying  up  or 
wasting  or  falling.  3i-35 

Gf  phthisis  which  presents  various  symptoms,  these  are  the  incu¬ 
batory  indications. 

Hear  now  what  ‘the  symptoms  of  this  disease  are,  according  to 
the  heads  stated  above  in  brief,  with  the  medicines  that  are  pres¬ 
cribable  :  36 

The  several  ‘dh&tus’  (ingredients  of  the  body,  such  as  juices,  blood, 
flesh,  &c.)  are  developed  by  their  respective  measures  of  heat. 

Thus  developed,  each,  coursing  through  its  own  duct,  nourishes  the 
others.  (The  juice  into  which  food  is  reduced,  nourishes  the  blood  ; 
the  blood  nourishes  the  flesh  ;  and  so  on). 

In  consequence  of  the  obstruction  of  the  ducts,  and  of  the  waste 
or  loss  of  blood  and  the  other  ‘dhatus,’  and  of  the  loss  of  the  inherent 
heat  in  each  ‘dhatu,’  the  king  of  diseases,  viz.,  phthisis,  is  induced.  37-38 

At  such  a  time  the  food  which  is  cooked  in  the  stomach  by  the 
(digestive)  fire,  becomes  converted  for  the  most  part  into  ‘Mala’ 
(impurities) ;  very  little  of  it  is  converted  into  anything  substantial. j-39 

Hence,  of  a  person  who  is  afflicted  with  phthisis,  the  impurities 
(stools)  should  be  protected.  Gf  him  whose  ‘dhatus’  have  all  been 
wasted,  the  only  strength  is  that  of  the  stools  (in  his  stomach  and 
jntestines).J  4° 


*/.«.,  Disrelish  for  what  is  taken. — T. 

t  Digestion  is  regarded  as  a  process  of  cooking.  The  digestive  fire  cooks  nbe  food  in  the 
stomach.  A  portion  of  the  food  taken  becomes  ‘Mala’  or  impurities,  and  the  other  portion 
becomes  ‘prasada’  or  pure  juice.  This  juice  afterwards  becomes  blood.  The  blood  makes 
flesh  ;  and  so  on. — T. 

t  The  fact  is,  such  a  person  should  never  have  purgatives  administered  unto  him.  The 
very  impurities  in  his  intestines  sustain  his  strength  and  life. — T. 

IS  7 


1.240 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  ducts  being  obstructed  (in  phthisis),  the  juice  (into  which 
food  is  converted)  remains  in  its  own  place  and  increases  there  (with¬ 
out  flowing  into  or  through  the  obstructed  channels  for  conversion 
into  blood).  Accumulating  in  its  place,  it  is  expelled  by  the  urgings 
of  cough,  in  various  forms.  41 

From  this  state  of  things,  six,  or  one  and  ten,  ailments  spring. 
It  is  in  consequence  of  the  combination  of  these  six,  or  of  these 
one  and  ten,  that  phthisis  is  said  to  develop.  42 

The  one  and  ten  ailments  of  a  person  afflicted  with  phthisis  are 
1.  cough,  2.  pains  in  the  shoulders,  3.  hoarseness  of  voice,  4.  fever, 
5.  pains  in  the  flanks,  6.  headache,  7.  vomiting  of  blood,  8-.  ejectment 
of  phlegm,  9.  asthma,  10.  loose  motions,  and  11.  disgust  for  food. 

Or,  the  six  aliments  of  such  a  person  are  1.  cough,  2,  fever, 
3.  pains  in  the  flanks,  4.  disease  of  the  voice,  5.  disease  in  respect  of 
stools,  and  6.  disgust  for  food.*  43-44 

One  whose  flesh  and  strength  are  wasted  should  not  be  taken  up 
for  treatment  if  he  happens  to  be  afflicted  with  all  these  symptoms  or 
with  only  half  their  number,  or  with  only  three  of  them. 

If,  however,  it  is  otherwise  (that  is,  if  there  has  been  no  loss  of 
flesh  and  strength),  one’s  treatment  should  be  taken  up  even  if  one 
happens  to  manifest  all  the  symptoms.  45 

The  phlegm,  or  the  blood,  or  the  bile,  that  lies  at  the  root  of  the 
organ  of  smell,  proceeds  towards  the  wind  filling  the  head.f 

From  this  is  born  the  disease  called  ‘Pratigyaya’  which  is  dreadful 
and  which  wastes  the  body. 

Its  symptoms  are  headache,  heaviness  (of  the  head,  or  of  the 
whole  body),  filling  of  the  nose  with  impurities,  fever,  cough,  vomiting 
of  phlegm,  hoarseness  of  voice,  disgust  for  food,  langour,  and  weak¬ 
ness  of  ail  the  organs  of  sense.  Combined  together,  these  produce 
the  disease  called  phthisis.  46-4S 

The  person  afflicted  with  phthisis,  while  coughing,  spits  out  food- 
juice  that  is  slimy,  copious  in  measure,  endued  with  the  smell  of  raw 
meat,  green  in  colour,  or  white,  or  yellow,  and  mixed  with  phlegm.J  49 

*  ‘Swara-gada’  and  ‘Varcha-gada’  are  diseases  in  respect  of  voice  and  in  respect  of  stools, 
i.  hoarseness  of  voice  and  loose  or  watery  motions. — T. 

t  The  original  is  'the  wind  of  the  head  which  has  been  filled  with  the  wind’.— T. 
t  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  the  food  one  takes  is  first  converted  into  ‘Rasa’  (food- 
juice).  Unable  to  pass  into  those  ducts  where  it  is  capable  of  conversion  into  blood,  owing 


Cf-IA  RA  KA-SAMHITA . 


1541 


Pain  in  the  shoulders  and  sides,  burning  of  the  soles  and  palms* 
and  fever  extending  over  the  whole  body,  together  constitute  the 
indication  of  one  that  is  afflicted  with  phthisis.  5° 

Through  excitement  of  wind,  of  bile,  of  phlegm,  and  of  blood, 
through  the  urging  of  cough,  and  through  inflammation  of  the  Schnei¬ 
derian  membrane,  hoarseness  of  voice  sets  in. 

Through  excitement  of  the  wind,  the  voice  becomes  dry,  weak,- 
and  trembling. 

Through  excitement  of  the  bile,  the  palate  and  the  throat  become 
dry,  and  hence  the  patient  feels  an  aversion  to  speech. 

Through  excitement  of  phlegm,  the  voice  becomes  dull  and 
obstructed,  and  resembles  the  cooing  of  the  pigeon.  51-52 

From  obstruction  of  blood,  the  voice  is  speedily  affected.  It 
comes  out  with  difficulty. 

From  the  excessive  urging  of  cough,  the  voice  becomes  plaintive. 

From  the  inflammation  of  the  Schneiderian  membrane,  the  voice 
assumes  those  characteristics  which  arise  from  excited  phlegm  as 
also  excited  wind.  S3 

Of  a  person  who  is  afflicted  with  phthisis,  the  pains  in  the  sides 
become  variable.  Somerimes  the  sides  become  contracted,  and  some¬ 
times  they  become  expanded. 

The  headache  which  he  gets  is  severe  and  is  accompanied  by  a 
sense  of  the  head  having  become  exceedingly  heavy.  54 

.  If,  of  a  person  afflicted  with  phthisis,  the  body  becomes  exceed¬ 
ingly  lean  (or  wasted)  through  inharmonious  food  and  drink,  then 
blood  comes  out  of  his  throat,  or  phlegm  which  has  been  accumulated 
and  which,  separated  from  the  lungs,  has  a  tendency  to  come  out.  55 

In  consequence  of  its  passages  being  obstructed,  the  blood  does 
not  reach  the  flesh  and  other  ingredients  of  the  body  (which  are  fed 
or  nourished  by  it). 

Or,  remaining  in  the  ‘amS£aya’  and  separated  therefrom,  it  comes 
to  the  throat,  in  consequence  of  its  copious  measure.  56 

In  consequence  of  the  obstruction  of  wind  and  phlegm,  one  that 
is  afflicted  with  phthisis  breathes  hard  from  the  lungs. 


to  those  ducts  being  obstructed,  that  ‘Rasa’  becomes  slimy,  &c.j  and  the  person  afflicted  with’ 
phthisis  spits  it  out  along  with  phlegm. — T. 


1242 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SAM  HIT  A. 


The  digestive  fire  being  affected  by  the  faults  (wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm),  the  person  afflicted  with  phthisis  passes  liquid  stools  mixed 
with  mucus.  57 

In  consequence  of  all  or  some  of  the  faults  being  located  in  the 
tongue  or  the  chest,  or  of  food  and  drink,  or  of  mental  objects 
awakening  repugnance,  disgust  for  food  is  generated  in  the  person 
afflicted  with  phthisis.*  5§ 

According  as  the  taste  in  the  mouth  is  astringent,  or  bitter,  or 
sweet,  the  physician  should  know  that  the  disgust  for  food  has  been 
caused  by  (?xcitecF)  wind,  or  bile,  or  phlegm  respectively. 

As  regards  disgust  for  food  that  arises  from  mental  causes,  that 
also  should  be  learnt  from  a  survey  of  the  faults,  j-  59 

The  vomiting  that  proceeds  from  disgust  for  food  and  drink,  or 
from  the  urging  of  cough,  or  from  the  tendency  for  expulsion  of  the 
faults,  or  from  fear,  is  a  supervening  symptom  of  other  diseases 
(than  phthisis).  60 

All  varieties  of  phthisis  are  born  of  the  excitement  of  all  the  three 
faults.  The  physician,  however,  should  examine  the  strength  or 
weakness  that  exists  of  each  of  the  faults  and  then  treat  the  person 
afflicted  with  phthisis.  6* 

Hear  now  the  diverse  general  courses  of  treatment  in  catarrh  in 
the  nose,  headache,  cough,  difficulty  of  breathing,  loss  of  voice,  and 
pains  in  the  sides,  (when  these  accompany  phthisis).  62 

In  inflammation  of  the  Schneiderian  membrane  (which  arises  from 
catarrh  of  the  nose),  the  application  of  heat  for  causing  perspiration, 
rubbing  the  body  with  medicated  oils,  inhalation  of  smoke,  plasters, 


*  Three  causes  are  set  forth  of  the  disgust  for  food  that  is  generated  in  persons  afflicted 
with  phthisis  :  these  are  I.  the  faults  located  in  the  tongue  or  the  chest ;  2.  food  and 
drink,  i.  e.,  continuance  of  eating,  and  drinking  ;  and  3.  such  thoughts  as  excite  repugnance 
or  the  feeling  of  abomination. — T. 

+  It  is  from  the  taste  which  the  patient  feels  in  his  mouth  that  his  disgust  for  food  should 
be  ascribed  to  wind,  or  bile,  or  phlegm.  If  that  taste  be  astringent,  the  disgust  for  food 
should  be  ascribed  to  excited  wind  ;  if  it  be  bitter,  it  should  be  ascribed  to  excited  bile  ;  and 
if  sweet,  the  disgust  should  be  ascribed  to  excited  phlegm.  If  none  of  these  tastes  be  present, 
the  disgust  for  food  should  be  known  as  arising  from  mental  causes.  Even  then,  the  physi¬ 
cian  should  seek  to  ascertain  what  particular  fault  (wind,  bile,  or  phlegm)  it  is  that  has  pro¬ 
duced  the  state  of  mind  from  which  the  disgust  has  arisen.  Such  ascertainment  must  be 
made  by  observation  of  symptoms  other  than  the  taste  in  the  mouth.  — T. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


[243 


sprinkling  the  body  with  water,  total  immersion  of  the  body,  drinking 
of  infusions  and  decoctions,  gruel  of  barley,  and  meat-juice  of  Lava 
( Perdix  chinensis),  Tittiri  (francoline  partridge),  Daksha  (cock  or 
hen),  and  Varttaka  (Perdix  olivacea),  hot  and  endued  with  saline, 
or  sour,  or  pungent  taste,  and  mixed  with  oils,  should  be  had 
recourse  to.  63-64 

The  meat-j'uice  also  of  the  goat,  mixed  with  Pippalaka  (the  fruit 
of  Piper  longuni),  Yava  (barley),  Kulattha  ( the  seeds  of  Dolichos 
bijlora),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  Dadima  (pomegranate  fruit),  and 
Amalaka  (the  fruit  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica),  as  also  with  oils,  should 
be  taken  by  the  patient.  65 

By  this,  the  six  ailments  beginning  with  Pinasa  (inflammation  of 
the  Schneiderian  membrane),  become  mitigated.* 

Or,  the  patient  may  be  treated  with  the  soup,  well-prepared,  of 
Mulaka  (dry  garden  radish)  and  Kulattha  (the  seeds  of  Dolichos 
biflorus ),  along  with  the  flour  of  barley,  or  wheat,  or  £ali  rice,  given 
in  measure  that  is  easily  assimilable.f 

Or,  the  patient  should  drink  the  pure  portion  (throwing  out 
the  dregs)  of  the  wine  called  Varuni,  or  the  decoction  of  the  five- 
roots.  66-67 

Or,  rice  boiled  in  the  decoction  of  Dh&nya  ( Coriandrum  sativum) 
and  Nagara  (dry  ginger)  ; 

Or,  in  the  decoction  of  Tamlaki  (otherwise  called  Bhumyamlaka, 
i.  e.,  Phyllanthus  Niruri) ; 

Or,  in  the  decoction  of  the  four  Parnis  (viz.,  Salaparni,  Prishni- 
parni,  Mudgaparni,  and  Mashaparni,  i.  e.,  Desmodium  Gangeticum, 
Uraria  lagopodioides,  Phaseohis  tribolus,  and  Glycine  debilis).  68 

Or,  with  Kricara  (sesame  seeds  reduced  to  paste),  or  with  Utk&rika 
(wheat-flour  fried  in  ghee  and  boiled  in  water),  or  with  the  frumenty 
of  Masha  (the  seeds  of  Phaseolus  radiatus )  or  of  Kulattha  (tbe  seeds 
of  Dolichos  biflorcb,  or  of  barley,  heat  should  be  applied  to  the  throat, 
flanks,  chest,  and  head,  according  to  the  method  known  as  £ankara.  69 


*  It  should  be  noted  that  ‘Pratigyaya’  and  ‘Pinasa’  are  used  as  convertible  terms.  The 
fact  is,  the  former  means  only  catarrh  in  the  nose  ;  while  the  latter  means  inflammation  of 
the  Schneiderian  membrane.  The  latter  arises  from  the  former.  Hence,  they  are  used  as 
synonymous.  — T 

t  ‘Supakalpitai.h’,  i.  e.,  well-prepared,  implying  that  black  pepper  and  other  spices  have 
been  added  to  it.  The  radish  to  be  used  should  be  dry. — T. 


244 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Or,  the  head  of  the  patient  should  be  sprinkled  with  the  ex¬ 
pressed  juice  of  those  leaves  which  have  been  mentioned  as  curatives 
of  catarrh  in  the  nose.* 

Or,  the  head  of  the  patient  should  be  sprinkled  with  the  water, 
agreeably  hot,  in  which  Bala  {Pavonia  odorata,  Guduchi  ( Tinospora 
cordifolia ),  and  Madhuka  (liquorice)  have  been  boiled.  7° 

Or,  the  patient’s  throat,  head,  and  sides  should  be  fomented, 
agreeably  to  the  method  called  ‘Nadi-sweda,’  with  the  decoction  of 
the  goat’s  head  or  the  head  of  a  (large)  fish,  or  with  water  in  which 
wind-alleviating  drugs  have  been  boiled.  7i 

Or,  these  limbs  of  the  patient  should  be  fomented,  agreeably  to 
the  method  called  ‘NSdi-sweda’,  with  the  decoction  of  the  flesh  of 
animals  dwelling  in  water  and  in  marshy  regions,  or  with  the 
decoction  of  the  five  roots,  or  with  ‘Kanji’  mixed  with  (medicated) 
oils.  72 

For  persons  afflicted  with  pains  in  the  head,  the  sides,  and 
the  shoulders,  the  application  is  very  much  applauded  of  plasters 
made  of  Jivanti  ( Ccelogyne  ovalis),  of  (^atapushpa  ( Pucedanum 
Sowa),  of  Bala  {Pavonia  odorata ),  of  Madhuka  (liquorice),  of  VachS 
(Acorus  calamus),  of  Vesavara,+  of  VidSri  ( Convolvulus  paniculatus), 
of  Mulaka  (garden  radish),  and  of  the  flesh  of  animals  dwelling  in 
water  and  in  marshy  regions.  Such  plasters  should  be  mixed  With 
the  four  kinds  of  oils.  73-74 

(^atapushpa  (. Pucedanum  Sowa),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Kushtha 
( Aplotaxis  auriculata),  Tagara  ( Taberncemontana  coronaria),  and 
Chandana  (red  sandal  wood), — these  mixed  with  ghee  form  a  plaster 
that  is  alleviative  of  headaches  and  pains  in  the  sides  and  the 
shoulders.  75 

Balfi  ( Pavonia  odorata),  Rasna  (  Vanda  Roxburghii),  Tila  (sesame 
seeds),  Sarpis  {Ghee),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  and  Nilotpala  {Nymphcea 
stellata)  ; 

Palankashfi  {Balsamodendron  Mukul),  Devadftru  {Pinus  deodara), 
Chandana  (red  sandal  wood),  Kejara  ( Mesua  ferrea),  and  ghee  ;  76 


*  These  leaves  have  been  mentioned  in  the  chapter  on  ‘Diseases  of  the  Head’  in  this 
Division  of  the  work,  supra.  The  leaves  are  those  of  Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis  auriculata),  &c. — T. 

t  ‘Vesavara’  is  a  condiment  as  pounded  coriander,  mustard,  pepper,  spices,  &c.  The  four 
kinds  of  oils  are  oil,  ghee,  fat,  and  marrow.  — T. 


CHA  RA  KA-  SAM  HIT  A', 


245 


Bir&  (otherwise  called  Kshira-kakoli,  i.  e.,  a  bulb  of  the  onion 
tribe  brought  from  the  Himalaya),  BalS  (Pavonia  odorata),  Vidari 
( Convolvulus paniculatus ),  KrishnagandhS  (otherwise  called  Sobhan- 
jana,  i.  e.,  Moringa  pterygosperma ),  and  Punarnava  ( Boerhavia  diffusa ), 
£atSvari  ( Asparagus  racemosa),  PayasyS  (otherwise  called  Khira- 
kakoli,  i.  e.,  a  bulb  of  the  onion  tribe  brought  from  the  Himalaya\ 
Kattrina  (otherwise  called  Bhustrina,  i.  e,  Andropogon  muricatum), 
Madhuka  (liquorice),  and  ghee  ;  77 

Each  of  these  four  groups,  mentioned  in  half  a  couplet,  forms  a 
plaster  that  is  highly  beneficial  for  persons  who  are  afflicted  with 
headaches,  pains  in  the  sides,  and  pains  in  the  shoulders,  and  in 
whom  all  the  faults  are  excited.  78 

Snuffs,  inhalation  of  smoke,  drinking  of  oils  after  meals,  such  oils 
as  are  fit  to  be  rubbed  on  the  body,  and  enemata,  are  highly  bene¬ 
ficial  to  persons  afflicted  with  these  ailments.  79 

Or,  the  vitiated  blood  of  such  patients  should  be  let  out  by  means 
of  leeches,  or  the  dried  husk  of  gourds,  or  (sharpened)  horns.*  80 

The  application  is  very  beneficial  of  a  plaster  made  of  Padmaka 
(a  fragrant  wood  brought  from  Central  and  Southern  India),  Ugira 
(roots  of  Andropogon  muricatus ),  and  Chandana  (red  sandal  wood), 
mixed  with  ghee  ; 

Or  of  Durva  ( Panicum  Dactylon ),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  ManjishthS 
( Rubia  cordifolia ;),.  and  Kegara  (otherwise  called  Nagakegara,  i.  e., 
Mesua  f erred),  mixed  with  ghee  ; 

Or  of  Prapanudarika  (roots-stock  of  Nymphcea  lotus),  Nirgundi 
( Vitex  Negundo),  Padmakegara  (filaments  of  the  lotus),  Utpala 
( Nymphcea  stellata ),  Kageruka  ( Scirpus  Kysoor),  and  Payasyft  (a 
bulb  of  the  onion  tribe  brought  from  the  Himalayas),  mixed  with. 
ghee. f  81-82 

Certain  other  processes  are  beneficial  for  persons  afflicted  with 
this  disease.  These  are — 

‘Avyanga’  (rubbing  the  body),  with  the  oil  called  1Chandanfidi> 
(mentioned  in  the  chapter  on  Fevers) ;  or  with  ghee  washed  a  hundred 
times  ; 


*  ‘Such  patients’,  i.  e.,  of  patients  afflicted  with  headaches,  and  pains  in  the  sides  and 
the  shoulders. — T. 

f  Some  texts  omit  Nirgundi. — T. 


246 


CHA  RA  K A-S  AM HIT A. 


‘Seka’  (sprinkling  or  bath)  with  milk  or  with  water  mixed  with 
honey  ;  or  with  well-cooled  rain-water  ;  or  with  water  in  which  the 
group  of  drugs  beginning  with  Chandana  (red  sandal  wood)  have 
been  boiled. 

These  processes  are  known  as  alleviatives  of  this  disease.*  83-84 

For  those  phthisical  patients  in  whom  the  faults  are  seen  to  be 
greatly  excited,  emetics,  mixed  with  oily  substances,  and  then  pur¬ 
gatives,  mixed  with  similar  substances,  are  commendable.  These, 
however,  should  not  be  administered  before  the  patients  have  gone 
through  the  processes  of  oiling  and  fomentation.  Then,  again, 
in  administering  emetics  and  purgatives,  care  should  be  taken  that 
the  patient  is  not  weakened.f  8S 

One  who  is  afflicted  by  phthisis,  casts  off  his  limbs  by  only  pass¬ 
ing  stools.  What  need  then  be  said  of  a  patient  to  whom  emetics 
and  purgatives  are  administered  in  measures  unregardant  of  his 
strength  ?f  86 

Unto  those  persons  (afflicted  with  phthisis)  whose  stomach  and 
intestines  have  been  cleared  by  means  of  the  well-known  groups  of 
drugs  possessed  of  emetic  and  purgative  virtues,  the  following  well- 
tested  medicines  should  be  administered  when  cough,  asthmatic 
breathing,  loss  of  voice,  headaches  and  pains  in  the  sides  and  the 
shoulders,  appear.  87 

Ghee  boiled  with  Bala  (Sida  cot dif olid),  VidarigandhS' (otherwise 
called  (^alaparni,  i.  e.,  Desmodium  Gangeticum),  Pippali  ( Piper  longum ) 
Madhuka  (liquorice),  and  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  constitute  a  snuff  that  is 
the  foremost  restorative  of  voice.  88 

Ghee  produced  from  milk,  boiled  with  Prapaundarika  (a  fragrant 
wood  brought  from  central  and  southern  India),  Madhuka  (liquorice), 
Pippali  ( Piper  longuui),  Vrihati  (, Solatium  Indicum),  and  Bala  ( Sida 
cordifolia),  forms  an  excellent  snuff  for  restoring  the  voice.  89 


*  The  group  of  drugs  known  as  ‘Chandanadi’  has  been  laid  down  in  the  chapter  on 
Fever.— T. 

+  The  constitution  of  the  patient  should  be  first  corected  by  the  administration  of 
(medicated)  oils  and  of  sweda  (fomentation  for  producing  perspiration).  He  should  then 
have  emetics,  mixed  with  oils  ;  and  then  purgatives,  mixed  with  oils.  He  should  not,  how¬ 
ever,  be  weakened. — T. 

I  ‘Gatrani  munchati’,  literally,  ‘casts  off  (his)  limbs’  ;  used  in  the  sense  of  ‘casts  off  his 
body,  or  dies’.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1247 


The  following  ghee,  taken  in  copious  measures  after  meals,  alle¬ 
viates  headache,  pains  in  the  sides  and  the  shoulders,  cough,  and 
asthmatic  breathing.  9° 

■  Ghee  boiled  with  the  ten  roots,  milk,  and  meat-juice,  (taken 
repeatedly  and  in  copious  measures,  after  meals),  promptly  checks 
all  these  ailments. 

Ghee  boiled  with  the  paste  of  Bala  {Sid a  cordifolid),  also  checks 
these  ailments  (if  taken  repeatedly  and  in  copious  measures,  after 
meals).  91 

Ghee  boiled  with  Rasna  ( Vanda  Roxburghii)  and  milk,  as  also 
ghee  boiled  with  Bala  {Sida  cordifolia),  and  milk,  taken,  after  or 
during  meals,  agreeably  to  the  measure  of  one’s  appetite,  checks 
those  ailments.  92 

Hear  now  of  those  kinds  of  linctus  and  those  oils  which  cure 
cough,  improve  the  .voice,  and  check  asthma  and  hiccup,  and  alleviate 
headache  and  pains  in  the  sides  and  the  shoulders  :  93 

Ghee  boiled  with  the  fruit  of  Kharjjura  (date),  Mridwika  (raisins), 
sugar,  and  honey,*  as  also  with  Pippali  (Piper  longuni),  cures  loss  of 
voice,  cough,  and  asthma.  94 

The  fresh  ghee  which  arises  from  milk  boiled  with  the  ten  roots, 
mixed  with  Pippali  {Piper  longuni)  and  honey,  cures  defects  of  the 
voice,  as  also  headache,  and  pains  in  the  sides  and  the  shoulders,  and 
cough,  asthma,  and  fever. 

The  (fresh)  ghee  that  arises  from  milk  boiled  with  the  five  kinds 
of  five  roots  possesses  the  same  virtues.-)-  95-96 

Ghee  boiled  with  the  decoction  of  the  five  kinds  of  five  roots,  and 
milk  of  four  times  that  measure,  conquers  the  seven  supervening 
symptoms  of  phthisis.):  97 

Kharjjura  (date),  Pippali  {Piper  langum ),  DrSksha  (raisins),  Pathya 


*  Some  texts  have  Madhuka  (liquorice),  and  Parushaka  (Grevoia  Asiatica)  for  Sarkara 
and  Kshandra  (sugar  and  honey). — T. 

f  There  are  five  groups  of  five  roots.  These  are  I.  Swalpa-panchamula,  2.  Vriliat- 
panchamula,  3.  Trina-panchamula,  &c. — T. 

t  ‘Saptakam  Valam’,  literally,  ‘the  seven  strong  ones’  ;  i.  e.,  the  seven  symptoms  already 
referred  to,  viz.,  pains  in  the  head,  the  sides,  and  the  shoulders  ;  cough,  asthma,  and  fever  ; 
and  loss  of  voice  ;  these,  though  supervening  symptoms  of  phthisis,  always  manifest  them¬ 
selves  with  virulence. — T. 

.158 


1248 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMH1TA. 


(ehebulic  myrobalans),  Sringi  (Rhus  succedanea ),  and  DurSlabha 
(Hedysarum  Alhagi) ; 

The  three  myrobalans,  Pippali  ( Piper  longum ),  Musta  ( Cyperus 
rotundus),  (^ringati  (Trapa  bispinosa),  treacle,  and  sugar  ; 

Virfi  (otherwise  called  Khirakakoli,  a  root  brought  from  Morung 
in  Nepal),  £ati  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet ),  Pushkara  (otherwise  called 
Pushk'aramula,  which  not  being  available,  Kushtha,  i.  e.,  Aplotaxis 
auriculata  is  used),  Surasa  ( Ocimum  sanctuni),  sugar,  and  treacle  ; 

Nagara  (dry  ginger),  Chitraka  (Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  Laja  (fried 
paddy),  Pippali  ( Piper  longum ),  Amalaka  ( Phyllanthus  Emblica),  and 
treacle  ;  98-99 

Each  of  these  four  groups  mentioned  in  each  half  couplet,  forms; 
a  linctus  which  the  patient  should  lick,  adding  to  it  honey  and  ghee. 

The  medicines  mentioned  above  cure  cough  and  asthma,  improve 
(or  restore)  the  voice,  and  alleviate  deep-seated  pains  in  the  sides,  mo 

White  sugarcandy,  Tug&kshiri  (bambu-manna),  Pippali  ( Piper 
longum),  Vahula  (otherwise  called  Ela,  He.,  cardamoms  of  the  larger 
variety),  and  Twach  (otherwise  called  Daruehini,  i.  e.,  the  bark  of 
Cinnamomum  Z eylanicurri),  each  of  twice  the  measure,  counting  back¬ 
wards  from  the  last,*  should  be  licked,  mixed  with  honey  andi 
ghee,  mi 

Or,  reducing  them  all  into  fine  pulv,  the  physician  should  cause 
it  to  be  eaten  by  one  afflicted  with  cough,  asthma,  fever,  a  paralysed 
tongue, f  disgust  for  food,  loss  of  digestive  fire,  and  deep-seated 
pains  in  the  sides,  m2 

This  medicine,,  in  both  forms,  should  be  administered  in  burning 
of-' hands  and  feet  and  other  limbs  of  the  body,  as  also  in  fever,  and. 
blood  coursing  upwards. 

Vasa  (Justicia  Adhatoda),  and  ghee,  boiled  with  the  decoction  of 
^atavari  (Asparagus  racemosus),  form  a  medicine  that  is  highly 
beneficial,  m3 


*  ‘Antyat  urddhatn  dwigunitam’  is,  literally,  ‘each  of  twice  the  measure,  counting 
backwards  from  the  last*.-  The  sense  is  this  :  of  Twach,  which  is  the  last  in  the  list,  take  a 
certain  measure.  ‘Vahula’  then  should  be  of  twice  the  measure  of  Twach  ;  Pippali  should 
be  of  twice  the  measure  of  Vahula  ;  and  so  on.  Th(is,  if  Twach  be  represented  by  1,  Vahula 
should  be  represented  by  2  ;  Pippali  by  4  ;  Tugakshiri  by  8,  and  Sitopala  by  16.— T. 

+  ‘Supta-jihva’  is,  literally, . ‘sleeping  tongue’,  i,  e.,  a  paralysed  or  benumbed  tongue  5 
a  tongue  that  has  lost  the' sense  of  taste,— T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA . 


I24£ 


GOKSHURADYA-GHRITAM. 

(^wadanshtrS  (otherwise  called  Gokshura,  i.  e.,  Tribulus terrestris)f 
DurSlabha  (Hedysarum  Alhagi ),  the  Parni’s  (that  is,  ^alaparni  or 
Hedysarum  Gangeticum,  Prisniparni  or  Doodia  lagopodioides,  Mudga- 
parni  or  Phaseolus  trilobus,  and  MSshaparni  or  Glycine  debilis ),  and 
Bala  {Si da  cordifolia)  : 

Of  each  of  these,  a  ‘pala’  should  be  taken.  A  ‘pala’  should  also 
be  taken  of  Parppataka  {Oldenlandia  hiftord. 

These  should  be  boiled  in  water  of  ten  times  their  measure. 

When  a  tenth  of  the  whole  remains,  it  should  be  strained  through 
a  piece  of  clean  doth.  Into  the  pure  liquid  thus  obtained,  the  well- 
grounded  paste,  of  the  measure  of  a  ‘karsha,’  should  be  thrown  of 
each  of  the  following  drugs  : 

£ati  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet ),  Pushkaramula  (a  fragrant  root  which 
is  not  available,  the  substitute  used  being  Aplotaxis  auriculata ), 
Pippali  ( Piper  longum ),  TrayamSna  (Ficus  heterophylla ),  Tfimalaki 
( Phyllanthus  Niruri),  Kiratatikta  ( Ophelia  Cherayta ),  seeds  of  Kutaja 
( Holarrhena  antidysenterica ),  and  £ariv5  (Echites  frutescens)  : 

The  compound  thus  obtained  should  be  boiled  with  a  ‘prastha’  of 
ghee  and  twice  that  quantity  of  milk.*  104-107 

This  ghee  cures  fever,  burning  of  the  skin,  vertigo,  cough,  pains 
in  the  shoulders  and  the  sides,  headache,  thirst,  vomiting,  and 
diarrhoea.  108 

JIVANTYADYA-GHRITA. 

Jivanti  (Ccelogyne  ovalis),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Draksha  (dried 
grapes),  seeds  of  Kutuja  ( Holarrhena  antidysenterica),  £ati  (: Curcuma 
Zerumbet),  Pushkaramula  (this  root  not  being  available,  Aplotaxis 
auriculata  is  used),  Vyaghri  (otherwise  called  Kantikari,  i.  e.,  Solanum 
Xanthocarpuni ),  Gokshuraka  {Tribulus  terrestris ),  Bala  (Sidacordi- 
folia),  Nilotpala  {Nymphcea  lotus),  T&mlaki  {Phyllanthus  Niruri ), 
TrSyamana  {Ficus  heterophylla ),  Duralabha  {Hedysarum  Alhagi ),  and 
Pippali  {Piper  longum) : 

Take  equal  measures  of  these  and  reduce  them  to  a  paste,  and 
the  physician  should  boil  the  paste  in  ghee.  109-no 


*  A  ‘Karsha’  is  equal  to  2  ‘tolas’. 

A  ‘Prastha’  is  equal  to  2  seers.  Being  a  liquid,  twice  the  measure  laid  down  should  be 
taken.— T. 


1250 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


This  ghee  is  regarded  as  the  foremost  of  all  ghees  (applicable  fa 
this  disease).  It  cures  the  eleven  symptoms  (already  mentioned) 
that  arise  of  this  prince  of  all  diseases  (viz.,,  phthisis),  which  (in 
reality)  is  a  collection  of  many  ailments.  111 

Bala  (Sida  cordifolia ),  Sthira  (otherwise  called  £&laparni,  i.  e., 
Hedysarum  Gangeticum ),  Prisniparni  (Doodia  lagopodioides ),  Vrihaii 
(Solatium  Indicum),  and  Nidigdhika  (otherwise  called  Kantakari,  i.  e., 
Solatium  Xanthocarpuni) ; 

Boil  these  in  water,  and  into  the  decoction  thus  obtained,  throw 
cow’s  milk,  and  dry  ginger.  112 

Boil  this  with  DrakshS  (dried  grapes),  Kharjjura  (date),  ghee,  and 
Pippali  (Piper  longum\ 

Taken  with  honey,  it  conquers  fever,  and  cough.  It  should  alsa 
be  administered  in  loss  of  voice.  II[3 

The  same  medicine  prepared  with  goat’s  milk  (instead  of  cow’s 
milk)  and  the  meat-juice  of  wild  animals,  may  be  administered  (in 
phthisis). 

For  purposes  of  soup,  Chanaka  (gram  or  chick-pea),  Mudga 
(Pkaseolus  Mungo),  and  Mukushta  (Phaseolus  lobatus),  are  laid  down. 

The  rules  of  treatment  laid  down  before  for  the  alleviation  of 
fever,  are  regarded  highly  beneficial  in  fever  and  burning  of  the  skin 
when  these  supervene  in  phthisis. 

If  a  person  afflicted  with  phthisis  constantly  evicts  through  his 
mouth  phlegmonous  matter  .in  copious  measure,  and  if  his  strength  is 
not  reduced,  then  he  should  be  made  to  vomit  out  the  phlegmono  us 
matter  within  his  system  by  administering  to  him  milk  boiled  with 
the  paste  of  ‘Phala’  (Randia  dumetorum ),  or  the  decoction  of  liquorice 
boiled  with  the  paste  of  the  same,  or  the  gruel  of  barley  mixed  with 
ghee  boiled  with  such  drugs  as  are  possessed  of  emetic  virtues.  113-11G 

After  he  has  been  made  to  vomit  (in  this  way),  he  should  eat,  at 
the  proper  time  of  eating,*  such  light  food  as  kindles  the  digestive  fire. 

Then  taking  the  flour  of  barley,  or  of  wheat,  or  such  wines  as 
‘Msdhwika,’  ‘Sidhu,’  ‘Arishta,’  ‘Sura,’  and  ‘Asava,’  and  the  flesh, 
roasted,  of  wild  animals,  such  a  person  should  conquer  his  phlegm.f  ”7 


*  ‘At  the  proper  time  of  eating,  i.  e,,  when  hungry. — T. 

t  ‘Madhwika’  and  the  rest  are  different  kinds  of  wine  ;  vide  Sutrasthana,  ante,  Lesson. 
XXV,  aphorisms  10-21. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


I2JI 

In  that  condition  of  the  system  in  which  the  phlegm  is  evicted 
(through  the  mouth)  in  copious  quantities,  the  wind  swallows  up  the 
phlegm.*  The  physician  possessed  of  learning  should  conquer  the 
eviction  of  phlegm  by  means  of  medicines  that  are  oily  and  hot.  118 
The  treatment  which  is  laid  down  in  eviction  of  phlegm  is  recom¬ 
mended  in  vomiting  also.  Verily,  such  food  and  drink  as  are 
agreeable,  light,  and  destructive  of  the  wind,  are  recommended  (in 
vomiting).  “9 

It  is  generally  seen  (in  phthisis)  that  in  consequence  of  the  digest¬ 
ive  fire  being  weakened,  the  patient  evacuates  stools  mixed  with 
mucus.  Tastelessness  of  the  mouth  is  also  induced  ;  and  no  relish  is 
felt  for  food.  12° 

Unto  him  (in  such  a  case)  such  medicines  should  be  administered 
as  are  capable  of  kindling  the  digestive  fire,  conquering  diarrhoea, 
restoring  taste  to  the  mouth,  and  curing  disrelish  for  food.  121 

Or,  he  should  drink  the  pulv  of  dry  ginger  and  the  seeds  of  Indra- 
yava  ( Holarrkena  antidysenterica )  dissolved  in  rice-water.f 

When  the  medicine  has  been  digested,  he  should  take  gruel  of 
barley,  boiled  with  Changeri  ( Oxalis  corniculata ),  whey,  and  the.  juice 
of  pomegranates.  122 

Or,  he  should  drink  the  pulv  of  Pfitha  ( Stephania  hernandifolia ), 
-Vilwa  (ASgle  marmelos),  Yamami  (Ptychotis  Ajowan),  dissolved  in 
whey  • 

Or,  DuralabhS  ( Hedysarum  Alhagi ),  £ringavera  (dry  ginger),  and 
Paths  ( Stephania  hernandifolia )  dissolved  in  wine.  I23 

Or,  he  should  drink  the  pulv  of  the  seeds  of  Jambu  (. Eugenia 
Jambolana ),  those  of  Amra  ( Mangifera  Indica ),  Vilwa  ( AEgle  marmelos ), 
Kapittha  ( Feronia  elephantuni),  and  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  dissolved 
in  ‘Suramanda’  (yeast  of  wine)  for  the  alleviation  of  diarrhoea.  I24 
These  three  combinations  beginning  with  Patha  ( Stephania 
hernandifolia),  should  be  converted  into  ‘Khada’j  ‘Khadas’  mixed 


*  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  when  the  phlegm  begins  to  be  evicted  constantly,  the  result 
is  that  the  wind  becomes  greatly  excited  and  swallows  up  (or  dries  up)  the  phlegm  wholly. 
The  total  absence  of  phlegm  is  a  source  of  danger  to  life.  Hence,  the  physician  possessed  of 
knowledge  should  prevent  the  eviction  of  phlegm  by  oily  and  hot  drugs.  He  should  seek  to 
prevent  the  phlegm  from  being  totally  exhausted. — T. 

t  ‘Rice-water’  means  water  in  which  sun-burnt  rice  has  been  washed. — T. 
t  ‘Khada’  implies  butter-milk  boiled  with  acid  vegetables  and  spices. — T. 


1252 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA 


with  Chukra  {Rumex  vesicarius)  and  Dhanya  (coriander  seeds),  with 
oils,  and  with  acids,  are  regarded  as  the  foremost  of  constipators.  125 
In  making  ‘Khadas,’  the  following  drugs  may  be  used  :  1.  sprouts 
of  Vetasa  (i.  e.,  Amla-vetasa  or  Chukra,  or  Rumex  vesicarius),  of 
Arjuna  {Pentaptera  Arjuna ),  and  of  Jambu  ( Eugenia  Jambolana ) ; 
2.  the  sprouts  of  Mrinali  (otherwise  called  Virana,  i.  e.,  Andropogott 
muricatus ),  and  of  Krishnagandha  (otherwise  called  Sobhanjana 
or  £igru,  i.  e.,  Moringa  pterygosperma ) ;  3.  the  sprouts  of  £riparni 
(otherwise  called  Gambhari,  i.  e.,  Gmelina  arborea),  and  Madayanti 
(Arabian  Jasmine) ;  4.  the  sprouts  of  Yuthika  (Jasminum  auricu- 
latuiii) ;  5.  the  sprouts  of  MStulunga  ( Citrus  medico) ;  6.  the  sprouts 
of  Dhataki  ( Woodfordia  floribundd) ;  and  7.  the  sprouts  of  Dadima 
( Punica  gy  ana  turn).*  126-127 

Three  other  ‘Khadas’  may  be  made  (for  one  afflicted  with  phthisis 
accompanied  by  diarrhoea),  using  the  (decoction  of  the)  sprouts  of 
Changeri  ( Oxalis  corniculata ),  of  Chukra  ( Rumex  vesicarius ),  and 
Dugdhika  ( Asclepias  rosea),  and  adding  thereto  the  cream  of  curds, 
ghee,  and  the  juice  of  pomegranates.  128 

The  diet  that  is  commendable  (for  such  a  patient)  is  red  £ali  rice. 
For  curry,  meat-juice  prepared  of  such  flesh  as  is  easily  digest¬ 
ible,  mixed  with  such  medicines  as  have  constipating  virtues,  is 
beneficial.  *29 

For  drink,  water  boiled  with  the  five  roots  beginning  with  (that 
of)  Sthira  {Hedysarum  Gangeticum),  is  beneficial ;  as  also  whey,  or 
wine  mixed  with  the  expressed  juice  of  Chukrika  {Rumex  vesicarius ), 
or  the  expressed  juice  of  pomegranates. f  130 

Of  patients  afflicted  with  phthisis  accompanied  by  diarrhoea, 
the  medicines  that  have  constipating  virtues  and  that  kindle  the 
digestive  fire,  have  thus  been  spoken  of. 

Hear  now  of  those  medicines  that-  cure  the  tastelessness  of  the 
mouth  and  that  cause  relish  for  food.  131 

Twice  a  day  (i.  e.,  morning  and  evening),  one  should,  for  clearing 


*  The  decoctions  of  these  seven  should  be  taken  and  boiled  with  any  of  the  three  com¬ 
binations  already  mentioned,  beginning  with  Patha.  These  ‘Khadas’  are  regarded  as  possess¬ 
ing  constipatory  virtues.  Hence,  they  act  beneficially  in  diarrhoea _ T. 

t  Four  drinks  are  here  laid  down,  viz.,  I.  the  decoction  of  the  five  roots,  2.  Whey, 
3.  Wine  mixed  w  h  Chukrika,  and  4.  the  expressed  juice  of  Dadima. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1253 

one’s  mouth,  chew  tooth-sticks  (made  of  proper  vegetables  or  plants). 
One  should,  after  the  same  manner  m  e.,  morning  and  evening)  wash 
one’s  mouth  with  water.  One  should,  similarly,  hold  in  one’s  mouth 
gargles  (made  of  proper  drugs).  r3 2 

One  should  drink  the  smoke  (of  proper  drugs).  One  should  also 
eat  (chew)  such  ‘pachanas,’  properly  pulverised,  as  are  capable  of 
kindling  the  digestive  fire.  One  should  also  take  such  medicines, 
and  food  and  drink,  as  are  beneficial  and  of  agreeable  taste.*  *33 

The  decoction  of  Twach  (bark  of  Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum ), 
Musta  ( Cyperus  rotundus),  Ela  ( Elettaria  cardamomum),  and  Dhanya 
( Coriandrum  sativum ) ; 

That  of  Musta  ( Cyperus  rotundus'),  Amalaka  ( Phyllanthus  Emblica )„ 
and  Twach  (bark  of  Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum) ; 

That  of  Darbi  (. Berberis  Asiatica),  Twach  (bark  of  Cinnamomum 
Zeylanicum),  and  Yamlani  ( Ptychotis  Ajowan) ; 

That  of  Pippali  ( Piper  longum )  and  Tejavati  (otherwise  called 
Chavya  or  Piper  Chaba)  ;  and 

That  of  Yamani  (. Ptychotis  Ajowan),  and  Tintiri  [Tamarindus 
Indica) ; 

These  five,  each  laid  down  in  a  foot  of  the  above  verses,  constitute 
excellent  washes  of  the  mouth.  They  are  alsQ  correctives  of  the 
moCith,  and  they  bring  back  relish  for  food.  *34- 135 

Or,  one  may  keep  in  one’s  mouth,  boluses  made  of  the  paste  of 
each  of  these  five  groups  of  drugs,  or  grinding  them  into  pulv,  one 
may  rub  the  pulv  on  one’s  tongue  and  thereby  correct  one’s  mouth. 

Or,  reducing  each  of  these  five  groups  into  paste  and  dissolving 
the  paste  in  water,  gargles  may  be  made  which  the  patient  should 
keep  in  his  mouth.  l36 

There  are  other  gargles  which  are  beneficial  in  such  cases  and 
which  should,  therefore,  be  held  in  the  mouth.  They  are  SurS, 
Madhwika,  Sidhu,  oil,  honey,  ghee  milk,  and  the  expressed  juioe  of 
the  sugarcane.  r37 


*  ‘Pachanas’  are  drugs  which  assist  in  digesting  undigested  food  but  do  not  generally 
kindle  the  appetite.  Some  medicines  have  both  these  properties  ;  i.  e.,  they  are  appetisers 
as  well  as  digestives.  The  ‘Pachanas’  recommended  in  this  verse  are  of  the  latter  kind. 
They  are  ‘Dipana-pachanas’. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


*254 


YAMANI  SHADAVA. 

Yam&ni  (. Ptychotis  Ajowan),  Tintiri  ( Tamarindus  Indica ),  Nagara 
(dry  ginger),  Amlavetasa  ( Rumex  vesicarius),  D&dima  (pomegranates), 
and  sour  Vadara  (Lizyphus  Jujuboi)  :  take  a  ‘karshika’  (2  toias)  of  each 
of  these. 

Dhanya  (coriander  seeds),  ‘Sauvarchala’  (salt  of  a  particular 
variety),  Ajaji  (otherwise  called  Krishnajiraka,  i.  e.,  Nigella  sativa), 
and  Var&nga  (otherwise  called  Twach  or  Daruchini,  i.  e.,  the  bark  of 
Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum) :  take  half  a  ‘karsha’  (1  tola)  of  each 
of  these. 

Of  Pippali  ( Piper  longum )  take  a  hundred  ;  of  Maricha  (black 
pepper)  take  two  hundred. 

Of  sugar  take  four  ‘palas’  (half  a  seer). 

Pound  all  these  together.  The  pulv  so  made  is  a  corrective  of  the 
tongue.  It  is  agreeable  in  taste,  and  gives  relish  to  food.  i38-r4o 

This  pulv  cures  pains  in  the  chest,  the  spleen,  and  the  sides. 

It  cures  epistasis  or  suppression  of  urine,  and  all  varieties  of 
constipation. 

It  alleviates  cough  and  asthma.  It  is  also  an  inspissant. 

It  also  cures  ‘Grahani’  disease  (lienteric  diarrhoea)  and  piles.  >4i 

Even  these  are  the  ingredients  of ‘Yamani-shadava.* 

Taligapatra  (leaves  of  Pinus  Webbidna ),  Maricha  (black  pepper), 
Nagara  (dry  ginger),  Pippali  ( Piper  longum ),  and  £ubha  (otherwise 
called  Vangsalochana,  i.  e.,  bambu  manna),  the  measure  of  each  suc- 
ceding  drug  being  greater  by  one  part  than  that  of  the  immediately 
preceding  one  ;f 

Also  Twach  (bark  of  Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum ),  and  Ela  (Elet- 
taria  Cardamomum ),  taken  in  measures  half  of  that  of  Taligapatra 
{Pinus  Webbiana ) ; 

To  this  should  be  added  sugarcandy  eight  times  of  the  measure 
of  Pippali  {Piper  longuin). 

Reduce  all  these  to  pulv.  This  pulv  is  the  foremost  of  appetisers, 
and  conquers  cough  and  asthma  and  disgust  for  food. 


*  ‘Shadava’  literally,  ‘group  of  six’.  Here  six  ingredients  are  mentioned,  beginning 
with  Yamani.  Hence  the  medicine  is  called  ‘Yamani-shadava’.— T. 

t  /.  e.,  if  the  measure  of  Taligapatra  be  1,  that  of  Maricha  should  be  2,  that  of  Nagara 
3i  and  that  of  (Jubha,  4.— T. 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SA  MHITA, 


1235: 


It  conquers  also  all  ailments  of  the  chest,  chlorosis,  faults  of  the 
'‘Grahani,’  dropsical  swellings,  enlargement  of  the  spleen,  and  fever. 

It  cures  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  and  deep-seated  pains  (in  the  abdo¬ 
men).  It  also  causes  the  wind  'that  has  gone  upwards  to  move  in 
normal  directions. 

Cooking  the  pulv  with  sugarcandy,  boluses  should  be  made.  Such, 
boluses,  in  consequence  of  the  contact  with  fire,  are  regarded  lighter 
than  the  pulv.  142-145 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  the  pulv  called  Taligadya.  Unto' 
a  patient  whose  flesh  has  been  dried  up  and  who  has  lost  weight,  the 
physician  who  is  conversant  with  the  ordinances  (about  treatment),, 
should  administer  in  various  forms  the  flesh  of  such  birds  as  live 
upon  flesh.  Such  flesh  promotes  nutrition  and  increases  corpulency.  H6 

To  one  afflicted  with  phthisis,  flesh  of  the  peacock  should  be 
given,  or  flesh  of  the  vulture,  the  owl,  or  the  blue  jay,  properly 
dressed,  telling  the  patient  that  the  flesh  is  that  of  the  peacock.#  T47 

The  flesh  of  the  crow  should  be  given,  telling  the  patient  that  it 
is  that  of  the  francoline  partridge. 

The  flesh  of  snakes  also  should  be  given,  telling  the  patient  that 
it  is  that  of  the  eel. 

Fried  earth-worms  may  be  given,  telling  the  patient  that  they  are 
entrails  of  fishes.  M8 

The  flesh  of  jackals  of  the  variety  called  ‘LopSka,’  of  fat  Nakulas 
(mungoose),  of  cats,  and  of  young  jackals,  well-cooked,  should  be 
given,  telling  the  patient  that  it  is  the  flesh  of  the  hare  that  is  placed 
before  him.f  *49 

For  increasing  the  flesh  of  the  patient,  the  flesh  of  the  lion,  of  the 
bear,  of  the  hyena,  of  the  tiger,  and  other  carnivorous  animals,  should 
be  given,  telling  the  patient  that  it  is  the  flesh  of  the  deer.  *5° 

For ’increasing  the  patient’s  flesh  the  physician  should  also  give 
the  flesh  of  the  elephant,  the  rhinoceros,  and  the  horse,  cooking  it 
with  spices,  and  telling  the  patient  that  it  is  the  flesh  of  the  buffalo.  151 


*  ‘Gridhra’  and  not  ‘Godha’  is  the  true  reading.  The  fact  is,  the  flesh  of  the  vulture 
may  be  repulsive.  Hence,  the  physician,  while  giving  it,  should  say  that  it  is  the  flesh  of 
the  peacock. — T. 

f  ‘Lopaka’  is  a  variety  of  jackals,  small  in  size.  ‘Sthula-Nakula’ — fat  Nakula^-may 
mean  also  the  animal  called  ‘Bhama’  in  Bengal. — T. 

159 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


125 6 

The  flesh  of  those  animals  which  live  On  flesh,  is  regarded  as  the 
foremost  of  flesh-increasing  diet. 

The  flesh  of  deer  and  of  birds  is  especially  beneficial  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  its  being  keen,  hot,,  and  light.  152 

Those  kinds  of  meat  that  are  disagreeable  in  consequence  of  the 
patient  being  unaccustomed  to  them,  should  be  given  under  such 
names  as  may  enable  him  to  take  them  with  ease.  *53 

For  if  the  patient  comes  to  know  the  truth,  he  will  not  take  them 
on  account  of  their  repulsiveness;  or,  if  he  takes  them,  he  is  sure 
to  throw  them  out.  Mence  the  flesh  of  these  animals  should  be 
given,  after  cooking  them  properly,  telling  the  patient  that  they 
are  flesh  of  some  other  animal  which  he  will  not  regard  as  an 
abomination.  !S4 

The  flesh  of  the  peacock,  or  the  francoline  partridge,  the  hen,  the 
goose,  the  boar,  the  camel,  the  ass,  the  cow,  or  the  buffalo,  is  the 
foremost  of  all  varieties  of  flesh  that  add  flesh  to  a  wasted  patient.  *55 
In  the  lesson  on  Food  and  Drink  (vide  Lesson  XXVII,  Sutra- 
sthlna,  ante,  p.  340),  eight  sources  have  been  indicated  of  meat  (that 
is  edible).  The  physician  possessed  of  learning  should,  after  due 
consideration,  give  unto  a  person  afflicted  with  phthisis  the  flesh  that 
is  proper  for  him.  156 

Of  the  eight  kinds,  those  called  ‘Prasaha,’  ‘Bhugaya,’  ‘Anupa,’ 
‘BSrija,’  and  ‘Bfiricharin,’  should  be  given  for  food,  in  proper  measure, 
to  a  phthisical  patient  in  whom  the  wind  predominates.  157 

As  regards  those  animals  and  birds  that  are  called  ‘Pratuda,’ 
and  ‘Vishkira,’  and  ‘Dhanwaja,’  their  flesh  should  be  given  unto 
such  phthisical  patients  in  whose  constitutions  phlegm  and  bile 
predominate.*  *58 


*  ‘Prasahas’  are  animals  which  seize  their  food  suddenly  and  forcibly,  as  lions,  tigers,  &c. 
‘Bhmjayas’  are  those  that  live  in  holes. 

‘Anupas’  are  those  that  live  in  marshy  regions. 

‘Barijas’  are  those  that  live  in  water. 

‘Baricharas’  are  those  that  live  and  move  on  the  surface  of  water. 

•Pratudas’  are  those  that  peck  at  their  food. 

•Vishkiras’  are  those  animals  or  birds  which  scatter  dunghills,  &c.,'with  their  claws, 
fer  finding  their  food. 

‘Dhanwajas’  include  all  amphibious  animals. — T. 


CHARAKA-SA  mhita. 


12-57- 


Buly  cooked,  made  agreeable  and  soft,  and  with  flavour  and  relish 
added  by  proper  means,  these  diverse  kinds  of  flesh  should  be  given 
to  the  patient  to  eat.  J59 

Of  a  person  that  takes  only  flesh  for  his  food,  and  ‘Mldhwika’ 
wine  for  drink,  that  has  his  passions  under  control,  and  that  has  a 
mind  which  is  pleased  with  the  possession  of  few  things,  the  phthisis 
does  not  remain  long  in  his  body.  160 

Phthisis  cannot  long  retain  hold  of  a  person  who  is  in  the  habit 
of  drinking  the  barm  of  ‘Varuni’  wine,  who  is  accustomed  to  the 
outward  cleansing  of  his  body,  and  who  never  suppresses  the  urgings 
of  nature.  161 

After  taking  the  kinds  of  flesh  (mentioned  above),  the  patient 
should  take  these  for  drink,  viz.,  the  liquors  named  ‘Prasanna,’ 
‘Varuni,’  ‘£idhu,’  ‘Arishta,’  ‘Asava,’  and  ‘Madhu,’  in  measures  that  are 
assimilable.*  162 

In  consequence  of  their  keenness,  heating  virtues,  purity,  and 
subtility,  wines,  acting  upon  the  mouths  of  ducts,  speedily  open  them. 
In  consequence  of  the  mouths  of  the  ducts  being  (thus  opened,  the 
seven  ‘dhatus’  (juice,  blood,  flesh,  bones,  marrow,  semen,  and  ojas), 
grow.  In  consequence,  again,  of  the  growth  of  the  ‘dhatus,’  phthisis 
becomes  soon  alleviated.  i63 

With  the  decoction  of  the  flesh  of  such  animals  as  live  upon  flesh, 
ghee  should  be  boiled.  Such  ghee  acts  as  an  alleviative  of  phthisis. 

Ghee  boiled  with  milk  ten  times  its  own  measure,  and  mixed  with 
honey,  alleviates  phthisis. 

Ghee  boiled  with  the  paste  of  such  drugs  as  are  included  in  the 
group  called  ‘Madhuraka,’  as  also  with  the  decoction  of  the  ten  roots> 
and  mixed  with  milk  and  meat-juice,  is  the  feremost  of  all  alleviatives 
of  phthisis.  164-165 

Ghee ,  cooked  with  Pippali  ( Piper  longum),  Pippalimula  (roots  of 
Piper  longum ),  Chavya  ( Chavica  officinarmri),  Chitraka  (. Plumbago 
Zeylanica ),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  the  ashes  of  barley  spikes,  and  milk, 
Is  regarded  as  a  corrective  of  (obstructed)  ducts.  166 

Ghee  cooked  with  Rasna  ( Vanda  Roxburghii),  Bala  (Rida  cordi- 
folia),  Gokshuraka  ( Tribulus  terrestris ),  SthirS  ( Hedysarum  Gange- 


‘Prasanna,’  &c.,  are  different  kinds  of  wir 


s. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1258 

ticuwi),  and  Varshabhu  (otherwise  called  PunarnavS,  i.  e.,  Boerkavia 
diffusa),  and  the  paste  of  Jivanti  ( Ccelogyne  ovalis )  and  Pippali  {Piper 
longum ),  and  milk,  conquers  phthisis.  167 

Or,  the  patient  should  drink,  in  proper  measure,  these  ghees  thus- 
cooked  with  the  kinds  of  flesh  mentioned  above,  mixing  them  with 
the  gruel  of  barley,  or  lick  them,  mixing  them  with  honey,  or  eat 
them  with  his  meals.*  168 

Even  thus  is  laid  down  the  course  of  food  and  drink  in  respect 
of  a  person  who  is  wasting  away  under  an  attack  of  phthisis. 

The  course  of  treatment  that  should  be  adopted  in  respect  of 
external  applications,  are  now  being  laid  down.  i6.9 

The  patient  should,  after  his  body  has  been  well-rubbed  with  oil, 
be  bathed  in  a  tub  filled  with  ghee}  milk,  and  water,  for  opening  the 
obstructed  mouths  of  the  ducts,  as  also  for  imparting  to  him  strength 
and  growth.-)-  *1° 

When  the  patient  rises  from  the  tub,  he  should  be  made  to  sit  at 
his  ease,  and  his  body  should  be  rubbed  with  oils  and  ghees  of  differ¬ 
ent  kinds  mixed  together.  The  person  who  rubs  him  should  do  so 
with  gentle  and  wet  hands. 

He  should  also  b.e  gently  rubbed  with  the  following  pulv.$  171 

Jivanti  {Ccelogyne  ovalis ),  (^ataviryya  {Panicum  dactylon ),  Vikasa 
(otherwise  called  Manjishtha,  i.  e.,  Rubia  cordifolia ),  Punarnava  ( Boer - 
havia  diffusa),  AgwagandhS  {Physalis  fiexuosa ),  Apam&rga  {Achyr 
ranthes  aspera ),  Tarkari  {AEschynomene  sesban),%  Madhuka  (liquorice), 
Bala  ( Sida  cordifolia),  172 

Vidari  {Batatus paniculatuPj,  mustard  seeds,  Kushtha  {Aplotaxis 
auriculata ),  rice-grains,  Atasiphala  (linseeds),  MSsha  (seeds  of  Phaseo- 
lus  Roxburghii),  sesame  seeds,  and  the  fruit  of  Vilwa  {AEgle  Marmelos ) ; 

These  should  be  pounded  together.  *73 


•*  The  patient  is  directed  to  take  the  ghees  mentioned,  in  three  different  ways  :  I.  mixing 
them  with  gruel  of  barley  ;  2.  mixing  them  with  honey  ;  and  3.  along  with  his  meals. — T. 

-|-  ‘Avagahayet’  implies  that  the  patient’s  body  should  be  wholly  immersed  in  the 
tub.— T. 

*  ‘MridpiySt’  is  rubbing.  ‘Utsadana’  implies  cleaning.  What  is  said  here  is  that 
mixed  oils  and  ghees  should  be  used  for  rubbing  the  patient’s  person.  The  pulv  mentioned 
in  the  next  verse  should  be  rubbed  on  the  body  for  cleansing  it  of  all  filthy — T. 

§  ‘Tarkari’  is  otherwise  called  ‘Jayanti.’  In  Bengal,  it  is  known  by  the  name  of 
‘Dhanche.’ — T. 


CHAR  A ICA-SAMHITA . 


1259 

Add  flour  of  barley,  of  twice  the  measure  (of  the  powder  thus 
obtained). 

Add  curds  mixed  with  honey. 

The  compound  thus  formed  should  be  used  as  an  ‘uts&dana.’  It 
is  capable  of  bringing  about  growth,  complexion,  and  strength.*  174 
The  patient  may  also  be  rubbed  with  the  paste  of  white  mustard 
seeds,  or  with  emollients  made  of  the  paste  of  sweet-scented  drugs. 

He  should  then  be  bathed  in  water  boiled  with  the  drugs  belong¬ 
ing  to  the  ‘Jivanya’  group  and  made  agreeable  to  the  body  according 
to  the  requirements  of  the  season. j-  i75 

After  the  bath  he  should  be  smeared  with  fragrant  unguents  and 
decked  with  floral  vvreaths  and  good  robes  and  ornaments.  He 
should  then  touch  the  (usual)  auspicious  articles  (such  as  kine,  gems, 
&c,),  and  worship  the  deites  along  with  the  physician  himself  and 
Brahmanas.  176 

1  He  should  then  eat  and  drink  such  food  and  drink  as  are  endued 
with  agreeable  colour,  taste,  and  touch,  and  as  are  possessed  of  deli¬ 
cious  scent,  as  are  agreeable,  mixed  with  things  that  are  agreeable, 
as  are  beneficial,  and  as  are  productive  of  happiness.  *77 

The  rice  which  is  beneficial  for '  persons  afflicted  with  phthisis 
should  be  a  year  old  ;  well  cooked  ;  light  of  digestion  yet  not  devoid 
of  strength-giving  substance  ;  possessed  of  agreeable  taste  and  good 
scent ;  and  capable  of  imparting  cheerfulness.];  *78  ...  . 

For  the  increase  of  strength  and  flesh,  that  diet  should  be  given 
to  a  person  afflicted  with  phthisis  which  has  been  laid  down  in  the 
lesson  on  the  treatment  of  persons  weakened  by  wounds  and  sores.  *79> 
Verily,  this  prince  of  diseases  is  allayed  by  oils  and  ghees  and 
powders  for  rubbing  thd  body  with,  by  bathing,  dipping,  and  washing 
the  body  (in  or  with  water  prepared  according  to  directions),  by 
enemata,  by  milk  and  ghee  (prepared  according  to  the  instructions 
laid  down),  by  meat  and  meat-juice  mixed  with  rice,  by  agreeable 
wines,  by  enjoyment  of  agreeable  perfumes,  by  baths  in  water  agree- 


*  ‘Utsadanas’  are  powders  used  for  rubbing  the  body  with. — T. 

+  Drugs  that  promote  longevity  are  called  ‘Jivaniya.’ 

If  the  season  is  winter,  the  water  should  be  used  while  lukewarm  ;  if  it  is  summer,  it 
should  be  used  when  cooled.— T. 

J  This  verse  is  incorrectly  and  differently  read  in  many  of  the  printed  texts.— T. 


1260 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


able  to  the  season,  by  robes  untorn  and  agreeable,  by  sight  of  friendly 
and  beautiful  women,  by  songs  and  instrumental  music  delightful 
to  the  ear,  by  giving  everything  that  contributes  to  make  the  patient 
cheerful,  by  consolatory  and  soothing  speeches,  by  constant  service 
of  superiors  and  seniors,  by  practice  of  Brahmacharyya,  by  practice 
of  gifts  and  penances,  by  worship  of  the  deites,  by  truthfulness  of 
speech,  by  good  conduct,  by  auspicious  rites  and  touch  of  auspicious 
articles,  by  abstention  from  injuring  others,  and  by  adoring  physi¬ 
cians  and  Brahmanas.i8°-l84 

Desirous  of  cure,  a  person  afflicted  with  phthisis  should  also 
perform  that  sacrifice  and  those  religious  rites  which  are  laid  down 
in  the  Vedas.  By  performance  of  these,  this,  disease  was  in  former 
times  conquered.*  i85 

( Here  are  two  verses  containing  a  summary ). 

In  this  lesson  on  the  treatment  of  ‘Raja-Yakshma’  (phthisis),  the 
first  appearance  of  the  disease,  its  causes,  its  premonitory  indications, 
the  group  of  (developed)  symtoms  it  manifests,  the  medicines  in  brief 
as  also  in  detail,  the  designations  by  which  it  is  known,  the  subsidiary 
causes,  incurability,  curability,  and  difficulty  of  cure, — these  have  all 
been  compiled  and  expounded. 

Thus  ends  Lesson  Eight,  called  Treatment  of  ‘Raja-Yakshma,’ 
in  the  Division  called  Chikitsita,  of  the  treatise  of  Agniveja  as  revised 
by  Charaka, 


This  refers  to  the  case  of  Chandramas,  the  diety  of  the  moon. — T. 


LESSON  IX. 

THE  TREATMENT  OF  INSANITY.* 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  on  Insanity. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri. 

Punarvasu,  who  was  the  abode  of  intelligence,  memory,  know¬ 
ledge,  and  penances,  and  who  was  the  refuge  of  all  living  creatures, 
declared  unto  Agnivega,  asked  (by  him)  at  the  proper  time,  the 
causes,  symptoms,  and  medicines  of  Insanity.  1 

Food  that  consists  of  hostile  or  inharmonious  ingredients,  or 
Ingredients  that  are  vitiated,  or  that  are  impure  (tainted),  attacks  on 
the  deities,  Brahmanas,  and  seniors,  mental  shocks  caused  by  fear 
and  joy,  and  abnormal  efforts,  are  the  causes  of  Insanity.  2 

Of  a  person  of  weak  mind,  the  faults  (viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm), 
vitiated  by  these  (causes),  vitiating  the  heart  which  is  the  abode  of 
Intelligence,  and  overwhelming  the  ducts  that  convey  impressions 
(from  the  senses)  to  the  mind,  quickly  stupefy  the  mind.f  3 

A  clouded  or  confused  understanding,  restlessness  of  mind, 
anxious  glances,  restlessness  of  manner,  indistinct  articulation,  and 
emptiness  of  the  chest,  are  the  general  symptoms  of  Insanity.  4 

Of  bedimmed  understanding,  the  person  that  is  insane  feels  neither 
happiness  nor  misery.  He  becomes  oblivious  of  conduct  and  duty. 
Peace  of  mind  is  not  his. 

Destitute  of  memory  and  understanding  and  consciousness,  the 
mind  of  the  person  afflicted  with  Insanity  wanders  hither  and 
thither4  5 

Disorder  of  the  understanding,  the  mind,  and  the  memory,  is 
called  Insanity.  Insanity  is  either  accidental  or  constitutional. 

The  causes  which  produce  Insanity  are  of  five  kinds.  I  shall  now 
expound  the  symptoms  and  the  treatment  of  this  disease.  6 


*  In  many  of  the  Bengal  texts,  this  Lesson  occurs  as  the  fourteenth.  In  Gangadhara’s 
text,  it  is  numbered  as  the  ninth. — T. 

■}•  The  words  ‘sattwa’,  ‘hridaya’,  and  ‘chetas’  probably  imply  the  same  thing,  viz.,  the 
mind.  ‘Manovahagratangsi’  mean  the  ducts  or  nerves  which  convey  impressions  from  the 
senses  to  the  mind.— T. 

J  The  correct  reading  is  ‘bhramatyasya’  and  not  ‘bhrahmatyayam.’  Gangadhara 
adheres  to  the  incorrect  reading  and  takes  ‘bhramati’  as  standing  for  the  causal  form. — T. 


1262 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Dry,  scanty,  and  cold  food,  purging  and  vomiting,  loss  of  the 
constituent  elements  (of  the  body),  and  fasts,  greatly  increase  the 
wind.  The  increased  wind  vitiates  the  heart  already  affected  by . 
anxious  thoughts,  and  then  destroys  the  understanding  and  the 
memory  speedily.  7 

Laughter  and  smile  and  dancing  and  singing  and  speech  on 
inappropriate  occasions,  and  motions  and  gestures,  and  crying, 
and  roughness  and  leanness  of  the  body  and  reddishness  of  the 
complexion,  are  the  symptoms  of  Insanity  born  of  (excited)  wind. 
This  form  of  Insanity  gains  force  when  digestion  has  taken  place  of 
food  taken  by  the  patient.  8 

The  force  of  accumulated  bile,  aggravated  by  food  that  causes 
indigestion,  that  is  pungent,  or  sour,  or  productive  of  a  burning  sen¬ 
sation,  or  hot,  occupies  the  heart  and  speedily  causes  a  fierce  form 
of  Insanity  in  a  person  who  has  no  control  over  his  mind.  9 

Impatience,  fury,  nudity  (t.  e.,  abandonment  of  cloth),  wrathful 
abuse  of  others,  running  away,  heat  of  body,  rage,  desire  for  cool 
food  and  drink,  and  a  yellow  complexion, — these  are  the  symptoms 
of  Insanity  caused  by  (excited)  bile. 

Phlegm  accompanied  by  bile,  increasing  in  the  chest  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  gorging  the  stomach  with  rich  food  (such  as  milk  and 
curds,  &c.)  and  of  absence  of  proper  exercise,  begets  this  disease 
by  first  afflicting  the  understanding  and  the  memory,  and  stupefying 
the  mind.  11 

Aversion  to  loquacity,  disgust  for  food,  fondness  for  women  and 
priyacy,  excessive  sleep,  vomiting,  discharge  of  salivary  secretions, 
accession  of  strength  after  meals,  and  whiteness  of  nails  and  the  rest, 
manifest  themselves  in  Insanity  born  of  (excited)  phlegm.*  12 

That  Insanity  which  is  born  of  all  the  three  faults  (excited 
together)  becomes  terrible. 

In  it  the  presence  of  may  be  detected  of  all  the  causes  (laid  down 
above)  combined  together. 

It  puts  forth  also  the  symptoms  combined  together  of  the  sepa¬ 
rate  varieties. 


.  *  ‘Nails  and  the  rest’ imply  eyes,  urine,  faeces,  and  the  whole  body,  as  explained  by 

the  commentators. — T, 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


1263 

Such  Insanity,  in  which  the  ordinances  about  treatment  become 
hostile  to  one  another,  should  never  be  taken  up  for  treatment.*  13 
The  humiliation  (by  words  or  acts)  of  the  deities,  the  Rishis,  the 
Gandharvas,  the  Pigachas,  the  Yakshas,  the  Rakshas,  and  the  Pitris, 
is  the  cause  of  Insanity  that  is  Accidental. 

Breaches  also,  arising  from  hypocracy  and  falsehood,  of  religious 
observances  and  vows,  as  also  the  (evil)  acts  of  a  former  life,  are 
eauses  of  this  form  of  the  disease.  *4 

He  who  becomes  endued  with  speech,  prowess,  energy,  exertion, 
knowledge  of  Self,  conversance  with  the  Scriptures  and  the  arts,  and 
strength,  that  are  all  superhuman,  and  he  whose  outbreaks  of  Insanity 
are  uncertain  and  irregular,  is  said  to  be  afflicted  with  Insanity  that 
is  born  of  the  action  of  superhuman  beings.  *5 

Without  vitiating  the  body  of  the  person,  the  deities  and  the 
others,  in  consequence  of  the  energy  of  their  own  attributes,  quickly 
and  invisibly  enter  it,  like  the  image  or  the  rays  of  the  sun  entering 
a  mirror  or  the  gem  called  Suryyak&nta/j"  16 

As  regards  this  form  of  Insanity,  the  time  of  the  attack  by  the 
deities  and  the  others,  as  also  the  premonitory  symptoms,  have  been 
laid  down  in  the  Division  called  Nidana. 

Hear  now,  separately,  what  the  symptoms  are  of  this  form  of 
Insanity,  what  the  times  are  of  its  outbreak,  and  who  the  persons 
are' that  are  liable  to  it,j  T7 
These  are  as  follow  : — 

An  amiable  appearance,  a  gravity  of  deportment,  incapability  of 
being  humiliated  or  defeated  by  any  one,  absence  of  wrath,  sleepless¬ 
ness,  absence  of  desire  for  food  and  drink,  scantiness  of  perspiration, 
urine,  stools,  and  speech,  fragrance  of  body,  and  a  face  like  a  full- 


*  Insanity  born  of  the  excitement  of  all  the  three  faults  is  a  very  severe  form  of  the 
disease.  It  should  not  be  taken  up  for  treatment  simply  because  in  the  attempt  to  conquer 
one  fault,  another  or  the  two  others  may  be  more  provoked.— T. 

-]-  The  image  of  an  object  placed  before  a  mirror  quickly  and  invisibly  enters  it.  So  also 
the  light  of  the  sun  quickly  and  invisibly  enters  the  gem  called  Suryyakanta.  The  deities 
and  the  other  superhuman  beings  enter  the  human  body  in  the  same  way.  Suryyakanta 
means  a  crystal  or  a  lens.  It  also  means  a  gem  of  fabulous  properties. — T. 

+  ‘Suradyaih’,  or,  as  some  texts  read,  ‘Suradibhih’,  is  connected  with  ‘SyStakSlah’  ot 
‘3ghatakalah\ — T. 

160 


1264 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SAM  HIT  A. 


blown  lotus, — these  are  the  indications  of  Insanity  caused  by  the 
action  of  the  deities.  18 

Food  and  movements  and  deportment  conformable  to  the  curses, 
incantations,  and  the  will-force  of  superiors,  seniors  in  age,  persons 
crowned  with  success  of  penances,  and  Rishiss,  should  be  regarded 
as  indications  of  Insanity  caused  by  the  action  of  superiors  and 
the  rest,*  19 

One  who  is  of  cheerless  sight,  who  does  not  look  at  others,  who  is 
sleepy,  whose  articulation  is  indistinct,,  who  has  no  desire  for  food  and 
drink,  who  feels  a  disgust  for  food  and  drink,  and  whose  digestion 
has  been  destroyed,  should  be  known  as  afflicted  with  Insanity 
caused  by  the  action  of  Pitris.  20 

One  who  is  fierce,  full  of  courage,  keen,  grave,  incapable  of  defeat 
or  humiliation,  and  fond  of  musical  instruments  and  dancing  and 
singing  and  eating  and  drinking  and  bathing  and  garlands,  and  the 
scent  of  incense,  and  who  takes  pleasure  in  red  garments  and 
sacrificial  acts  and  humorous  speech,  and  agreeable  perfumes, 
should  be  known  as  afflicted  with  Insanity  caused  by  the  action  of 
Gandharvas.  21 

One  who  frequently  sleeps  and  cries  and  laughs,  who  takes 
pleasure  in  dancing  and  singing  and  instrumental  music  and  reading 
and  conversation,  and  food  and  drink  and  bathing  and  garlands  and 
the  scent  of  incense,  whose  eyes  are  red,  who  speaks  ill  of  the  twice- 
born  ones  and  physicians,  and  who  gives  out  secrets,  should  be 
regarded  as  afflicted  with  Insanity  caused  by  the  action  ofYakshas.  22 

One  who  is  sleepless,  who  has  repugnance  for  food  and  drinkr 
who  goes  without  sustenance,  who  is  endued  with  immeasurable 


*  The  original  is  extremely  terse.  I  have  tried  to  give  as  literal  a  version  as  possible. 
The  sense  seems  to  be  this  :  there  are  certain  forms  of  Insanity  in  which  the  food,  move¬ 
ments,  and  deportment  of  the  person  conform  to  the  curses  denounced,  or  the  incantations 
performed,  or  the  will-force  directed  by  superiors,  seniors,  &c. ,  of  course,  the  nature  of  the 
eurse  denounced  should  be  known.  Thus,  a  superior  or  a  senior  curses  one,  saying, — Be 
thou  a  Rakshasa  ! — Forthwith,  the  food,  movements,  and  deportment  of  the  person  become 
like  those  of  a  Rakshasa.  Or,  a  superior  or  a  senior  performs  certain  incantations  with  the 
desire  of  reducing  a  person  to  sheer  idiocy.  Forthwith,  the  food,  &c.  Of  that  person  resem¬ 
ble  those  of  an  idiot.  Or,  a  superior  or  a  senior  directs  his  will-force  with  the  purpose  of 
making  a  man  swerve  from  the  path  of  rectitude.  Forthwith  the  kind  of  change  desired 
comes  over  the  man.  In  all  these  instances,  the  Insanity  should  be  regarded  as  caused  by 
the  curse,  or  the  incantations,  or  the  will-force  of  superiors  and  seniors,  he, — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1265 

strength,  and  who  is  fond  of  weapons,  blood,  flesh,  and  red  garlands, 
and  who  rebukes  others  furiously,  should  be  regarded  as  afflicted 
with  Insanity  caused  by  the  action  of  Rakshasas,  23 

One  who  is  fond  of  loud  laughter,  who  always  speaks  untruths, 
who  expresses  hate  and  contempt  for  the  deities,  learned  Brahmanas, 
and  physicians,  who  utters  hymns  and  Vedic  mantras  and  quotes 
illustrations  from  the  Scriptures,  and  who  afflicts  his  own  body  with 
wooden  sticks  and  other  appliances,  should  be  known  as  suffering 
from  Insanity  caused  by  the  action  of  Brahma-Rakshasas.  24 

One  who  is  of  a  troubled  mind,  who  dances  and  sings  and  laughs 
at  places  (or  occasions)  unsuited  to  those  acts,  who  talks  both  cohe¬ 
rently  and  incoherently,  who  takes  a  pleasure  in  ascending  dangerous 
heights  and  hill-tops  and  walking  along  filthy  paths  and  treading 
upon  dirty  rags  and  heaps  of  grass  or  straw,  whose  complexion 
is  not  uniform  (that  is,  who  has  discoloured  patches  on  his  body), 
and  whose  voice  is  dry  and  harsh,  who  remains  naked,  who  runs 
hither  and  thither  restlessly,  who  is  incapable  of  remaining  in  one 
spot,  who  always  speaks  of  his  own  griefs,  and  whose  memory  is 
lost,  should  be  known  as  afflicted  with  Insanity  caused  by  the  action 
of  Pi?Schas.*  25 

In  this  connection  it  should  be  stated  that  a  person  whose  prac¬ 
tices  are  pure  and  who  is  conversant  with  penances  and  the  study 
of  the  Vedas,  is  generally  assailed  by  the  deities  on  the  first  or  the 
thirteenth  day  of  the  lighted  fortnight.  26 

One  who  cleans  oneself  by  baths,  whose  practices  are  pure,  and 
who  is  fond  of  solitude,  who  is  well-versed  in  the  Scriptures  on  piety 
and  duty,  as  also  the  Vedas  and  poetry,  is  generally  assailed  by 
Rishis  on  the  sixth  or  the  ninth  day  of  the  lighted  fortnight.  27 

One  who  serves  with  devotion  the  deities  and  his  parents  and 
preceptors  and  seniors  and  those  who  are  crowned  with  success  of 
penances,  and  professors  (of  different  branches  of  learning),  is  gener¬ 
ally  assailed  by  Pitris  on  the  tenth  day  of  the  dark  fortnight  or  the 
day  of  the  new  moon.  28 

One  who  is  fond  of  hymns,  songs,  and  instrumental  music,  who 
takes  delight  in  associating  with  other  peoples’  wives  and  using 


Gangadhara  reads  this  differently.  I  think  his  text  is 


correct.— T. 


1266 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


perfumes  and  floral'  wreaths,  and  who  practises  purity  of  conduct,  vs 
generally  assailed  by  Gandharvas  on  the  twelfth  or  the  fourteenth 
lunar  day.  29 

One  who  is  endued  with  a  good  rnindj'  as  also  with,  complexion 
and  beauty  of  person  and  pride  of  deportment  and  courage,  who  uses 
floral  garlands  and  fragrant  unguents,  who  is  possessed  of  humour, 
and  who  is  loud-speeched,  is  generally  assailed  by  Yakshas-  on  the 
seventh  or  the  eleventh  day  of  the  lighted  fortnight.  3° 

One  who  takes  pleasure  in  the  study  of  the  Vedas,  in  the  practice 
of  penances,  of  religious  observances,  of  fasts,  and  of  vows,  and  in 
the  worship  of  the  deities,  ascetics,  and  seniors,  who  has  fallen  away 
from  purity,  who  may  or  may  not  be  a  Br&hmana  (by  birth)  but  who 
is  an  utterer  of  Brahma  (Vedic  texts),  who  regards  himself  to  be  a 
person  of  great  courage,  and  who  delights  to  pass  his  time  in  the 
temples  of  deities  and  to  sport  in  (holy)  waters,  is  generally  assailed 
by  Bfahma-Rakshasas  on  the  fifth  day  of  the  lighted  fortnight  or  on 
the  day  of  the  full  moon.  31 

Rakshas  and  Pigachas,  beholding  an  opportunity,  generally  assail 
a  person  who  is  of  weak  mind,  who  is  vile  and  wicked,  who  is  under 
the  government  of  his  wife,  and  who  is  characterised  by  cupidity, 
on  the  second,  or  the  third,  or  the  eighth  day  of  the  moon. 

‘Grahas’  (or  super-human  causes  of  calamitous  afflictions)  are 
innumerable.  Only  eight  of  them  that  are  well  known  have  thus 
been  mentioned.  32 

Amongst  all  these  varieties  of  t.Insanity,  that  one  in  which  a 
person  uplifting  his  hands,  and  giving  way  to  an  accession  of  wrath, 
unconsciously  strikes  either  himself  or  others,  should  be  known 
to  be  incurable.* 

So  also  one  who  is  always  in  tears,  from  whose  genital  organ 
bloody  discharges  take  place,  whose  tongue  has  sores  (in  consequence 
of  his  own  bites),  from  whose  nose  also  discharges  take  place  of 
fetid  matter,  who  regards  all  his  vital  parts  as  torn  or  pierced,  who 
disregards  the  words  of  others,  who  always  utters  cries  and  groans, 
who  cannot  be  kept  under  control,  who  is  always  afflicted  with 
thirst,  whose  body  emits  a  fetid  smell,  and  who  wishes  to  injure 


*  GangSdhara  reads  ‘nihjankam,’  meaning  fearlessly,  for  ‘nihsanjam,’  meaning  uiv 
eonsciously. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


12  67 


others,  should  be  regarded  as  one  whose  treatment  should  not  be 
taken  up.*  33 

The  physician,  understanding  that  one  whose  Insanity  is  charac¬ 
terised  by  the  desire  of  enjoyment,  as  also  one  whose  Insanity  is 
characterised  by  the  desire  of  worship,  has  caught  the  disease  through 
incantations  or  curses,  should  treat  him  agreeably  to  the  ordinances 
(laid  down)  about  mantras  and  medicines,  along  with  suitable  offerings 
and  sacrifices.^  34 

Here,  of  the  two  varieties  of  Insanity,  viz ,  Constitutional  and  Acci¬ 
dental,  the  ordinances  in  respect  of  treatment,  we  shall  presently 
exrpound,  in  brief  as  well  as  in  detail.  35 

In  Insanity  caused  by  (excitement  of)  the  wind,  the  physician 
capable  of  discrimination  should,  at  the  outset,  administer  oily  drinks. 

When  the  passage  of  the  wind  is  obstructed  (by  bile  and  phlegm), 
mild  correctives,  mixed  with  oils,  should  be  administered.  36 

In  Insanity  caused  by  excited  phlegm  and  bile,  the  patient  should 
first  be  treated  with  oils  and  the  usual  methods  for  inducing  perspira- 
ration,  and  then  emetics  and  purgatives  should  be  administered 
(respectively). 

After  the  system  has  been  corrected  (by  these  methods),  light, 
digestible  diet  (such  as  manda ,  vilepi,  peyti,  &c.,)  should  be  pres- 
cribed.J  37 

After  this,  enemata  of  both  dry  and  the  oily  varieties,  as  also- 
cerebral  purgatives,  should  be  administered,  according  to  the  fault 
that  is  excited. 


*  Many  differences  of  reading  occur  in  the  printed  texts.  For  ‘Durvarna,’  which  is 
evidently  incorrect,  Gangadhara  has  ‘Durvagyah’. — T. 

t  Two  classes  of  persons  are  indicated  by  the  first  word  in  this  aphorism  :  1.  One 

whose  insanity  is  characterised  by  ‘ratikama’  or  the  desire  for  enjoyment  (particularly,  sexual 
enjoyment)  ;  and  2.  one  whose  insanity  is  characterised  by  the  desire  for  worshipping  the 
deities.  Gangadhara  explains  the  sense  wrongly.  He  takes  ‘ratikamonmadin’  to  mean  one 
whose  insanity  has  been  brought  about  by  some  superhuman  being  entering  his  body  from 
desire  of  enjoyment.  Yakshas  and  Rakshas,  it  is  said,  enter  the  persons  of  kings  from  a 
desire  of  enjoyment.  This  is  certainly  far-fetched.  Possessed  of  superhuman  puissance, 
these  beings  would  not  care  for  the  enjoyments  of  man. — T. 

t  In  insanity  caused  by  excited  phlegm,  emetics,  while  in  that  caused  by  bile,  purgatives, 
should  be  administered.  In  both  cases,  oils  and  the  methods  of  causing  perspiration  should 
be  prescribed.  In  both  cases  also,  ‘samsarjjana’  Or  light,  digestible  diet  is  prescribable.— T. 


[268 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  same  should  be  repeated  frequently.*  38 
When  the  chest,  the  senses,  the  head,  and  the  stomach  (including 
the  intestines)  have  been  cleared  by  emetics  and  the  rest,  the  mind 
of  the  patient  becomes  clear  and  he  regains  consciousness  and 
memory.  39 

Of  one  whose  system  has  been  duly  corrected  by  the  administra¬ 
tion  of  emetics  and  the  rest,  if  deviation  be  still  noticeable  from  the 
correct  standard  of  conduct,  snuffs  and  collyria  of  keen  virtues  are 
beneficial.  Chastisement  that  is  capable  of  afflicting  the  mind,  the 
understanding,  and  the  body,  is  also  beneficial.  4° 

One  who  is  susceptible  of  being  taught  should  (instead  of  being 
struck  or  belaboured)  be  bound  with  strong  cords  of  hemp  without 
causing  him  pain,  and  confined  in  a  dark  chamber  from  which  sticks 
or  pieces  of  wood  as  also  brickbats  and  stones  have  been  removed.f  41 
Chastisement,  afrighting,  presents,  comforting,  gladdening,  terror¬ 
ising,  and  excitement  of  wonder, — these  are  means  which,  by  causing 
the  aberrations  to  be  dispelled,  bring  back  the  mind  to  its  normal 
state.!  42 

The  application  of  plasters,  of  unguents  and  emollients,  the  use 
of  oils  for  rubbing  the  body  with,  inhalation  of  smoke,  and  drinking 
of  (medicated)  ghees ,  should  be  resorted  to  as  these  are  capable  of 
'awakening  the  mind,  the  understanding,  the  memory,  and  con¬ 
sciousness.  43 

The  ordinances  about  the  drinking  of  ghee ,  and  those  about  the 
use  of  mantras ,  for  Insanity  brought  about  by  accidental  causes,  have 
now  been  expounded.  Hear  now  what  the  well-tried  combinations 
are  (of  drugs)  for  the  cure  of  this  diseaee.  44 

Hingu  (assafcetida),  Sauvarchala  salt,  and  Vyosha  (otherwise 
called  Trikatu,  i.  e.,  the  three  pungents,  viz.,  dry  ginger,  Piper  longum, 
and  black  pepper) :  2  palas  of  each  of  these  should  be  taken. 


*  The  direction  about  repetition  has  reference  to  emetics,  purgatives,  enemata,  and 
cerebral  purgatives.  Of  course,  in  excitement  of  wind,  oily  enemata,  in  excitement  of 
phlegm,  dry  enemata,  are  prescribable. — T. 

t  The  correct  reading  is  ‘Vinaye’  and  not  ‘Vinayet’.  Also  ‘Kashthadyaih’  is  wrong  ; 
the  locative  form  is  correct. — T. 

+  ‘Trasanam’  is  explained  by  the  commentators  as  exciting  the  fears  of  the  patient  by 
naming  magistrates  and  officers  of  the  peace.  By  ‘bhayam’  is  meant  the  excitement  of  fear 
by  producing  before  the  patient  snakes  and  tigers,  &c.  The  distinction  is  certainly 
fanciful.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1269 


One  Adhaka  of  ghee  should  be  taken,  to  which  should  be  added 
four  times  as  much  cow’s  urine. 

The  former  should  be  boiled  with  the  latter.  This  medicine  is  a 
good  curative  of  Insanity.  4S 

KALYANA  GHRITA. 

VigSla  ( Cucumis  colocynthis),  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans,  viz., 
chebulic,  emblic,  and  belleric),  Kaunti  (otherwise  called  RenukS  or 
HarenukS,  i.  e,  Piper  aurantiacum),  Devadfiru  (Pinus  deodara),  Elava- 
luka  (a  red  powder  of  this  name),  Sthira  ( Hedysarum  Gangeticum ), 
AnantS,  ( Asclepias  pseudosarsa ),  the  two  varieties  of  Rajani  (*.  e.,  Cur¬ 
cuma  longa,  and  Berberis  Asiatica ),  the  two  varieties  of  <^ariva  ( Bchites 
frutescens),  Nata  (otherwise  called  TagarapadikS,  i.  e.,  Taberncz- 
montana  coronaria),  Nilotpala  ( Nymphosa  stellata),  Ela  ( Elettaria 
cardamomuni),  ManjisthS  (Rubia  cordifolia),  Danti  {Croton polyandruvi), 
Dadima  ( Punica  granatmn ),  Kegara  (otherwise  called  Nagakecara, 
i.  e.,  Mesua  ferrea ),  Taligapatra  ( Pinus  Webbiana ),  Vrihati  ( Solanum 
Indicum ),  fresh  flowers  of  Mslati  {Echites  caryophyllata ),  46-47 

Vidanga  ( Embelia  ribes),  Prisniparni  (JDoodia  logopodioides), 
Kushtha  {Aplotaxis  auriculata ),  Chandana  ( Pterocarpus  Santalinus), 
and  Padmaka  (a  fragrant  wood  of  that  name,  occurring  in  Malwa 
and  Southern  India). 

With  the  paste,  of  the  measure  of  a  ‘Karsha,’  of  each  of  these 
eight  and  twenty  drugs,  a  ‘prastha’  of  ghee  should  be  boiled  in  water 
of  four  times  its  measure.* 

This  ghee  is  beneficial  for  epilepsy,  fever,  bronchites,  asthma,  loss 
of  appetite  or  weakness  of  the  digestive  fire,  phthisis,  leprosy,  catarrh 
in  the  nose,  tertian  and  quartan  fevers,  nausea  and  vomiting,  piles, 
difficulty  of  micturition,  patients  afflicted  with,  erysepelas,  itches, 
chlorosis,  Insanity,  poisons,  gonorrhoea,  persons  afflicted  by  evil 
spirits,  those  who  having  lost  the  power  of  speech  only  stutter  and 
lisp,  persons  in  swoons,  and  women  that  are  sterile.  It  is  a  highly 
commendable  medicine.  It  increases  the  period  of  life  and  imparts 


*  A  prastha  of  ghee  (obtained  from  cow’s  milk)  is  equal  to  2  seers.  When  the  direction 
occurs  of  its  being  boiled  in  water  of  four  times  its  measure,  the  quantity  of  water  should 
be  doubled.  Hence  16  seers  of  water  are  indicated.— T. 


1270 


CHAR  A IC A-S  AM HIT A. 


strength.  It  removes  the  effects  of  Inauspicious  conditions  and  of  sin 
It  drives  away  Rakshasas  (if  they  possess  a  person).  It  removes  the 
effects  of  evil  planetary  and  astral  conjunctions. 

This  ghee  is  called  ‘Kalyanaka.’  It  is  the  foremost  of  all  medi¬ 
cines  administered  in  the  rite  called  ‘Pumsavana.’*  48-52 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  ‘Kalyana  Ghrita.’ 

Taking  one  and  twenty  of  these  drugs  beginning  with  Sthira 
(otherwise  called  (p&laparni,  i.  e,  Hedysarum  Gangeticum),  (out  of  the 
eight  and  twenty  named  above),  boil  them  in  water. 

With  the  decoction  so  obtained,  to  which  should  be  added  the 
milk,  four  times  its  measure,  of  a  cow  that  has  calved  only  once,  ghee 
should  be  cooked. f  53 

Into  the  ghee  so  cooked  should  be  thrown  the  paste  of  these  (eight) 
taken  in  equal  measures,  viz.,  Vira  (otherwise  called  Prisniparni,  i.  e., 
Doodia  logopodioides),  the  two  Mashas  {viz.,  Mashaparni,  i.  e.,  Glycine 
debilis,  and  Mudgaparni,  i.  e.,  Phaseolus  trilobus ),  Kakoli  (a  root  of  the 
onion  tribe  brought  from  Nepal),  Swayamgupta  (. Mucuna  pruriens), 
Rishabhaka  (not  identified,  its  substitute  being  bambu  manna),  Riddhi 
(not  identified,  its  substitute  being  B&la,  i.  e.,  Pavonia  odorata ),  and 
Meda  (not  identified,  its  substitute  being  Physalis  flexuosa). 

The  ghee  thus  prepared  is  called  ‘Maha-kalyfinaka.’  It  promotes 
nutrition  and  is  especially  alleviative  of  the  excitement  of  all  the 
three  faults  together.  54-55 

JatilS  (otherwise  called  Jatamansi,  i.  e.,  Nardotackys  Jatamansi), 
Putana  (otherwise  called  Haritaki,  i.  e.,  chebulic  myrobalans),  Ke?i 
(otherwise  called  Bhutakegi,  i.  e.,  Corydalis  Govaniana ),  Ch&rati  (other¬ 
wise  called  Br&hmayashthika,  i.  e.,  Siphonanthus  Indicd),\  Markati 
(otherwise  called  (^ukagimbi  or  AtmaguptS,  i.  e.,  Mucuna  pruriens), 
VachS  (Acorus  calamus),  Trayamana  ( Ficus  heterophylla ),  Jaya  (other¬ 
wise  called  Jayanti,  i.  e.,  Sesbania  aculeatd),  Vira  (otherwise  called 


»  An  important  rite  performed  when  the  first  signs  of  conception  become  noticeable. — T. 
f  Gangadhara  explains  the  measures  thus  :  the  measures  should  be  equal  of  each  of  the 
one  and  twenty  drugs,  making  in  the  aggregate  8  seers.  The  paste  should  be  boiled  in  water 
of  the  measure  of  64  seers.  The  water  should  be  boiled  down  to  16  seers.  To  this  should 
be  added  milk  of  the  measure  of  16  seers,  the  measure  oi  ghee  being  4  seers. — T. 

|  The  name  ‘Charati’  stands  for  many  plants.  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  understand 
what  particular  plant  is  meant  by  it  here.  Gangadhara  gives  the  names  of  all  the  plants 
that  go  by  this  name,  without  endeavouring  to  enlighten  the  reader, — T. 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland,  U.  S.  A.': — You  have  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California : —  . As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent.-  . 

there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
,  science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U  S.  A.:— You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  of  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c. ,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Ohio,  U.  S.  A.  The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  Of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge : — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
-will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished." 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York-. — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  Amer  ican  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia’. — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine.  . 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  of  Cashmere : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Facultv,  North-Western 
University,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition  : — I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lavtrence,  U.  S.  A.  : — Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  .you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  19,  East 38th  Street,  New  York : — Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Praise,  Dramstadt : — The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  'out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A-. 
Editor ,  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist : — I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of.  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal’. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere,  174,  Boulevatse,  Saint  Germain  : — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write.' 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia-. — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  I 
arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop 
from  the  Eharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients 
according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and 
fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of 
the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street,  Calcutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
[about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after, — 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips;  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing .—The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector : — Your  patriotic, 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  A.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  : — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hypocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gy  a It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  Wales  : — The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instfuctive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is 
a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji, — The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success, 


PART  XLI. 


47357 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 

(TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH). 

PUBLISHED  BY 

PARESHNATH  SARMA, 

SON  OF  LATE 

KAVIRAJ  AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  original)  WITH  COMMENT¬ 
ARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 

journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  the  Hindu 

SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C.,  &C. 


CALCUTTA : 

200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N.  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRATNA  PRESS, 
12,  SIMLA  STREET,  BYE-LANE. 

1906. 

(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved. ) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters.) 


Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an.  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — .  I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention. 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 


Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  X  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them,  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office— .  Your 

excellent  translation  . .  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail. 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

. Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York ,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  w'ith  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  Will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden -.-l  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A.— I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing,  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 


antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris  Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
Of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris  /—I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  j  ustice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany  .-—The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 


to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsbureh,  Germany  Engh 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the 


work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E„ 

been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life, 
cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


CHARAKA-'SAMHITA. 


1271. 


Prisniparni,  i.  e.,  Doodia  logopodioides ),  Choraka  ( Andropogon  acicu- 
laris ),  Katurohini  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ),  Kfiyastha  (otherwise  called 
Amlaka,  i.  e.,  the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica ),  £ukari  (otherwise 
called  Var&hi,  i.  e.,  an  esculent  root  called  Chamar-Slu  in  Bengali), 
Cchatra  (otherwise  called  Madhurika,  i.  e.,  fennel  seeds),  AticchatrS 
(otherwise  called  (^atSpushpa,  i.  e.,  Pucedanum.  Sowa  or  dill  seeds), 
Palankasha  (otherwise  called  Gokshuraka,  i.  e.,  Tribulus  terrestris ), 
Mahapurushadanta  (otherwise  called  £atamuli,  i.  e.,  Asparagus  race- 
mosus),  Vayastha  (otherwise  called  Vibhitaka,  i.  e.,  Terminalia  Beller- 
icd),  the  two  Nakulis  (otherwise  called  Rasna,  i.  e.,  Vanda  Roxburghii , 
and  Gandha-RSsnS  or  the  scented  variety  of  the  same),  Katambhara 
(otherwise  called  Gandha-bhadulia,  i.  e.,  Pcedria  fcetida)t  Vrischikali 
{Tragi a  involucrata ),  and  Sthira  {Hedysarum  Gangeticum ) : 

Ghee  boiled  with  these  is  alleviative  of  quartan  fever,  Insanity, 
the  influence  of  evil  spirits,  and  epilepsy.  This  ghee  is~called  Maha- 
paigSchika  and  is  regarded  as  equal  to  ‘Amrita’  .or  nectar  itself.  It 
strengthens  the  memory  and  the  understanding,  and  promotes  the 
growth  of  children.  56-5 8 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  ‘Mahapaijachika  Ghrita.’ 

Take  a  hundred  Lagunas  (garlics),  thirty  chebulic  myrobalans 
(without  their  seeds),  a  ‘pala’  of  Tryushana  (/.  e.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits 
of  Piper  longum ,  and  black  pepper),  the  ashes  of  cow-skin,  of  the 
measure  of  sixteen  palas,  and  sixteen  seers  of  cow’s  milk  and  cow’s 
urine.  One  prastha  of  old  ghee ,  cooked  with  these,  should  be  admi¬ 
nistered  (in  Insanity). 

To  it,  however,  when  cooled,  should  be  added  a  pala  of  the  pulv 
of  assafoetida,  and  a  Mfinika  of  honey.* 

This  ghee ,  administered  as  drink,  ointment,  and  snuff,  quickly 
cures  Insanity  that  is  born  of  vitiated  faults  or  that  is  accidental,  as 
also  remittent  fever,  and  epilepsy.  59-6 1 


*  In  practice,  one  prastha,  which  is  equal  to  2  seers  of  ghee,  is  doubled  ;  i.  e. ,  4  seers  of 
ghee  are  taken.  So  also  two  adhakas  of  cow’s  milk  and  urine  are  taken,  equivalent  to 
.16  seers  of  milk  and  16  seers  of  urine.  .A  manik?  of  honey,  being  doubled,  is  equal  to 
-i 6  palas,— T. 

1 6l 


12  J2 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA . 


Even  this  is  the  composition  of  ‘Lagun&dya  Ghrita/ 

Of  fresh  or  uninjured  Lagunas  (garlics),  divested  of  husk,  take 
-half  a  Tula  (equal,  that  is,  to  50  ‘palas’  or  six  seers  and  a  quarter). 

Of  the  ten  roots  take  half  this  measure  (i.  e.,  25  palas).  These 
"should  be  boiled  in  2  adhakas  of  water  (equal  to  16  seers).*  62 

When  a  fourth  of  it  only  remains  in  the  vessel,  it  should  be  taken 
down. 

To  it  should  then  be  added  a  prastha  of  ghee  (this  is  doubled  in 
practice).  The  same  measure  of  the  expressed  juice  of  garlics  also 
is  to  be  added. 

Half  that  measure  should  next  be  added  of  the  expressed  juice 
of  each  of  these,  viz.,  Kola  ( Zizyphus  jujubd),  Mulaka  (garden  radish), 
•Vrikshamla  ( Zingiber  cassumunar),\  Mstulunga  ( Citrus  medico, ), 
ginger,  Dadimamla  (sour  pomegranates),  Sura  (wine),  whey,  and  sour 
KSnjika. 

Boiling  all  these  together,  the  paste  of  the  following  drugs  should 
then  be  added,  viz.,  the  triple  fruits  (*.  e.,  the  three  myrobalans),  Daru 
(otherwise  called  Devadaru,  i.  e.,  Pinus  deodara),  Lavana  (Saindhava 
salt),  Vyosha  (i.  e.,  the  three  acrids,  viz.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of  Piper 
■  longum,  and  black  pepper),  Dipyaka  (otherwise  called  Vanayamani, 
i.  e.,  Cnidium  diffusum ,  syn.  Seseli  Indicum),  Yamani  ( 'Ptychotis 
Ajowan ),  Chavya  ( Piper  chaba ),  assafcetida,  and  Amlavetasa  ( Rumex 
vesicarius).  Half  a  pala  of  the  paste  of  each  of  these  should  be  the 
measure. 

'Having  boiled  all  these  together  once  more,  the  result  will  be  a 
ghee  that  cures  deep-seated  pains,  abdominal  tumours,  piles,  and 
diseases  of  the  stomach,  abcesses,  chlorosis,  enlarged  spleen,  diseases 
of  the  genital  organs  of  women,  fever,  and  worms. 

This  medicine  cures  also  all  diseases  born  of  wind  and  phlegm, 
and  all  kinds  of  Insanity.  63-66 


■*  Double  the  quantity,  i.  e.,  32  seers,  is  taken  in  practice.— T. 

t  The  name  stands  for  many  kinds  of  acid  fruits,  such  as  hog-plums,  tamarind,  the 
county  sorrel,  &c.  Here,  Gangadhara  explains,  it  stands  for  Mahada  or  Vanadraka.— T, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


I27£ 


Even  this  is  the  composition  of  the  second  kind  of  ‘Lagunadya 
Ghrita.’ 

Ghee  boiled  with  assafcetida,  Hinguparni  {Balanites  Roxburghii), 
Kayastha  (the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica)  and  Vayastha  (chebulic 
tnyrobalans), 

Or  ghee  boiled  with  chebulic  myrobalans,  assafcetida,  and' 
Choraka  {Andtopogon  acicularis ), 
is  beneficial  in  Insanity. 

Or,  old  ghee  boiled  by  itself,  or  ghee  boiled  with  all  these,  should 
be  given  to  the  patient  to  drink.* 

Administering  a  good  dose  unto  the  patient,  he  should  be  con¬ 
fined  in  a  hole  or  a  chamber. 

In  treating  the  Insane,  the  physician  should,  in  especial,  cause 
him  to  take  old  ghee.  For  old  ghee  is  capable  of  checkiug  all  the 
three  faults,  and  in  consequence  of  its  particular  sanctity,  it  is  capable 
of  freeing  the  patient  from  the  influence  of  evil  spirits  and  astral 
conjunctions.  67-69 

Old  ghee  becomes  superior  in  respect  of  its  virtues  and  effects  in 
consequence  of  the  place  (and  vessel)  in  which  it  is  kept  Its  taste 
becomes  pungent  and  bitter. 

Ghee  that  is  ten  years  old  becomes  possessed  of  a  keen  scent.  7° 

That  ghee  which  (in  consequence  of  age)  assumes  the  aspect  of 
a  solution  of  lac,  becomes  possessed  of  very  cooling  properties.  It 
becomes  capable  of  dispelling  all  kinds  of  evil  spirits  and  astral 
influences. 

Ghee  that  is  older  is  regarded  as  highly  sanctified.  Such  ghee  is 
the  foremost  of  purgatives.  7t 

There  is  nothing  which  ghee  that  is  a  hundred  years  old  cannot 


*  ‘Boiled  with  all  these  it  is  difficult  to  understand  what  is  meant  by  ‘all  these’.  Gan- 
gadhara  thinks  that  ‘all  these’  or  ‘those’  (ebhih)  has  reference  to  the  ingredients  of  Kalyana- 
ghrita.  This  is  a  very  far-fetched  interpretation.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  reading  ‘ebhih’- 
is  incorrect.— T. 


1274 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


effect.  Such  ghee ,  only  seen,  of  touched,  or  smelt,  dispels  aff  cala¬ 
mities  caused  by  evil  spirits  and  malignant  astral  conjunctions. 

Such  ghee  is  especially'  beneficial  to  persons  afflicted  with  epilepsy 
and  InSahity.  72 

If  the  physician  fails  to  make  the  patient  quiet  by  administering 
these  medicines  internally,  he  should  then  administer  them  in  the 
form  of  collyria,  unguents,  plasters,  and  cerebral  purgatives.  73 

Sirisha  ( Mimosa  Sirissa),  liquorice,  assafcetida,  garlics,  Tagara 
( Taberncemontana  coronaria ),  Vachs  {Acorus  calamus ),  and  Kustha 
(Aplotaxis  auriculaia),  pounded  together  with  the  urine  of  the  goat, 
form  a  cerebral  purgative  and  collyrium  (that  are  beneficial  in 
Insanity).  74 

Similarly,  taking  the  following  drugs,  viz.,  Vyosha  (i.  e.,  the  three 
acrids,  viz.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum,  and  black  pepper); 
the  two  varieties  of  Haridra  (i.  e.,  Curcuma  longa,  and  Berberis 
Asiatica),  Manjishtha  ( Rubia  cordifolia ),  assafcetida,  mustard  seeds, 
and  the  seeds  of  Sirisha  ( Mimosa  Sirissa ),  and  pounding  them  toge¬ 
ther  with  goat’s  urine,  a  cerebral  purgative  and  collyrium  will  result 
that  are  very  beneficial  in  Insanity,  the  afflictions  caused  by  evil 
spirits  and  malignant  astral  conjunctions,  and  epilepsy.  75 

Taking  equal  measures  of  ApSmarga  (Achyranthes  asp  era),  assa¬ 
fcetida,  and  Hingupatra  (the  leaves  of  Balanites  Roxburghii),  and 
adding  black  pepper  of  half  the  measure,  and  pounding  them  with 
the  bile  of  the  cow  and  the  jackal,  sticks  may  be  prepared  : 

These  sticks  form  an  excellent  collyrium  for  the  eyes  of  those 
that  are  afflicted  with  epilepsy,  and  fever  induced  by  Insanity  caused 
by  the  action  of  of  evil  spirits. 

They  form  an  excellent  collyrium  for  also  those  men  who  are 
afflicted  by  evil  spirits  or  by  the  deities.  They  may  be  applied  alsO' 
in  diseases  of  the  eye.*  76-77 

Black  pepper  (reduced  to  pulv),  macerated  in  the  bile  of  the  cow 
and  the  jackal,  and  kept  exposed  to  the  sun  for  a  month,  forms  a 


♦  The  last  line  of  77  is  read  incorrectly  ir 
5maye’  and  not  ‘gomaye’, — T. 


editions.  The  correct  reading  is  ‘drig- 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1275 


collyrium  that  is  beneficial  to  him  whose  vision  is  disordered  or  whose 
memory  has  been  lost  (in  Insanity)  through  the  influence  of  evil 
spirits  or  the  action  of  vitiated  faults.* * * §  78 

SiddhSrthaka  (white  mustard  seeds),  Vacha  (Acorns  calamus), 
assafcetida,  the  two  varieties  of  Karanja  (i.  e.,  Pongamia  glabra 
and  Guilandina  Bonducella ),  Devadaru  (Pinus  deodara),  Manjishtha 
( Rubia  cordifolia ),  the  three  myrobalans  (viz.,  Chebulic,  Emblic,  and 
Belleric),  Aparajita  ( Clitoria  Ternatea )  of  the  white  variety),  the  bark 
of  Katabhi  (a  variety  of  Mimosa  Sirissa  of  small  stature),  the  three 
acrids  (viz.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum,  and  black 
pepper),  Priyangu  (Aglaia  Roxburghiana),  Sirisha  (Mimosa  Sirissa ), 
HaridrS  ( Curcuma  longa ),  and  Daruharidra  ( Berberis  Asiatica )  ; 

Taking  all  these  in  equal  measures,  pound  them  together  in  goat’s 
urine. 

This  medicine  is  called  ‘Agada.’f  It  should  be  used  as  a  drink, 
a  collyrium,  a  cerebral  purgative,  a  plaster,  a  bath,  and  an  unguent4 

This  medicine  cures  epilepsy,  the  effects  of  poison  in  the  system. 
Insanity,  the  effects  Atharvan  rites,  inauspiciousness  or  the  absence 
of  prosperity,  and  fever. 

It  destroys  all  fear  of  evil  spirits.  Its  operation  is  auspicious  in 
the  king’s  court.§ 

Ghee  boiled  with  these  drugs  and  cow’s  urine  serves  the  same 
purposes.  79-82 

If  the  person  afflicted  with  Insanity  suffers  from  constant  secre¬ 
tions  from  the  mouth,  or  inflammation  of  the  Schneiderian  membrane 
(with  loss  of  the  sense  of  smell),  these  drugs  should  then  be  mixed 
with  same  fragrant  substance,  and  after  reducing  them  into  a  paste, 
sticks  should  be  made  for  making  the  patient  inhale  their  smoke. 


*  In  this  verse  also,  the  correct  reading  is  ‘masam’  and  not  ‘mansam’. — T. 

•J-  ‘Gada’  means  disease  ;  hence  ‘agada’  implies  a  curative  of  disease.  As  such,  it  is  a 
synonym  of  medicine.  The  Commentators  explain  that  ‘Agada’  here  stands  for  the  name 
of  the  medicine  whose  composition  is  explained. — T. 

J  Dissolving  in  a  large  quantity  of  water,  it  serves  for  a  bath. — T. 

§  /.  e.,  if  any  body  goes  to  the  court  of  the  king  with  this  medicine  on  his  person,  the 
king  becomes  propitious  unto  him  and  his  object  is  gained. — T. 


K2/6 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Or,  he  should  be  made  to  inhale  the  smoke  of  such  sticks  as  have 
been  mentioned  among  the  methods  of  smoking  that  induce  purging. 

Or,  he  may  be  made  to  inhale  the  smoke  of  sticks  made  of  the 
drugs  mentioned  above,  beginning  with  Chitoria  Ternatea  of  the 
white  variety  (and  ending  with  Berberis  Asiatica ) ;  or  he  may  be 
made  to  inhale  the  smoke  of  sticks  made  of  the  above  drugs  (begin¬ 
ning  with  Ternatea  of  the  white  variety)  and  assafcetida.  83 

In  Insanity  characterised  by  vitiated  wind  and  phlegm,  the  appli¬ 
cation  of  fomentation,  of  collyrium,  of  snuff  blown  into  the  nose 
through  a  tube,  and  of  cerebral  purgatives,  and  the  inhalation  of 
smoke,  are  beneficial,  with  the  aid  of  the  following,  vie'.,  the  urine, 
the  bile,  the  stools,  the  hair,  the  nails,  and  the  skin  of  the  porcupine, 
the  owl,  the  cat,  the  jackal,  the  wolf,  and  the  goat. 

In  Insanity  characterised  by  excited  bile,  the  following  are  bene¬ 
ficial,  vie.,  ghee  cooked  with  bitters,  as  also  ghee  cooked  with  the 
group  of  drugs  called  ‘Jivaniya  :  also  the  oil  called  ‘Misrak.’  In  such 
Insanity,  food  and  drink  that  are  cooling,  sweet,  and  of  mild  virtues, 
are  also  beneficial.  84-86 

The  physician  possessed  of  knowledge  should  let  out  blood  by 
opening  the  veins  at  the  line  joining  the  temples  with  the  hair  of  the 
head,  in  cases  of  violent  Insanity  as  also  in  fever  and  epilepsy.  87 

Gratifying  the  Insane  with  ghee  and  meat,  the  physician  should 
place  him  at  his  ease  in  a  chamber  not  exposed  to  the  wind.  He  will 
come  out,  freed  from  loss  of  understanding  and  memory,  and  having 
regained  his  senses.  88 

Or,  some  friend  of  his  should  console  him  with  words  that  are 
fraught  with  Piety  and  Profit ;  or,  he  should  inform  him  of  the  loss  of 
some  beloved  one,  or  show  him  some  such  object  as  is  capable  of 
exciting  his  wonder.*  89 

Or,  rubbing  him  with  mustard  oil  and  binding  him  with  cords,  he 
should  be  kept,  face  upwards,  in  a  lying  posture,  exposed  to  the  sun. 


Gangadhara  explains  the  second  line  wrongly. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


127-7 

Or,  he  should  be  touched  with  the  (ripe)  cods  of  Mucuna  prunens , 
hot  iron,  or  sprinkled  over  with  hot  oils  and  water.  90 

Or,  striking  him  with  whips  and  goads,  and  binding  him  strongly, 
he  should  be  confined  in  a  solitary  chamber.  By  this,  his  deranged 
mind  will  be  quickly  restored  to  equanimity.  91 

Or,  he  should  be  terrified  by  means  of  snakes  deprived  of  fangs, 
or  tame  lions  and  elephants,  or  armed  men.  Or,  his  terror  should 
be  excited  by  the  mention  of  robbers  and  enemies  lying  in  wait 
for  him.  92 

Or,  officers  of  the  peace,  binding  him  strongly  and  taking  him  out, 
frighten  him  with  death,  saying  that  the  king  had  ordered  it,  and 
speaking  fiercely  to  him  all  the  while.  93 

Verily,  the  fear  of  life  is  greater  than  the  fear  of  bodily  injury. 
By  putting  the  patient  into  fear  of  his  life,  his  mind  which  is  wan¬ 
dering  in  multifarious  directions  becomes  restored  to  a  state  of 
quietness.  94 

That  person  whose  mind  has  been  afflicted  in  consequence  of  the 
loss  of  some  beloved  object,  should  be  brought  back  to  reason  by 
sweetly  spoken  assurances  about  his  acquisition  of  a  similar  object.  95 

Those  that  have  become  insane  through  lust,  or  grief,  or  fear,  or 
wrath,  or  joy,  or  envy,  or  cupidity,  should  be  brought  back  to  reason 
by  the  operation  of  opposite  emotions.  96 

Ascertaining  the  strength  or  weakness  of  habitat,  age,  food  and 
drink  and  practices  to  which  the  patient  is  habituated,  the  fault  that 
is  excited,  and  the  season  (when  treatment  is  begun),  the  physician 
should  take  up  the  treatment,  agreeably  to  what  has  been  laid  down 
above,  of  Insanity  caused  by  the  action  of  evil  spirits  as  also  of  the 
faults  {viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm).  97 

The  physician  possessed  of  intelligence  should  avoid  keen  collyria 
and  the  rest,  as  also  all  sorts  of  cruel  acts  in  treating  a  person  who 
has  become  insane  through  the  action  of  a  deity,  a  Rishi,  a  Pitri,  or 
a  Gandharva.  98 

The  drinking  of  ghee  and  the  like,  and  such  other  mild  courses 
of  treatment  should  be  adopted  in  the  case  of  such  a  person.  In  the 


1278 


CHARAKA-SAMHI TA. 


case  of  such  a  patient,  the  following  courses  of  treatment  should  be 
adopted,  (viz.,  worship  of  the  deities,  sacrifices  and  offerings  to  them), 
the  recitation  of  mantras,  the  application  of  mild  collyria,  performance 
of  religious  rites  as  bring  about  an  alleviation  of  calamities,  the  offer 
of  oblations,  performance  of  Homa,  the  silent  recitation  of  sacred 
texts  or  names,  propitiatory  rites,  observance  of  Vedic  ordinances, 
and  of  ceremonies  of  expiation.  99-i°° 

By  worshipping  every  day,  with  concentrated  attention,  the  Lord 
of  all  creatures,  the  Supreme  Being  possessed  of  great  effulgence,  the 
the  Master  of  the  Universe,  one  conquers  the  fear  of  (catching) 
Insanity,  wi 

By  offering  worship  to  the  retainers,  called  ‘Pramathas,’  of  Rudra, 
who  wander  over  the  earth,  one  becomes  freed  from  diverse  kinds 
of  Insanity  (brought  about  by  the  action  of  superhuman  beings).  102 

As  regards  those  varieties  of  Insanity  which  are  accidental,  these 
may  be  alleviated  by  sacrificial  offerings  auspicious  -rites,  Homa 
(libations  on  the  sacred  fire),  wearing  pearls,  and  gems,*  practice  of 
truth,  penances,  knowledge,  gifts,  observance  of  pious  ordinances 
as  also  of  vows,  the  worship  of  the  deities,  Guhyakas,  learned 
Brahmans,  seniors  and  preceptors,  and  by  well-tested  mantras  (sacred 
texts)  and  ordinances.  103-104 

In  consequence  of  their  causes,  as  also  the  ingredients  vitiated, 
being  the  same,  the  instructions  that  have  been  laid  down  in  the 
treatment  of  epilepsy  should  be  followed  in  (the  treatment  of) 
Insanity  also.  I05 

He  who  abstains  from  fish  and  wine  and  lives  upon  food  and 
•drink  that  are  beneficial,  whose  passions  are  under  control,  who  is 
pure  in  body  and  mind,  is  regarded  as  one  devoted  to  the  quality  of 
Goodness.  Such  a  person  is  never  attacked  by  Insanity  that  is  born 
of  the  vitiated  faults  or  that  is  Accidental.  106 

Of  one  whose  Insanity  has  been  cured,  the  symptoms  are  a  clear 
apprehension  of  all  the  objects  of  the  senses,  clearness  of  the  mind, 


*  ‘Gada,’  disease  ;  hence  ‘agada’  is  a  general  name  for  remedies  of  all  kinds.  Here 
it  evidently  refers  to  gems  and  stones. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1279 


the  understanding,  and  the  soul,  and  the  restoration,  to  their  normal 
condition,  ‘of  the  several  ingredients  of  the  body. 

( Here  is  a  verse  containing  a  summary.) 

The  foremost  of  physicians  ( viz.,  Punarvasu  of  Atri’s  race)  has 
explained  in  this  Lesson  the  causes,  the  symptoms,  and  the  treatment 
of  Insanity  that  is  born  of  vitiated  faults  as  also  that  is  Accidental. 

Thus  ends  Lesson  IX,  called  the  Treatment  of  Insanity,  in  the 
Division  called  Chikitsita,  of  the  treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised  by 
Charaka. 


162 


LESSON  X. 


We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  treatment  of  Epilepsy, 
Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  1 

Physicians  conversant  with  medicine  say  that  loss  of  memory  is 
called  ‘ApasmSra’  (epilepsy).* 

In  consequence  of  the  disappearance  of  the  mind  and  understand¬ 
ing,  the  patient  enters  into  darkness  and  his  movements  also  become 
horrid  If 

Of  persons  whose  tranquillity  has  been  disturbed  by  the  faults 
being  excited  in  a  large  measure,  and  who  take  baneful  and  impure 
food  and  drink,  epilepsy  sets  in,  when  their  quality  of  Goodness  is 
destroyed  by  Passion  and  Darkness,  when  their  heart  is  over¬ 
whelmed  by  faults,  and  when  their  minds  are  afflicted  by  anxiety, 
lust,  fear,  wrath,  grief,  care  and  the  rest.j  2  3 

Accumulated  faults  afflict  the  heart  by  means  of  the  ducts  (that 
have  their  roots  in  the  heart). 

The  person  thus  afflicted  is  then  tortured  by  his  wandering  mind, 
In  consequence  of  which  he  loses  consciousness.  4 

Such  a  person  sees  forms  that  are  unreal.  He  falls  down  and 
trembles  (from  head  to  foot). 

His  eyes  and  eyebrows  become  displaced  ;  he  secretes  saliva  ; 
and  tosses  his  arms  and  legs.  5 


*  ‘Apa’  is  ‘apagamanam’  or  loss  ;  and  ‘smara’  is  ‘smriti’  or  memory.  Hence,  ‘Apasmarar 
Kterally  means  loss  of  memory.  This  disease  agrees  in  its  symptoms  with  what  is  called 
Epilepsy  in  Western  Medical  Science. — T. 

t  ‘Samplava’  is,  literally,  immersion  or  plunge.  Hence,  the  idea  is  that  of  disappearance. 
•Vibhatsa’  is,  literally,  pitiable.  Here  it  may  be  taken  as  equivalent  to  horrid. — T. 

J  ‘Vahudosha,’  as  explained  by  Gangadhara,  refers  to  measure  and  not  number,  for  of 
faults  there  are  only  three. 

‘Sattwa’  here  means  the  quality  of  Goodness,  as  ‘Rajas’  and  ‘Tamas’  imply  the  qualities 
of  Passion  and  Darkness. 

‘Of  men  who  are  &c.,  epilepsy  sets  in’  does  not  certainly  agree  with  the  English  idiom  ; 
but  X  retain  the  exact  form  of  the  original.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


I28t 

When  the  strength  of  the  faults  is  spent,  he  awakes  like  one 
from  sleep. 

In  consequence  of  the  faults  being  excited  separately  or  unitedly, 
this  disease  is  of  four  kinds  ( viz .,  I.  that  born  of  excited  wind  ;  2.  that 
born  of  bile,  3.  that  born  of  excited  phlegm  ;  and  4.  that  born  of  all 
the  three  faults  excited  together),  6 

In  epilepsy  born  of  excitement  of  the  wind,  the  patient  trembles, 
clashes  his  teeth,  vomits  froth,  breathes  hard,  and  sees  dark  and 
hideous  forms.*  7 

One  that  is  afflicted  with  epilepsy  born  of  excited  bile,  shows  the 
following  symptoms  : 

The  froth  on  his  mouth,  his  body,  his  face,  his  eyes,  all  become 
yellow.  He  sees  forms  that  are  yellow  and  red. 

He  feels  thirsty,  and  sees  everything  covered  with  flames.  8 

One  that  is  afflicted  with  epilepsy  born  of  excited  phlegm  shows 
the  following  symptoms  : 

The  froth  on  his  mouth,  his  body,  his  face,  his  eyes,  all  become 
white. 

His  body  becomes  cold  and  heavy,  and  his  hair  stands  on  end. 
He  sees  also  forms  that  are  white. 

His  attack  does  not  last  long.  9 

When  all  these  symptoms  appear  unitedly,  the  epilepsy  should  be 
regarded  as  born  of  all  the  three  faults. 

That  epilepsy  is  incurable  which  appears  in  a  person  that  is  weak, 
or  which  is  old.  10 

The  excited  faults  put  forth  their  strength  at  intervals  of  twelve 
days,  or  a  fortnight,  or  a  month,  or  slightly  sooner  or  later,  for 
inducing  epilepsy.  “ 

The  physician  should,  at  the  outset,  seek  to  affect  the  awakening 
of  the  heart,  the  ducts,  and  the  mind,  overwhelmed  by  those  faults, 


*  Gangadhara  reads  ‘parusharuna  krishnani.  ’This  seems  to  be  incorrect.  ‘Parushant 
cba  krishnani,’  is  undoubtedly  better, — T. 


1282 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


(of  the  patient),  by  means  of  violent  operations  as  the  administration 
of  emetics  and  the  rest.  12 

Epilepsy  born  of  excited  wind  should  be  treated  with  the  aid  of 
enemata  largely ;  that  born  of  excited  bile  should  generally  be 
treated  with  purgatives  ;  and  that  born  of  excited  phlegm  should 
generally  be  treated  with  the  aid  of  emetics.  *3 

Listen  now  to  those  combinations  of  drugs  which  are  used  as 
medicines  for  the  cure  of  epilepsy  of  a  person  who  has  been  well  puri¬ 
fied  in  all  directions  (by  the  administration  of  emetics,  purgatives, 
and  the  rest),  and  who  has  been  properly  consoled  (with  hopes  of 
cure).*  14 

Take  the  expressed  juice  of  cow-dung,  sour  curds,  milk,  and 
urine,  in  equal  measures. 

Ghee  boiled  with  these  cures  epilepsy,  anaemia,  and  fever. 

One  afflicted  with  these  diseases  should  take  this  ghee  which  is 
called  ‘Panchagavya  Ghrita.’  15 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  “Panchagavya  Ghrita.” 

The  two  groups  of  five  roots,  the  three  myrobalans,  the  two 
Rajanis  [viz.,  Curcuma  longa  and  Berberis  Asiaticd ),  the  bark  of  Holar- 
rhena  antidysenterica ,  Echites  sckolaris,  Achyranthes  aspera,  Indigofera 
tinctoria ,  Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ,  Cassia  fistula,  the  roots  of  Ficus 
glomerata,  Aplotaxis  auriculata,  and  Hedysarum  Alhagi: 

Take  2  palas  of  each  of  these,  and  boil  the  compound  in  a  drona 
(32  seers)  of  water,  till  a  fourth  of  that  measure  (viz.,  8  seers)  remains 
In  the  vessel.f 

Into  the  decoction  thus  obtained,  the  pulv  of  the  following  should 
be  thrown,  viz.,  Bhargi  (Siphonanthus  Indica ),  Paths  (Cissampelos 
hernandifolia ),  the  three  acrids  (viz.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of  Piper 


*  It  is  clear  from  this  that  the  combinations  of  drugs  mentioned  below  are  not  to  be 
administered  before  the  patient  has  been  properly  corrected  by  means  of  emetics  and  the 
rest.  The  patient  should  also  be  consoled  with  hopes  of  cure. — T. 

+  In  practice,  double  the  measure,  viz.,  64  seers  of  water,  are  taken  and  boiled  down  to 
16  seers. -T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


[2S3 


longum,  and  black  pepper),  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethuin).  Nichula 
( Eugenia  acutangula ),  £reyasi  (otherwise  called  Gajapippali,  i.  e., 
Pothos  officinalis),  Adhaki  ( Cajanus  Indicus),  Murva  ( Sanseviera  Zey- 
lanica ),  Danti  ( Baliospermum  montanum,  syn.  Croton ■  polyandrum), 
Bhunimba  (otherwise  called  Cherayta,  i.  e.,  Agathotes  Cherayta ), 
Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanicd),  the  two  SarivSs  {viz.,  ShyamSlata  or 
{Echites  frutescens  and  AnantS  or  Hemidesmus  Indicus ),  Rohisha  (a 
sort  of  grass),  Bhutika  (otherwise  called  Gandhatrina,  i.  e.,  Andro- 
pogon  schcenanthus),  and  Madayantika  (otherwise  called  MallikS,  or 
Jasminium  Sambac). 

The  measure  of  the  pulv  of  each  of  these  should  be  2  tolas. 
Having  thrown  these  pul  vs  into  the  decoctions,  a  prastha  of  ghee 
should  be  boiled  with  it,  adding  thereto  an  equal  measure  of  each  of 
these,  'viz.,  the  expressed  juice  of  cowdung,  acid  curds,  milk,  and 
cow’s  urine. 

Ghee  that  is  thus  prepared  is  called  ‘Maha-Panchagavya  Ghrita.’ 
It  is  regarded  as  equal  to  Amrita  itself.  16-20 

It  is  beneficial,  when  administered  day  after  day,  in  epilepsy,  in 
Insanity,*  in  dropsical  swellings,  in  abdominal  tumours,  in  piles,  in 
chlorosis,  in  anaemia,  and  in  malignant  jaundice, f 

This  medicine  cures  also  all  diseases  caused  by  inauspiciousness 
and  the  influence  of  Rakshasas. 

It  cures  also  quartan  fevers.  2122 

Old  ghee  boiled  with  the  expressed  juice  of  Brfihmi  ( Gratiola 
monnierra),  Vacha  {Acorus  Calamus),  Kushtha  {Applotoxis  auriculata), 
and  £ankhapushpi  (Pladera  decussata,  syn.  Canscora  decussata), 
conquers  Insanity,  the  diseases  brought  about  by  inauspicious  sur- 
.  roundings,  and  epilepsy.  23 

Ghee  boiled  with  Saindhava  salt  and  assafcetida,  and  in  the  urine 
of  the  ox  and  the  goat  of  four  times  the  measure  (of  the  ghee),  cures 
epilepsy,  heart-disease,  and  diseases  caused  by  the  action  of  malig¬ 
nant  stars  and  planets.  24 


*  Gangadhara  reads  ‘kshaye  kaje,’  meaning  ‘in  wasting  phthisis.’ — T. 
t  I  adopt  Gangadhara’s  reading,  viz.,  ‘halimake’  instead  of  ‘bhagandhare’  which  means 
fistula-in-ano.— T. 


t284 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Ghee  boiled  with  Vacha  {Acorus  Calamus ),  Sampaka  (otherwise 
called  Aragbadha  or  Cassia  fistula ),  Kaitarya  (Myrica  sapida),  Vayas- 
thS  (otherwise  called  Vibhitaki,  or  Terminalia  Bell  erica],  assafcetida, 
and  Choraka  {Andropogon  aciculatus),  with  (the  exudation  of)  Palan- 
kasha  (otherwise  called  Guggulu  or  Balsamodendron  Mukul)  thrown 
into  it,  cures  epilepsy  characterised  by  excitement  of  wind  and 
phlegm.  25 

A  prastha  of  oil  and  a  prastha  of  ghee  should  be  cooked,  with  the 
drugs  called  Jivaniya,  a  pala  of  each  of  these  being  taken,  in  a  drona 
of  milk.  This  ghee  is  a  well-tried  medicine  in  curing  epilepsy.*  26 

In  a  Kangsa  (8  seers)  of  milk  and  the  juice  of  the  sugarcane,  and 
the  juice,  of  eight  times  the  measure,  of  Kasmaryya  ( Gmelina  arborea ), 
a  prastha  (2  seers)  of  ghee  should  be  boiled,  with  a  Karshika  (2  palas) 
of  each  of  the  drugs  included  in  the  group  called  Jivaniya.f  27 

This  Ghee  conquers  epilepsy  born  of  wind  and  bile. 

Ghee ,  boiled  in  the  decoction  of  Kaga  ( Saccharuni  spontaneum ), 
Vidari  {Convolvulus paniculatus),  I kshu  (sugarcane),  and  Kuga  (Poa 
cynosuroides),  has  the  same  virtues.  28 

A  prastha  (2  seers)  of  ghee  boiled,  with  the  paste,  of  the  measure 
of  2  palas,  of  liquorice,  in  a  drona  (32  seers)  of  the  expressed  juice  of 
the  fruits  of  Amlaka  (Phyllanthus  Emblica ),  constitutes  a  remedy 
for  epilepsy  born  of  (excited)  bile.  29 

Mustard  oil  boiled  with  goat’s  urine  of  four  times  its  measure 
forms  an  excellent  ointment  (for  rubbing  the  body  with,  in  epilepsy). 

Baths  in  cow’s  urine,  and  rubbing  the  body  with  cow-dung,  are 
beneficial  in  epilepsy.  3° 

Mustard  oil,  boiled  in  the  decoction  of  the  bark  of  the  following, 
viz.,  Katabhi  (a  variety  of  Mimosa  Sirissa  of  smaller  proportions), 
Nimba  (Melia  Azadirachta),  Katwanga  (otherwise  called  Syonaka  or 
Bignonia  Indica),  Madhu-sigru  ( Moringa  Pterygosperma  of  the  red 


*  A  ‘prastha’  is  equal  to  2  seers  ;  a  ‘drona’  is  equal  to  32  seers. — T. 
f  In  practice,  the  measure  of  milk  and  the  juice  of  sugarcane  taken  is  16  seers.  As- 
regards  the  juice  of  Gmelina  arborea,  its  measure  being  stated  to  be  8  times  that  of  ghee , 
double  that  quantity,  i.  e.,  32  seers,  should  be  taken.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1285 


variety),  and  in  an  equal  measure  of  cow’s  urine,  is  spoken  of  highly 
as  an  ointment  for  rubbing  the  body  with  (in  epilepsy).  31 

Palankasha  (otherwise  called  Guggula,  or  Balsamodendron  Mukul), 
VachS  ( Acorus  Calamus),  Pathya  (chebulic  myrobalans),  Vrigchikali 
( Tragia  involucrata),  Arka  ( Calatropis  giganted),  Sarshapa  (mustard 
seeds  of  the  white  variety),  JatilS  (otherwise  called  Jatamansi  or 
Nardostachys  Jatamansi ),  Putana,  (chebulic  myrobalans),*  Kagi 
( Corydalis  Govaniana ),  Langali  ( Gloriosa  superb  a), \  assafcetida,  Choraka 
( Andropogon  acicularis).  Laguna  (garlics),  AtirasS  (liquorice  born  in 
water),  Chitra  (otherwise  called  Chitraka  or  Plumbago  Z  eylanica),% 
Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis  auriculatd),  and  as  much  of  the  dung  of  carnivo¬ 
rous  birds  as  may  be  procurable  : 

Oil  boiled  with  these  drugs,  in  goat’s  urine  of  four  times  its 
measure,  forms  a  collyrium  that  is  capable  of  curing  epilepsy. 

With  these  drugs,  again,  the  patient  may  be  fumigated. 

They  form  also  an  excellent  plaster  for  persons  afflicted  with 
epilepsy.  32-34 

Pippali  ( Piper  longum),  Saindhava  salt,  9’gru  ( Moringa  pterygos- 
perma ),  assafcetida,  the  leaves  of  Ferula  assafcetida,  Kakoli,  mustard 
seeds,  Kakanasa  ( Asclepias  curassavica ),  Kaitarya  ( Myrica  sapida\ 
{Pterocarpus  santalinus ),  and  the  shoulders  of  a  dog,  the  nails  of  a 
dog,  and  the  ribs  of  a  dog,  should  all  be  pounded  together  with  the 
urine  of  the  goat,  when  the  constellation  called  Pushya  is  ascendant. 

The  paste  thus  obtained  forms  a  good  plaster  for  epilepsy.  35-36 

Sticks  may  also  be  made  of  it  for  fumigating  the  patient. 

Apetarakshasi  (otherwise  called  Krishna  Tulsi,  viz.,  the  black 
variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum),  Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis  auriculatd),  Putana 
(otherwise  called  Haritaki,  i.  e.,  chebulic  myrobalans),  Kegi  (otherwise 
called  Bhutakegi,  i  e.,  Corydalis  Govaniana),  and  Choraka  ( Andropogon 


*  Chebulic  myrobalans  have  been  mentioned  once  above.  The  second  mention  of  the 
same  implies  that  double  the  quantity  should  be  taken. 

f  Some  texts  read  ‘Nakuli,’  *.  e.,  a  variety  of  Vanda  Roxburghii. 

+  Chitra  is  taken  by  Gangadhara  to  mean  Danti,  i.  e.,  Croton  folyandrum.  It  stands 
sometimes  for  M anjishtha ,  ?,  e.,  Rubia  cordifolia, — T. 


1286 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


aciculatus ),  pounded  with  (cow’s)  urine,  form  a  paste  that  should  be 
rubbed  over  the  body  of  a  person  afflicted  with  epilepsy. 

The  patient  may  also  be  sprinkled  over  with  the  urine  of  the  cow 
(with  good  results).  37 

The  dung  of  the  bat,  or  the  ashes  of  the  goat’s  hair,  or  those  of  the 
hair  on  cows’  tails,  forms  a  good  plaster  for  persons  afflicted  with 
epilepsy.  38 

The  urine  of  a  ‘Kapila’  cow  is  highly  beneficial  as  a  cerebral  pur¬ 
gative  for  persons  afflicted  with  epilepsy. 

The  urine  of  the  dog,  of  the  jackal,  of  the  cat,  and  of  the  lion, 
are  also  regarded  as  beneficial  (when  used  in  a  similar  way).  39 

Bhargi  ( Siphonanthus  Indica ),  Vacha  ( Acorus  Calamus ),  Nagadanti 
(otherwise  called  Hastidanti,  i.  e.,  Heliotropium  Indicum)* 

£weta  ( Clitoria  Tematea  of  the  white-flowered  variety),  and  £ata- 
vishfinika  ( Asclepias  geminata), 

Jyotishmati  (  Cardiospermum  Halicacabun ),  and  Nagadanti, — these 
three  sets  of  drugs  mentioned  in  the  three  successive  feet  of  this  verse, 
should  be  pounded  with  cow’s  urine.  Five  or  six  drops  of  the 
expressed  juice  of  each  of  these  three  sets  thus  pounded,  should  be 
administered  by  the  physician  as  a  cerebral  purgative  to  a  person 
afflicted  with  epilepsy. 

The  three  myrobalans  {viz.,  Chebulic,  Emblic,  and  Belleric), 
Vyosha  (i.  e.,  the  three  acrids,  viz.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of  Piper 
longum,  and  black  pepper),  Pitadru  (otherwise  called  DSruharidra, 
i.  e.,  Berberis  Asiatica ),  the  ashes  of  barley  shoots,  Phanijjhaka  (a 
variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum ),  Cyama  ( Echites  frutescens),  Apamarga 
( Achyranthes  aspera)  aud  Karanjaphala (the  fruits  of  Pongamia glabra,. 
syn.  Galedupa  Indica ),  should  be  pounded  together  in  goat’s  urine. 

Oil  boiled  with  this  paste  forms  an  excellent  cerebral  purgative 
that  is  curative  of  epilepsy.  40-42 


*  Nagadanti  or  Hastidanti  is  commonly  identified  with  Hastisunda  or  Heliotropium 
Indicum.  This,  however,  is  incorrect.  By  Nagadanti  is  meant  garden  radish  ;  but  in 
medical  scriptures,  this  meaning  is  not  taken.  It  implies  a  plant  whose  leaves  are  indented. 
In  Bengali,  it  is  called  ‘Cherapata-Danti,’ i.  e.,  Danti  with  indented  leaves. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


[2  87 


Pippali  ( Piper  longum)  Vrischikali  ( Tragia  involucrata ),  Kushtha 
( Aplotaxis  auticulata ),  the  (five)  salts,  and  Bhargi  ( Siphonanthus 
Indicd)  pounded  together  into  a  pulv,  form  a  highly  beneficial  cerebral 
purgative  in  epilepsy.*  43 

Kayastha  (otherwise  called  K&koli,  i.  e.,  a  bulbous  root  of  the  onion 
tribe  brought  from  the  Himalayas),  Mudga  ( Phaseolus  Mungo )  born  in 
autumn,  Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  Ushira  ( Andropogon 
muricatum ),  barley,  and  Vyosha  (or  the  three  acrids,  i.  e.,  dry  ginger, 
the  fruits  of  Piper  longum,  and  black  pepper),  should  be  pounded 
together  with  the  goat’s  urine  into  a  paste.  Sticks  should  then  be 
formed  of  it.  These  sticks  are  like  ‘Amrita’  (nectar)  in  epilepsy, 
Insanity,  snake-bite,  in  afflictions  caused  by  poison,  in  cases  of 
persons  that  have  drunk  poison,  as  also  in  cases  of  suspension  of 
animation  in  consequence  of  drowning.f  44-45 

Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus'),  Vayahstha  (the  fruits  of 
Terminalia  Bellerica),  the  three  myrobalans,  KSyasthS  (the  fruits  of 
{Phyllanthus  Emblica),  assafcetida,  green  grass  {Panicum  Dactylon 
species),  Vyosha  (the  three  ac-rids,  viz.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of  Piper 
longum,  and  black  pepper),  Masha  (the  seeds  of  Phaseolus  Roxburghii) 
and  grains  of  barley,  should  be  pounded  into  a  paste  with  the  urine 
of  the  goat,  the  sheep  and  the  ox. 

Sticks  should  then  be  made  of  the  paste  thus  prepared.  These 
sticks  are  used  in  epilepsy,  in  leucoderma,  in  Insanity,  and  in  inter¬ 
mittent  fever.J  46-47 

(The  sticks  should  be  used  for  purposes  of  collyria). 

The  bile  of  the  dog,  taken  under  the  asterism  called  Pushya  (the 
eighth  lunar  asterism),  cures  epilepsy  (when  administered  as  a 
collyrium). 


*  This  cerebral  purgative  is  called  a  ‘Pradhamana,’  that  is,  it  is  administered  with  the 
aid  of  a  blowing  tube. — T. 

t  These  sticks  are  intended  for  use  as  collyria.— T. 

J  It  will  be  seen  that  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica  and  Terminalia  Bellerica  have  been 
mentioned  separately,  although  ‘Triphala,’  meaning  the  same  two  with  chebulic  myro¬ 
balans,  has  been  mentioned.  Gangadhara  explains  that  two  parts  of  each  of  these  two 
should* be  taken, — T. 

163 


1288 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  same  article,  taken  under  the  same  asterism,  mixed  with  (old) 
ghee  forms  an  excellent  expedient  for  fumigation  (of  one  afflicted 
with  epilepsy).  48 

Taking  the  down,  the  feathers,  and  the  dung  of  the  mongoose, 
the  owl,  the  cat,  the  vulture,  the  scorpion,  the  snake,  and  the  crow, 
pound  them  together  and  make  sticks  of  the  paste.  They  are  good 
expedients  wherewith  the  physician  should  fumigate  patients  afflicted 
with  epilepsy.*  49 

By  the  aid  of  these  operations,  which  are  all  well-tested,  the  heart 
of  the  epileptic  patient  becomes  awakened.  His  ducts  also  become 
freed  (from  the  faults  that  obstruct  them).  In  consequence  of  this, 
he  regains  consciousness  and  memory.  5° 

When  the  physician  sees  the  Accidental  to  be  conjoint  and  put¬ 
ting  forth  an  aspect  that  is  graver  than  (that  of)  the  symptoms  of 
(excited)  faults,  he  should  then  adopt  the  treatment  that  is  laid  down 
for  Accidental  Insanity.f  Si 

After  this,  Agnivega  joining  his  hands,  said  this  : 

O  holy  one,  before  this,  in  the  Division  on  Aphorisms,  you  spoke 
of  that  severe  disease  which  is  called  ‘Atattwabhinivega.’ 

You  did  not  tell  us  there  the  cause,  features,  and  remedies  of  that 
ailment. 

I  desire  to  hear  these.  O,  let  them  be  spoken  of  here  !  52-53 

Hearing  these  words,  Punarvasu  said  as  follows  unto  his  disciple 
who  was  desirous  of  hearing  what  he  would  say.  54 

O  amiable  one,  hear  about  that  great  disease,  with  its  causes, 
features,  and  remedies  ! 


*  The  fact  is,  ‘dhupana’  means  causing  the  patient  to  inhale  the  smoke  of  sticks  made 
of  different  drugs. — T. 

t  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  Epilepsy  that  is  Accidental  should  be  treated  in  the  same 
way  as  Insanity  that  is  Accidental.  Accidental  Epilepsy,  that  is,  epilepsy  caused  by  the 
action  of  the  deities  and  evil  spirits,  &c.,  should  be  diagnosed  from  the  fact  that  the  symp¬ 
toms  manifested  are  grayer,  i.  e.,  more  violent,  than  those  of  excited  wind,  bile,  and 
phlegm.— T. 


CHAR  AKA  -  SA  MHITA. 


1285P 

Of  one  who  is  accustomed  to  take  filthy  food  and  drink,  who- 
suppresses  the  urgings  (of  nature)  even  when  they  are  pronounced, 
the  heart  being  affected  by  cold  and  oily  and  dry  practices  in  which 
he  indulges,  the  (excited)  faults  reside  in  the  system  after  having 
vitiated  those  ducts  which  are  bearers  of  (the  operations  of)  the  Mind 
and  the  Understanding.  The  consequence  is  that  such  a- person  be¬ 
comes  overwhelmed  by  the  qualities  of  Passion  and  Darkness. 

When  his  Understanding  and  Mind  are  (thus)  overwhelmed  by 
aggravated  Passion  and  Darkness,  and  when  his  heart  is  agitated  by 
the  (excited)  faults,  that  person  of  dim  and  stupefied  consciousness 
applies  his  understanding  incorrectly  on  things  eternal  and  transitory 
as  well  as  beneficial  and  baneful. 

Instructed  men  (learned  physicians),  call  this  severe  disease  by  the 
name  of  ‘Atattwabhinivega.’*  5S-S8 

Having  treated  him  (at  first)  with  oils  and  different  kinds  of 
fomentation  (Sweda),  and  having  also  corrected  his  system  by  admi¬ 
nistering  emetics  and  the  rest,  and  having  given  him  also  such  regimen 
as  ‘peya’  and  the  rest,  he  should  be  treated  with  beneficial  food  and 
drink.  59 

The  five  products  of  the  cow,  mixed  with  the  expressed  juice  of 
Brahmi  ( Gratiola  Monnieria ),  have  already  been  laid  down.  This 
should  be  administered  (in  the  disease  called  ‘Atattwabhinivega ). 

The  expressed  juice  of  £ankhapushpi  ( Pladera  decussata )  also 
may  be  administered. 

Besides  this,  any  ‘Rasayana’  that  is  good  may  also  be  admi¬ 
nistered.  60 

Narratives,  agreeable  or  interesting  to  the  mind,  should  also  be 
recited  (in  the  hearing  of  the  patient),  by  men  who  are  accustomed 
to  speak  only  words  of  approved  wisdom. 


*  The  name  ‘Atattwabhinivega’  literally  means  ‘inability  of  aprehending  the  nature  of 
things.’  It  is  a  sort  of  mental  feebleness  or  idiocy,  in  consequence  of  which  right  notions 
cannot  be  entertained  of  things.  The  description  here  given  of  the  causes  of  the  disease  is 
fanciful.— T. 


1290 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


His  (power  of)  apprehension  also  should  be  sought  to  be  restored 
by  the  aid  of  patience,  memory,  and  contemplation.  61 

Or,  oil  boiled  with  garlics,  or  the  expressed  juice  of  ^atSvari 
( Asparagus  racemosus ),  or  the  expressed  juice  of  Brahmi  ( Gratiola 
Monnieria),  or  the  expressed  juice  of  Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis  auriculata), 
or  that  of  VachS  ( Acorus  Calamus ),  mixed  with  honey,  should  be 
administered.*  6z 

Epilepsy  is  exceedingly  difficult  of  treatment.  The  great  disease 
(viz.,  MahSgada  or  Atattwabhinivega)  takes  a  very  long  time  to  cure. 
Hence,  both  these  diseases  should  be  treated  with  ‘RasSyana’  (i.  <?., 
such  medicines  as  promote  the  growth  of  the  ingredients  of  the 
body.).  63 

Persons  afflicted  with  epilepsy,  or  the  disease  called  ‘Atattwabhi¬ 
nivega’  should  always  be  protected  from  water,  fire,  trees,  hills,  and 
other  dangers  of  a  similar  kind.  One  afflicted  with  Insanity  should 
also  be  protected  from  similar  dangers,  for  these  are  causes  of  immi¬ 
nent  destruction.  64 

(Here  are  two  verses  containing,  a  summary ):■ 

The  cause  (of  epilepsy),  how  the  faults,  becoming  provoked,  cause 
epilepsy,  the  general  and  the  particular  symptoms  (of  this  disease), 
the  medicines  (of  the  general  and  the  particular  varieties),  the  causes 
that  originate  what  is  called  the  Mahagada  (the  great  disease,  other¬ 
wise  called  ‘Atattwabhinivega),  its  symptoms,  along  with  the  remedies 
(that  should  be  administered),  have  all  be  expounded  in  brief  as  also 
in  detail  by  the  ascetic  (Punarvasu)  in  this  lesson  on  the  treatment 
of  epilepsy .f  65-6& 

Thus  ends  Lesson  X,  called  the  Treatment  of  Epilepsy,  in  the 
Division  called  “Chikitsita,”  of  the  treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised  by 
Charaka. 


*  The  second  line  of  this  verse  is  read  differently  by  Gangadhara.  According  to  him, 
the  meaning  is,  the  expressed  juice  of  Brahmi,  or  that  of  Kushtha,  or  Vacha  mixed  with 
honey,  &c.’  The  fact  is,  the  final  adjective,  according  to  Gangadhara,  is  ‘madhusamyutam’ 
and  not  ‘madhusamyutam. — T. 

f  It  should  be  stated  that  in  rendering  the  last  dozen  verses,  I  have  adopted  the  readings 
of  Gangadhara.  The  fact  is,  the  readings  of  the  Calcutta  edition  (of  Pandit  Jibananda)  are 
very  faulty.  As  regards  the  very  last  verse,  I  have  adopted  the  Calcutta  edition  reading.— T. 


LESSON  XL 


TREATMENT  OF  WEAKNESS  INDUCED  BY  SORES. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  treatment  of  Weakness  induced  by 
sores  (on  the  lungs,  &c.). 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri. 

Of  benevolent  deeds,  and  conversant  with  the  highest  topic,  the 
regenerate  Rishi  of  Atri’s  race  (viz.,  Punarvasu)  expounded  the 
following  course  of  treatment  for  treating  the  disease  called  ‘Kshata- 
kshina’  (viz.,  weakness  induced  by  sores  on  the  lungs,  &c.).* 

Of  one  who  exerts  strongly  in  (stringing  or  drawing)  the  bow, 
of  one  who  bears  a  heavy  burden, 

of  one  who  falls  down  upon  an  uneven  ground  or  from  a  high 
place, 

of  one  who  fights  with  many  strong  men  (or,  with  many  men  at 
the  same  time,  as  some  texts  have), 
of  one  who  seeks  to  forcibly  stop  an  ox  or  a  horse  that  is  run- 
ing,  or  any  other  (strong)  animal  that  requires  to  be  checked, 
of  one  who  throws  with  force  a  boulder,  a  piece  of  wood,  a  rock, 
a  man  (or  the  like),  or  who  forcibly  strike  a  foe  or  foes, 
of  one  who  reads  in  a  very  loud  tune,  or  who  runs  with  long 
distance, 

of  one  who  crosses  a  broad  stream  (by  swimming),  or  who  runs 
with  an  elephant  (or,  a  horse,  as  some  texts  have  it), 
of  one  who  suddenly  jumps  high  (above  the  ground),  or  who 
dances  with  quick  motion,  or 

of  one  who  has  been  severely  wounded  in  consequence  of  other 
acts  of  rashness  (of  a  similar  kind), 
the  chest  becomes  wounded  (or  afflicted)  and  in  consequence  a 
severe  disease  arises.  i-5 


*  The  second  line  of  this  verse  is  tautological.  The  tautology  is  preserved  in  the  English 


1292 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


Again,  of  one  who  is  very  much  addicted  to  women,  or  of  one 
who  takes  dry  food  sparingly  or  in  measure  that  is  insufficient,  the 
chest  becomes  diseased.  It  becomes  cracked  and  a  burning  sensation 
arises.*  6 

Gradually  the  sides  become  subject  to  pain.  The  body  begins  to 
dry  up  or  wither,  and  tremors  set  in. 

Energy,  strength,  complexion,  relish  (for  food),  and  the  digestive- 
fire  fade  away.  Then  fever,  pains,  cheerlessness  of  mind,  loose 
motions,  and  loss  of  appetite  set  in. 

When  he  coughs,  he  expectorates  phlegm  (mucus)  that  is  mixed 
with  blood,  rotten,  dark,  of  an  exceedingly  foetid  odour,  yellow, 
knotty,  and  copious. 

The  person  with  sore  chest  withers  away  exceedingly  in  conse¬ 
quence  (particularly)  of  the  waste  of  vital  seed  and  ojas  (through 
sexual  indulgence).  7-9 

The  symptoms,  slightly  manifested,  of  this  disease  are  called  its 
incubatory  indications. 

Pains  in  the  chest,  vomiting  of  blood,  and  cough  are  the  parti¬ 
culars  of  this  disease  (sores  in  the  chest).  10 

When  he  becomes  very  weak,  the  urine  he  passes  is  seen  to  be 
mixed  with  blood,  and  pains  appear  in  his  sides,  back,  and  waist. 

Of  one  in  whom  the  symptoms  have  appeared  slightly,  whose 
digestive  fire  is  not  extinct,  and  who  has  not  lost  his  strength,  the 
disease  is  curable.f  11 

When  the  disease  has  excited  for  more  than  a  year,  it  is  capable 
of  being  suppressed. 

One  in  whom  the  disease  has  put  forth  all  its  symptoms  should 
be  avoided  by  the  physician. 


*  In  the  second  line,  the  correct  reading,  as  given  by  Gangadhara,  seems  to  be  ‘Virujyate’ 
and  not  ‘nirujyate.’  Then  again,  the  last  word  seems  to  be  ‘Vidahyate’  and  not  (as  Ganga¬ 
dhara  reads)  ‘Vibhajyate.’ — T. 

t  The  last  word  of  the  second  line  of  verse  It  is  ‘narah.’  Some  read  ‘navah.’  If  ‘navah’ 
be  accepted,  it  means  ‘new.’— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1293 


When  the  physician  thinks  that  the  patient’s  chest  has  got  cracks 
(or  sores),  he  should  give  him  to  drink,  without  delay,  dac  mixed  with 
milk  and  honey. 

The  same  day  the  patient  should,  when  lac  and  milk  and  honey 
have  been  digested,  eat  boiled  rice  with  milk  and  sugar.* 

One  who  is  afflicted  with  pains  in  his  sides  and  pubic  [regions, 
whose  bile  has  been  slightly  provoked,  and  whose  digestive  fire  has 
lost  its  strength  (without  being  extinct),  should  drink  (the  pulv  of) 
lac  mixed  with  wine. 

One  who  is  getting  loose  motions  should  take  (the  pulv  of)  lac 
with  the  tubers  of  Musta  ( Cypetus  rotundus),  Ativisha  ( Aconitmn 
heterophylluni ),  Path  a  ( Cissampelos  kernandi/olid),  and  Vatsaka  (the 
seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica \ 

If  his  digestive  fire  be  strong,  he  should  take  (the  pulv  of)  lac 
mixed  with  the  following  drags  boiled  in  milk,  viz.,  the  group  of 
drugs  called  ‘Jivaniya,’  sugar,  and  Twak-kshiri  (bambu  manna). 

One  afflicted  with  this  disease  should  drink,  for  the  healing  up 
of  his  sores,  the  decoction  of  IkshalikS  (otherwise  called  Ikshuvalika, 
that  is,  a  variety  of  sugarcane  of  small  proportions),  Visha  (lotus- 
stalks),  Granthi  (the  roots  of  Piper  longurn ),  Padmakegara  (filaments 
of  the  lotus),  and  red  sandal  wood,  mixed  with  milk  and  honey. 

If  a  person  afflicted  with  this  disease  gets  fever  with  burning 
of  the  skin,  he  should  drink  powdered  barley  boiled  in  milk  and 
mixed  with  ghee ;  or,  fried  barley  reduced  to  powder,  mixed  with 
sugar  ahd  honey. 

If  one  afflicted  with  this  disease  gets  cough,  or  pains  in  his  bone- 
joints,  he  should  lick  the  pulv  of  liquorice,  Madhuka  ( Bassia  latifolia ), 
grapes,  bambu  manna,  Piper  longum ,  and  Sid  a  cordifolia,  mixed  with 
ghee  and  honey.  I2-T7 

ELADI  PILLS. 

Take  half  an  aksha  of  each  of  these,  viz ,  Elfi  ( Elletaria  cardamo- 
mum ),  Patra  (leaves  of  Cinnamomum  Tamala ),  and  Twacha  (bark  of 
Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum ) ; 

*  Las  should  be  powdered  and  mixed  with  milk  and  honey. — T. 


i294 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Also  half  a  pala  of  the  fruits  of  Pippali  {Piper  longuni) ; 

Also  a  pala  of  each  of  these,  viz.,  sugar,  liquorice,  Kharjjura 
(dates),  and  Mridvika  (raisins)  ; 

Reduce  these  to  pulv,  and  mix  the  pulv  with  honey.  Of  the  paste 
thus  obtained,  pills  should  be  made. 

Each  of  the  pills  should  be  of  the  measure  of  an  aksha. 

One  afflicted  with  this  disease  should  take  a  pill  every  day  (for 
some  time),*  18-19 

These  pills  cure  cough,  asthma,  fever,  hiccup,  vomiting,  swoons, 
excitement  of  the  brain  like  to  what  occurs  in  inebriation,  vertigo, 
expectoration  of  blood,  thirst,  pains  in  the  sides,  disgust  for  food, 
consumption,  enlargement  of  spleen,  provoked  wind,  hoarseness  of 
voice,  sores  (in  the  chest),  waste,  and  blood-bile. 

These  pills  are  excellent  aphrodisiacs  and  have  cooling  and 
nutritive  virtues.!  2°-21 

(Even  this  is  the  composition  of  the  pills  called  Eladi-gudika). 

If  blood  is  vomited  copiously,  then  the  patient  should  drink  eggs 
of  the  hen  dissolved  in  the  soup  of  Phaseolus  Mungo ,  or  in  water  ; 

Or,  he  should  drink  the  soup  of  the  eggs  of  ‘Chatakas’  (sparrows), 
or  the  blood  of  goats  or  wild  animals  (such  as  deer,  &c.).|  22 

If  the  patient  expectorates  blood,  he  should  drink  the  pulv  of 
Punarnavfi  (Boerhavia  diffusa),  red  £ali  rice,  and  sugar,  boiled  toge¬ 
ther  in  water  mixed  with  the  juice  of  grapes,  milk,  and  ghee.  23 

Or,  he  may  drink  the  decoction  of  liquorice  and  the  flowers  of 
Bassia  latifolia,  mixed  with  milk,  and  boiled,  again,  with  Tanduliyaka 
(otherwise  called  NatiS  sak,  that  is,  Amaranthus  aleraceus ). 


*  An  ‘aksha’  is  equal  to  two  tolas.  Eight  tolas  make  one  pala. — T. 

+  ‘Tarpani’  means,  medicines  that  cool  and  oilify  the  system  and  thereby  promote 
nutrition.  Vide  Lesson  XXIII,  Sutrasthana,  ante. — T. 

J  Sparrows’  eggs  are  boiled  with  the  seeds  of  Phaseolus  Mungo  to  make  the  soup  referred 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


129s 


If  the  wind  of  the  patient  becomes  immoveable,  he  should  take 
the  adeps  of  the  goat,  fried  in  wine,  and  mixed  with  ‘Saindhava’  salt.  *4 

If  a  person  with  sores  in  his  chest  becomes  wasted  and  weak,  and 
sleepless  in  consequence  of  his  wind  being  excited,  he  should  then  eat 
boiled  rice  mixed  with  boiled  milk,  meat-juice,  and  honey,  ghee,  and 
sugar.*  2S 

If  weakened  and  emaciated,  he  should  lick  sugar,  the  flour  of 
barley  and  wheat,  Jivaka,  Rishavaka,  and  honey,  mixed  together,  and 
then  drink  "boiled  milk.  26 

Such  a  patient  may  also  drink  the  soup  of  the  meat  of  carnivorous 
animals  and  birds,  fried  in  ghee,  and  mixed  with  the  pulv  of  Pippall 
(fruits  of  Piper  longuiri)  and  honey.  This  soup  promotes  the  growth 
of  flesh  and  blood.  21 

A  person  afflicted  with  sores  in  his  chest  should  eat  boiled  rice 
of  the  £ali  variety,  mixed  with  the  ghee  obtained  from  milk  boiled 
with  Nyagrodha  ( Ficus  Bengalensis),  Udumvara  ( Ficus  glomerata \ 
Acwatha  ( Ficus  religiosa ),  Plaksha  ( Ficus  infectoriay,  £ala  (Shore# 
robust# ),  Priyangu  (Aglaia  Roxburghiana ),  Tamalaka  (the  head  of 
Borassus  flab  ellif or  mis'),  j  amvutwach  (the  bark  of  Eugenia  Jambolana ), 
Piyala  (Buchanania  latifolia ),  Padmaka  (otherwise  called  Padma- 
kashtha — a  fragrant  wood  of  that  name),  and  Agwakarna  (a  variety  of 
(Shorea  robusia  ;  some  identify  it  with  Termendlia  tomentosa  which  is 
the  same  as  Asana^f  2%-29 

The  following  is  beneficial  in  sores  of  the  chest,  mz.,  ghee  with  an 
equal  measure  of  milk  boiled  with  the  decoction  of  liquorice  and 
NSgabala  (otherwise  called  Goraksha-chakulia,  i.  e.,  Sida  spinosa), 
and  the  paste  of  PayasyS  (otherwise  called  Kshirakakoli,  i.  e.,  a  bul¬ 
bous  root  of  the  onion  tribe  brought  from  Nepal),  Pippali  ( Piper 
longuiri),  and  Vangi  (bambu  manna).  The  ghee  should  be  taken  with 
boiled  £ali  rice.  3° 


*  Gangadhara  reads  ‘avale  anile.1  It  should  be  ‘savale  anile.1 — T. 
f  The  drugs  mentioned  are  first  reduced  to  a  paste  which  is  boiled  in  milk  mixed  with 
water.  The  boiling  produces  a  kind  of  ghee.  It  is  this  ghee  that  is  directed  to  be  taken 
with  gali  rice. — T. 


164 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


This  ghee  also  is  beneficial  in  sore  chest,  viz.,  that  which  is  boiled, 
in  the  same  way,  with  milk  of  equal  measure  as  also  with  the  decoc¬ 
tion  of  Kola  ( Zizyphus  jujuba)  and  lac,  (and  with  the  paste  of  PayasyS 
Pippali,  and  V&ngi),* 

Ghee  boiled  with  milk  of  eight  times  its  measure  as  also  with  the 
paste  of  Katwanga  (otherwise  called  Syonaka,  i.  e.,  Bignonia  Indica), 
DSrbitwach  (the  bark  of  Berberis  Asiaticd),  Vatsakatwach  (the  bark 
of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica ),  and  the  fruits  ( or  seeds)  of  the  same 
(*,  e..  Holarrhena  antidysenterica',  is  beneficial  in  sore  chest.  31 

Take  a  Karshika  (or  two  tolas)  of  each  of  the  following,  viz,,  Jivaka 
(not  identifiable,  Tinospora  cordifolia  being  used  as  a  substitute), 
Rishabhaka  (not  identifiable,  bambu  manna  being  used  as  a  substi¬ 
tute),  Vira  (otherwise  called  ^Slaparni,  i.  e.,  Hedysarum  Gangeticuni), 
Jivanti  ( Ccelogyne  ovalis ),  N&gara  (dry  ginger),  £athi  {Curcuma  Zerum- 
bet),  the  four  Parnis  [viz.,  (^filaparni  i.  e.,  I.  Hedysarum  Gangeticum  ; 
2.  Prisniparni,  i.  e.,  Doodia  logopodioides,  3.  Mudgaparni,  i.  e.,  Phaseo- 
lus  trilobus,  and  4.  Mashaparni,  i.  e.,  Teramnus  labialis),  the  two 
Medas  (viz.,  Meda,  which  is  unidentifiable,  Aqwagandha,  Physalis 
ftexuosa  being  used  as  a  substitute)  and"  2.  Mahameda,  which  also 
is  unidentifiable,  £ariva,  i.  e.,  Echites  frutescens.  being  used  as  a  sub¬ 
stitute),  the  two  Kakolis  (viz,  Kakoli  and  Kshirakakoli,  both  being 
bulbous  roots  brought  from  the  Himalayas),  the  two  Nidigdhikas- 
{viz.,  Kantakari,  i.  e.,  Solunum  Xanthocarpum,  and  Vrihati,  i.  e.,  Sola- 
num  Indicuni),  the  two  Punarnavas  {viz.,  the  red  and  the  white 
varieties  of  Boerhavia  diffusa),  the  two  Madhukas  {viz.,  liquorice  and- 
Bassia  latifolia),  Atmagupta  {Mucuna- pruriens),  ^atavari  {Asparagus 
racemosus),  Riddhi  (not  identifiable,  Bala  or  Pavonia  odorata  being 
used  as  a  substitute),  Parushaka  {Grewia  Asiaticd),  BhSrgi  {Sipho- 
nanthes  Indica),  Mridvika  (raisins),  Vrihati  {Solanum  Indicum ),  (^ringa- 
taka  {Trapa  bispinosd),  Tamlaki  (otherwise  called  BhumySmlaki,  i.  e., 
Phyllanthus  Niruri)y  Payasya  (here  taken  for  KshiravidSri  or  Bhumi- 
kushmanda,  i.  e.,  Batatus  paniculatus),  Pippali  {Piper  longum),  Bala 
{Si da  cordifolia)y  V adara  {Zizyphus  jujuba),  Akshaka  (Juglans  regia). 


*  I  think  GangSdhara  is  right  in  interpreting  this  verse.  ‘Kolalaksharase  tadvat’  is  one 
part,  and  the  rest  of  the  two  lines  is  another  part,  ‘Tadvat’  brings  in  the  paste  of  Payasya 
and  the  rest. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1297 

Kharjjura  (dates\  B3tama  (almonds),  Abhishuka  (a  kind  of  fruit),  and 
other  fruits -of  the  kind  (which  are  known  to  be  alleyiative  of  both' 
wind  and  bile) : 

Reduce  these  into  a  paste'. 

Add  a  prastha  (2  seers)  of  each  of  these,  viz.,  Dhatri-rasa  (the 
expressed  juice  of  the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblicd),  the  expressed 
juice  of  Vidari  ( Batatus  Paniculatus ),  that  of  Ikshu  (sugarcanes),  the 
meat-juice  of  the  goat,  and  milk. 

Boil  a  prastha  of  ghee  with  all  these. 

When  cooled,  add  half  a  prastha  of  honey  and  half  a  Tula  of 
sugar.  32-36 

Also  add  two  karshikas  of  the  pulv  of  each  of  these,  viz.,  Patra 
(leaves  of  Cinnamomum  Tamala ),  Eli  ( Elettaria  cardamomum ),  Hema 
(otherwise  called  Nagkegara,  i.  e.,  Mesua  f erred),  Twach  (the  bark  of 
Cinnamomum  Zeylauicum ),  and  black  pepper. . 

One  afflicted  with  sores  in  the  chest  should  take  a  proper  measure 
of  this  preparation  and-  lick  it  as  often  as  he  can.  37 

This  ghee  is  called  ‘Amritapraga,’  and  its  effects  on  human  beings- 
are  like  those  of  ‘amrita’  (nectar)  itself. 

Unto  one  who  takes  milk  and  meat-juice,  this  ghee  is  said  to  be' 
‘Sudha’  or  ‘amrita-rasa.’*  3s 

..  This  ghee  nourishes  those  that  have  lost  their  semen,  those  who 
have  been  weakened  by  sores  in  the  chest  (2.  e.,  the  lungs),  those  who 
have  lost  their  strength  (through  other  causes),  those  who  have 
been  emaciated  by  ‘(other)  ailments,  those  who  are  addicted  to 
women  (and  have,  as  the  consequence  thereof,  become  weak),  those 
who  have  lost  flesh,  as  also  those  who  have  lost  complexion  or 
voice.  39 

This  ghee  cures  cough,  hiccup,  fever,  difficulty  of  breathing,  burn¬ 
ing  of  the  skin,  thirst  and  blood-bile. 


*  The  first  line  is  read  variously.  All  the  texts,  however,  have  ‘Sudhamritarasa’.  Both 
‘Sudha’  and  ‘Amrita’  mean  nectar. — T. 


1298 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


It  gives  progeny,  and  cures  nausea  and  vomiting,  swoons  and 
ailments  of  the  chest,  the  genital  organs  (of  females),  and  the 
urine.  4° 

Even  this  is  the  composition,  and  these  the  uses,  of  the  ghee  called 
‘Amritapraga.’ 

Take  a  pala  of  each  of  the  following  drugs,  viz.,  £wadangshtr& 
(otherwise  called  Gokshura,  i.  e.,  Tribulus  latiuginosus),  Ushira  (the 
roots  of  Andropogon  muricatum ),  ManjishthS  ( Rubia  cordifolia),  B&la 
{Sida  cordifolia ),  Kasmaryya  (otherwise  called  GambhSri,  i.  e., 
Gmelina  arborea),  Kattrina  (otherwise  called  Gandhatrina,  i.  e.,  Andro¬ 
pogon  schcenarithus),  Darbhamula  (the  roots  of  Saccharum.  cylindricum), 
Prithakparni  (otherwise  called  Chakulia,  i.  e.,  Doodia  logopodioides), 
Palaga'  ( Butea  frondosa),  Rishabhaka  (not  identifiable,  bambu  manna 
being  used  as  a  substitute),  and  Sthira  (otherwise  called  ^alaparni, 
i.  e.,  Hedysarum  Gangeticuni). 

These  should  be  boiled  in  water,  mixed  with  milk  of  four  times 
its  measure,  along  with  the  paste  of  Swagupta  (Mucutta  pruriens), 
Jivanti  ( Ccelogyne  ovalis),  MedS  (not  identifiable,  Agwagandha,  i.  e., 
Physalis  flexuosa  being  used  as  a  substitute),  Rishavaka  (not  identi¬ 
fiable,  bambu  manna  being  used  as  a  substitute),  Jivaka  (not  identi¬ 
fied,  Guduchi,  i.  e.,  Tinospora  cordifolia  being  used  as  a  substitute), 
(^atfivari  (otherwise  called  £atamuli,  i.  e.,  Asparagus  racemosus ), 
Riddhi  (not  identifiable,  Bala  i,  e.,  Sida  cordifolia  being  used  as  a 
substitute),  Mridvika  (raisins),  £arkara  (sugar),  £rabani  (otherwise 
called  Munderi,  i.  e.,  Sphceranthus  Hirtus,  syn.  Spkeranthus  Indicus ), 
and  Visha  (lotus-stalks). 

When  a  prastha  (2  seers)  only  remains  in  the  vessel,  it  should  be 
taken  down. 

The  ghee  thus  prepared  cures  excited  wind  and  bile,  as  also  pains 
in  the  chest.  It  cures  also  difficulty  of  micturition,  gonorrhoea,  piles, 
cough,  consumption  and  phthisis. 

It  gives  strength  and  flesh  to  those  that  have  been  weakened  by 
wielding  the  bow,  or  by  addiction  to  women  and  wine,  or  by  bearing 
burdens,  or  by  walking  long  distances.  4W4 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  ‘^wadangshtradi  ghrita.’ 


CHAR  AKA -SAM HIT  A. 


1299 


Eight  palas  of  the  flowers  of  Bassia  latifolia  should  be  boiled  in 
the  decoction,  measuring  a  prastha  (2  seers),  of  grapes.  Add  ghee 
measuring  a  prastha,  and  boil  the  compound  with  the  paste,  measur¬ 
ing  eight  palas  of  Piper  longum. 

When  the  boiling  is  over  and  the  contents  of  the  vessel  become 
cool,  they  should  be  mixed  with  eight  palas  of  honey  and  sugar. 

Add  to  the  product  an  equal  measure  of  the  flour  of  fried  barley. 

This  preparation  (of  fried  barley)  is  beneficial  in  weakness  caused 
by  sores  in  the  chest,  as  also  in  bloody  tumours.  45-46 

Even  this  is  the  manner  of  giving  the  flour  of  fried  barley  to  a 
patient. 

The  physician  should  boil  seven  prasthas  of  these  (seven)  ingre¬ 
dients,  viz.,  the  expressed  juice  of  Dhatriphala  (fruits  of  Phyllanthus 
Emblica ),  that  of  Vidari  ( Batatus paniculatus ),  that  of  sugarcane,  the 
decoction  of  the  group  of  drugs  called  ‘Jivaniya,’  ghee,  the  milk  of  the 
goat,  and  that  of  the  cow,  (a  prastha  of  each  being  taken).  47 

When  boiled  and  cooled,  two  prasthas  of  sugar  and  honey  should 
be  added. 

The  ghee  thus  prepared  cures  phthisis,  epilepsy,  blood-bile,  cough, 
gonorrhoea,  and  consumption.  It  also  prevents  the  effects  of  age, 
increases  one’s  period  of  life,  and  imparts  flesh,  semen  and  strength. 

When  the  bile  increases,  one  should  lick  this  ghee.  When  the  wind 
increases,  one  should  drink  it.  48-49 

Licked,  it  extinguishes  the  bile  ;  a  little  of  it  entering  the  system, 
it  does  not  (when  licked),  extinguish  the  digestive  fire.* 

Drunk,  it  attacks  the  (excited)  wind  (and  restores  it  to  its  normal 
state).  At  the  same  time,  it  does  not  extinguish  the  digestive  fire.  5° 

The  physician  should  prescribe  as  drink  all  these  ghees,  mixing 
them  with  bambu  manna,  and  the  pulv  of  Piper  longum  and  fried 
paddy,  for  such  persons  as  are  weakened  by  sores  in  the  chest  and 
those  who  have  lost  flesh.  51 


The  reading  ‘analam’  is  correct ;  and  not  ‘anilam’. — T. 


*300 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


We  shall  speak  below  of  another  medicine  that  is  called  ‘Sarpir- 
guda’  (boluses  of  ghee).  The  physician  should  prescribe  it  for  the 
same  class  of  persons,  mixing  it  with  a  proper  measure  of  honey. 
The  patient  should  drink  milk  after  taking  this  medicine.  By  drink¬ 
ing  this  medicine  one  quickly  gets  semen,  energy,  strength,  and 
growth.  52 

Bala  ( Sida  cordifolia ),  Vidari  ( Batatus paniculatus ),  HrashS-Pan- 
chamuli  (otherwise  called  ‘Swalpa-Panchamuli,’  that  is,  the  group 
of  the  five  smaller  roots,  viz.,  those  of  Hedysarum  Gangeticum ), 
Doodia  logopodioides,  Solanum  Indicum,  Solanum  X anthocarpum,  and 
Tribulus  lanuginosus),  Punarnava  {Boerhavia  diffusa ),  and  the  five 
milk-yielding  trees  {viz.,  Ficus  glomeratus,  Ficus  Bengalensis,  Ficus 
religiosa ,  Ficus  infectoria,  and  Calamus  rotang) :  take  the  buds  of  each 
of  these,  of  the  measure  of  a  pala. 

In  the  decoction  of  these,  mixed  with  two  kinds  of  milk  (viz.,  that 
of  the  goat  and  of  the  cow),  as  also  with  the  expressed  juice,  of 
proper  measure,  of  Vidari  (Batatus  paniculatus)  and  the  meat-juice 
of  goat’s  flesh,  an  adhaka  (8  seers)  of  ghee  should  be  cooked,  along 
with  an  aksha  (2  palas)  of  the  paste  of  the  group  of  drugs  called 
‘Jivaniya.’  53-54 

When  the  boiling  is  over  and  it  becomes  cool,  it  should  be  strained 
through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth.  Two  and  thirty  palas  of  sugarcandy 
should  then  be  thrown  into  the  strained  liquid.  The  flour  of  wheat, 
the  pulv  of  Piper  lougum,  the  pulv  of  bambu  manna,  the  pulv  also 
of  yringatfika  (Trapa  bispinosa),  with  honey,  coming  up  in  all  to 
the  measure  of  a  Kudava  (half  a  seer),  should  also  be  thrown 
into  it. 

The  product  should  then  be  stirred  with  a  wooden  ladle  till  it 
becomes  thick.  The  ghee,  when  it  reaches  this  condition,  should  be 
made  into  pills.  The  pills  should  all  be  wrapped  round  with  leaves 
of  Betula  Bhojpattra.  55-56 

Swallowing  these  pills,  one  should  drink  milk,  or  wines  if  the 
phlegm  be  excited. 

These  boluses  of  ghee  are  regarded  as  beneficial  in  consumption, 
cough,  sores  in  the  chest,  weakness,  in  afflictions  brought  about  by 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SA  MHITA. 


!30I 


excessive  toil,  by  addiction  to  women,  and  by  bearing  heavy  burdens, 
in  expectoration  of  blood,  in  heat  of  the  body,  in  deposit  of  the  phlegm 
in  the  chest,  in  pains  of  the  sides,  in  headaches,  in  hoarseness  of  voice, 
and  loss  of  complexion.  57-s8 

Even  this  is  the  composition  and  process  of  preparation  of  the 
medicine  called  ‘Swarpi-gudar  (boluses  of  ghee). 

A  prastha  of  ghee  should  be  boiled  with  a  pala  of  each  of  the 
following  drugs  pounded  with  milk,  viz.,  Tvakkshiri  (bambu  manna), 
£ravani  (otherwise  called  Munditika  or  Munderi,  i.  e.,  Sphceranthus 
hirtus),  DrSksha  (grapes),  Murva  ( Sanseviera  Z,eylanicd),  Rishabhaka 
(not  identifiable,  bambu  manna  being  used  as  a  substitute),  Jivaka 
(not  identifiable,  Guduchi,  i.  e.,  Tinospora  cordifolia  being  used  as  a 
substitute),  Vira  (otherwise  called  £alparni,  i.  e.,  Hedysarum  Gangs- 
ticuni),  Riddhi  (not  identified,  BalS  i.  e.,  Sida  cordifolia ),  being  used 
as  a  substitute),  Kshirakakoli  (a  bulbous  root  of  the  onion  tribe 
brought  from  the  Himalayas),  Vrihati  ( Solatium  Indicum ),  Kapi- 
kechcchu  {Mucuna  pruriens),  Kharjjuraphala  (dates),  and  MedS.  (not 
identified,  AcwagandhS,  i.  e.,  Physalis  flexuosa  being  used  as  a  substi¬ 
tute)  ;  as  also  with  a  prastha  of  the  expressed  juice  of  each  of  the 
following,  viz.,  Dhatri  (the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica ),  Vidari 
( Batatus  paniculatus ),  and  Ikshu  ( Saccharum  officinarmri). 

When  the  boiling  is  over  and  the  contents  of  the  vessel  become 
cool,  half  a  Tula  (i.  e.,  six  and  a  quarter  seers)  of  sugar,  and  half  a 
prastha  of  honey,  should  be  thrown  into  vessel. 

After  this,  boluses  should  be  made  of  the  ghee  thus  prepared. 
These  (taken  in  proper  measure)  cure  cough,  hiccup,  fever,  phthisis, 
that  violent  form  of  asthma  which  is  called  ‘Tamaka-fwasa’,  blood- 
bile,  malignant  jaundice,  loss  of  semen,  loss  of  sleep,  thirst,  leanness, 
and  anaemia,  59-62 

Even  this  is  the  composition  and  the  method  of  preparation  of 
another  kind  of  ‘Swarpirgudaka’  or  boluses  of  ghee . 

Take  equal  measures  of  DrSksha  (grapes),  new  Amalaka  (fruits  of 
Phyllanthus  Emblica ),  Atmagupta  (. Mucuna  pnitiens),  Punarnava 
{Boerhavia  diffusa ),  ^atavari  (. Asparagus  racemosus),  Vidari  ( Batatus 


I3°2 


CH A  RAKA-SA  M HIT  A. 


paniculatus ),  and  Pippali  (fruits  of  Piper  longuni ),  aggregating  ten 
palas  in  all. 

Add  eight  palas  of  ginger,  two  palas  of  liquorice,  two  palas  of 
‘Sauvarchala’  salt,  and  two  palas  of  Maricha  (black  pepper). 

Take  also  three  Sdhakas  of  (cow’s)  milk,  (sesame)  oil,  and  ghee 
(obtained  from  cow’s  milk).  Boil  a  hundred  palas  of  sugar  in  the 
mixed  liquid.  When  the  boiling  is  over,  throw  into  it  the  pulv  of  the 
(eleven)  drugs  mentioned  above. 

Make  boluses  of  the  measure  of  a  ‘Vilwa’.*  These  boluses  should 
be  taken  by  one  that  has  been  weakened  by  sores  in  the  chest ;  as 
also  by  one  that  has  been  dried  up. 

Through  the  action  of  this  medicine  the  juices  increase  and  the 
patient  speedily  regains  nourishment.  63-66 

Even  this  is  the  composition  and  method  of  preparation  of  a  third 
variety  of  ‘Swarpirgudaka’  (boluses  oi  ghee). 

Two  adhakas  of  cow’s  milk,  one  prastha  of  ghee,  one  adhaka  of 
the  expressed  juice  of  the  sugarcane,  one  prastha  of  the  expressed 
juice  of  Vidari  {Batatus  paniculatus),  and  one  prastha  of  the  meat- 
juice  of  francolirie  partridges,  should  be  taken. 

After  these  have  beeen  boiled  together,  the  following  drugs 
pounded  with  the  expressed  juice  of  the  sugarcane  should  be  thrown 
into  the  boiled  product :  a  kudava  of  the  flowers  of  Madhuka  (Bassia 
latifolia ),  a  kudava  of  Piyala  ( Buchanania  latifoha),  half  a  kudava  of 
Tugakshiri  (bambu  manna),  twenty  fruits  of  the  date,  twenty  fruits  of 
Vibhitaka  (Terminalia  Belief  ica),\  a  chaturthika  (i.  e.,  a  pala)  of  the 
fruit  oi  Piper  longum,  thirty  palas  of  Khanda  (a  variety  of  treacle),  a 
karsha  of  Madhuka  (liquorice),  also  half  a  pala  of  each  of  the  drugs 
included  in  the  group  called  ‘Jivaniya.’ 

All  these  should,  again,  be  boiled  together.  When  the  boiling 
is  over  and  the  product  becomes  cooled,  a  khudava  of  honey  should 


*  A  ‘vilwa’  (literally,  a  fruit  of  Mgle  marmelos)  is  taken  to  be  a  pala,  that  is,  one-eighth 
of  a  seer. — T. 

■f  The  correct  reading,  as  given  by  Gangadhara,  is  ‘Vibhitakanancha’  and  not  Vibhi 
tSkSnakshah’.  If  the  latter  reading  be  accepted,  it  would  mean  ‘an  aksha  (*'.  e.,  2  tolas) 
of  vibhitaka  fruits’.— T. ' 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland ,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  have  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California: —  . As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent . 

there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis ,  Ohio,  U.  S.  A.  : — The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
.societies,'  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge : — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York  : — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  American  four nal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia-. — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia : — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  of  Cashmere : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
■be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-  Western 
University,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition  -I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  .-—Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  ig,  East  jSth  Street,  New  York  : — Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Traise,  Dramstadl : — The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist : — I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising  out  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere,  174,  Boulevatse,  Saint  Germain  : — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  I 
arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop 
from  the  Phar-macopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients 
according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and 
fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of 
the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street,  Calcutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  Kablratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
[about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after. — 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  :—\  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing .-—The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector  \ — Your  patriotic, 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  A.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  : — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hypocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gya  It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  Wales  The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is 

a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji,— The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


PART  XLII. 


47357 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


(TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH ). 


PUBLISHED  BY 

PARESHNATH  SARMA, 


SON  OF  LATH 


KAVIRAJ  AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  Original)  WITH  COMMENT¬ 
ARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 

journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  the  Hindu 
SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C-,  &C. 


CALCUTTA : 

2oo,  Cornwallis  Street. 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N.  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRATNA  PRESS, 
12,  SIMLA  STREET,  BYE-LANE. 


(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved. ) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters.) 

Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Chataka.  The  book  Is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — . .  ...  I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention. 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Sttsruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  a3  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office —  .  Your 

excellent  translation  . -a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

. Many  importaht  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York ,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
•  rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgk,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A.— I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing,  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris  .—I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest,  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University  ',  Germany : — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsbureh,  Germany  .-—English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,' C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal. — I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life, 
cannot.be  other  than  valuable. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


'303 


be  thrown  into  it,  as  also  the  fine  pulv  of  Maricha  (black  pepper) 
and  Ajaji  (otherwise  called  Krishnajiraka,  i.  e.,  Nigttta  sativa). 

Boluses  should  then  be  formed  of  the  soft  mass.  These  boluses 
■are  beneficial  in  ‘Vata-rakta’  (tubercular  leprosy),  in  ailments  caused 
by  the  excited  bile,  in  sores  in  the  chest  (or  kings),  in  cough,  in 
consumption,  in  the  case  of  persons  whose  ‘dhatus’  are  wasting,  also 
of  persons  whose  semen  has  dried  up,  also  of  persons  who  are  ema¬ 
ciated,  weak,  and  old,  also  of  persons  who  are  desirous  of  nourish¬ 
ment,  complexion1,  and  strength,  in  the  case  also  of  women  Who  are 
suffering  from  discharges  from  their  genital  organs,  also  of  women 
whose  offspring  die  after  birth,  also  of  women  who  are  desirous  of 
conceiving,  or  of  those  who  have  abortions,  and  of  those  whose 
embryos  die  within  the  womb. 

These  boluses  are  highly  efficacious  in  the  cases  mentioned  above,- ,6 
They  impart  strength,  and  increase  the  semen  and  the  blood.  67-74  j 

Even  this  is  the  composition  and  the  method  of  preparation  of  feC  , 
fourth  variety  of  ‘Swarpirmodaka’  (boluses  of  ghee).  Vv-- 

Unt'O'  a  person  who  is  addicted  to  women  and  the  wind'  of  whose  " 
pubic  region  has  been  vitiated,  such  combinations  (of  drugs)  should 
be  administered  as  are  alleviative  of  the  wind,  nutritive,  and  possessed 
of  aphrodisiac  virtues.  7 5 

Such  a  person  should  drink  (cow’s)  milk  mixed  or  boiled  with 
sugar  and  the  pulv  of  Piper  Zongurn,  or  with  ghee,  or  with  honey. 
This  milk  cures  cough  and  fever.  76 

A  person  who  has  been  weakened  by  indulgence  in  women, - 
should  drink  soup  (of  Pkaseolus  Mungo  and  similar  seeds),  boiled 
with  the  expressed  juice  of  VidSri  (Batatus paniculatus)  and  that  of 
the  sugarcane  also,  fried  in  ghee,  and  rendered  slightly  sour  by  the 
addition  of  acid  fruits  (such  as  pomegranates,  jujubes,  &c.).  This 
juice  is  the  forembst  of  those  combinations  that  prolong  life'  and' 
increase  nutrition.  77 

When  one  who  is  habituated  to  preparations  of  barley  as  food, 
has  been  weakened  by  sores  in  the  chest  (lungs),  and  has  his  digest¬ 
ive  fire’  enkindled,  he  should  take  the  gruel  of  the  flour  of  barley 
165 


1 304 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


strained  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth  and  mixed  with  honey  and- 
ghee.  7s 

Or,  unto  one  who  has  been  weakened  (by  sores  in  the  lungs), 
should  be  administered  meat-juice  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  wild 
animals,  boiled  with  the  group  of  drugs  called  ‘Jivaniya,’  fried  in  ghee, 
and  mixed  with  sugar,  as  curry  (with  boiled  rice  or  chuppatis  of 
wheat  flour).  79 

One  who  has  been  weakened  (by  the  causes  mentioned  above) 
should  be  fed  with  the  milk  of  the  cow,  the  buffalo,  the  horse,  the 
elephant,  and  the  goat,  or  with  meat -juice,  or  with  soup  (of  Phaseolus 
Mungo  and  similar  seeds)  dressed  with  ghee  and  rendered  slightly 
sour  by  means  of  pomegranates  and  other  fruits  of  the  kind.*  So 

When  the  digestive  fire  is  kindled  (of  a  person  who  is  weakened 
by  such  ailments),  even  this  {viz.,  what  has  been  laid  down  above) 
is  what  is  ordained  (in  respect  oT  regimen).  If  the  digestive  fire  is 
weak,  the  administration  of  such  drugs  as  enkindle  it  and  as  cause 
the  digestion  of  the  food  taken,  is  desirable. 

If  the  bowels  of  persons  afflicted  with  phthisis  become  loose,  the 
administration  of  such  drugs  as  are  constipating  is  desirable.  81 

Take  a  pala  of  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  2  palas  of  £unthi  (dry  ginger), 
2  palas  of  ‘Sauvarchala’  salt,  a  Kudava  (4  palas)  of  Vrikshamla  (the 
fruits  of  Tamarindus  Indica),  the  same  measure  of  Dadima  (the  bark 
of  pomegranates),  the  same  measure  of  the  leaves  of  Sarjjaka  {Oci- 
mum  sanctum),  1  pala  of  black  pepper,  1  pala  of  Ajaji  (cumin  seeds), 
2  chaturthikas  (2  palas)  of  Dhanyaka  (coriander  seeds),  and  12  palas 
of  sugar. 

These  should  be  reduced  to  pulv,  and  a  proper  measure  thereof 
should  be  administered  with  food  and  drink. 

This  medicine  creates  relish  for  food,  excites  the  digestive  fire, 
increases  strength,  cures  pains  in  the  sides,  and  alleviates  asthmatic 
breath  and  cough.  82-84 

*  For  ‘mangsarasaih’  in  the  first  line,  GangSdhara  reads  ‘mangsaihrasaih,’  meaning  ‘with 
flesh  and  meat-juice.’  X  think  this  is  not  correct,  for  only  liquid  regimen  is  here  prescribed. 
.Flesh,  even  of  such  wild  animals  as  deer,  &c.,  would  be  strong  for  such  persons. — T. 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SAM  11  IT  A. 


1305 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  the  medicine  called  ‘SaindhavacH 
powder.’ 

Take  one  shodagikfi  of  DhSnya  (coriander  seeds),  2  shodagikas  of 
Aj&ji  (cumin  seeds),  the  same  measure  of  Ajamoda  ( Pimpinella  invo- 
lucrata ) ;  to  these  should  be  added  4  palas  of  Dadima  (the  bark  of 
pomegranates)  and  4  palas  of  Vrikshamla  (the  fruits  of  Tamarindus 
Indica ),  1  pala  of ‘Sauvarchala’  salt,  1  karsha  (2  tolas)  of  £unthi  (dry 
ginger),  and  5  palas  of  the  kernel  of  Kapittha  ( Feronia  elephantum). 

Reduce  all  these  to  a  pulv,  and  add  16  palas  of  sugar. 

The  ‘Shadava’  (mixture  or  compound)  thus  prepared  should  be 
administered,  as  in  the  case  of  the  medicine  mentioned  last,  with  food 
and  drink.  85-86 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  the  ‘Shadava’  that  is  administered 
to  persons  weakened  by  the  causes  mentioned- 

A  person  that  is  weakened  by  the  causes  mentioned  above  should 
drink  half  a  karsha  (1  tola)  of  the  expressed  juice  of  the  roots  of 
NagabalS  (Sida  spinosa>,  increasing  the  measure  gradually  to  1  pala. 
The  juice  should  be  mixed  with  milk  and  he  should  take  the  medi¬ 
cine  for  a  month.  The  patient  should,  during  this  period,  confine 
himself  to  this  milk  only,  without  taking  any  other  food.  87 

The  administration  of  this  medicated  milk  is  highly  conducive  to 
nourishment,  longevity,  strength,  and  restoration  to  health. 

The  process  for  administering  the  expressed  juice  of  Manduka- 
parni  ( Hydrocotyle  Asiatica),  as  also  £unthi  (dry  ginger)  and  liquorice 
is  the  same.*  88 

Persons  weakened  by  sores  in  the  chest,  if  desirous  of  regaining 
health  and  ease,  should  take  such  food  and  drink  as  are  oily  and 
cooling,  as  are  not  productive  of  any  burning  sensation,  and  as  are 
light  and  beneficial.  89 

Whatever  regimen  has  been  laid  down  for  persons  afflicted  with 
phthisis,  or  cough,  or  blood-bile,  should  be  administered  to  one 


*  l.e.,  the  expressed  juice  of  Madhukaparni,  mixed  with  milk,  should  be  administered 
for  a  month,  increasing  the  dose  from  half  a  karsha  to  one  pala,  the  patient  giving  up  other 
food  and  drink  all  the  while.— T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHI TA. 


1306 


weakened  by  sores  in  the  lungs,  guided  by  considerations  of  the 
strength  of  the  patient’s  digestive  fire,  the  violence  of  his  disease,  his 
capacity  for  assimilation,  as  also  his.  strength.  9° 

If  the  treatment  be  neglected  of  weakness  caused  by  gores  in  the 
lungs,  the  disease  that  is  certain  to  be  induced  is  phthisis.  Hence, 
before  its  advent,  the  other  disease  {viz.,  sores  in  the  lung!?)  should 
be  promptly  cheeked. 

(Here  occur  two  verses  containing  a  summary). 

The  causes  that  bring  about  the  disease  called  ‘Kshatakshina’’ 
(weakness  due  to  sores  in  the  lungs),  its  general  and  special  features, 
considerations  about  its  incurability,  suppressibility,  and  curability 
and  the  means  by  which  success  is  achieved  in  cases  that  are  curable, 
—all  these  have  been  declared  unto  the  foremost  of  his  disciples  {viz.,. 
Agnivega),  in  this  Lesson  on  the  treatment  of  weakness  induced  by 
sores  in  the  lungs,  by  Punarvasu  conversant  with  the  truths  of  all 
topics  and  freed  from  the  qualities  of  Tamas  (Darkness),  Rajas. 
(Passion),  and  heedlessness.  1-2 

Thus  ends  Lesson  XI,  called  ‘Treatment  of  ‘Kshatakshina,’  in 
the  Division  called  Chikitsita,,  of  the  treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised 
by  Charaka, 


■f  Some  editions  read  ‘VitlSstamajastamodoshe.’  This  is  incorrect.  GangSdhara  read* 
rightly — ‘VitsstSmorajomoha.  ’ — T. 


lesson  xrr. 


We  shall  now  expound  the'  treatment  of  (dropsical)  swellings* 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri. 

Agnivega  asked  that  prince  of  physicians,  that  foremost  of 
ascetics  viz.,  him  of  Atri’s  race,  about  the  exciting  causes,  the  symp¬ 
toms,  and  the  means  of  alleviation,  of  that  severe  disease  called: 
‘£wayathu’  (dropsical)  swellings.  1 

t  Unto  him,  in  consequence  of  his  question,  that  Ocean  of  the 
Science  of  Medicines,  that  foremost  of  learned  Brfihmans,  viz.,  he 
sprung  from  Atri’s  race,  duly  explained  (the  exciting  causes,  the 
symptoms,  and  the  means  of  alleviation)  of  this  disease  which  is  of 
three  kinds  according  to  the  distinctions  of  wind  and  the  rest,  and 
which  is  of  four  kinds  (classified  under  a  different  principle)  viz.. 
Constitutional,  Accidental,  affecting  a  single  limb,  and  that  affecting 
the  whole  body.*  2 

Of  persons  rendered  weak  and  emaciated  by  (improper)  adminis¬ 
tration  of  correctives,  by  ailments,  and  by  abstention  from  food  and 
drink,  the  following  are  the  causes  mentioned  of  the  constitutional 
variety  of  (dropsical)  swellings,  viz.,  indulgence  in  food  that  abounds, 
with  alkaline  ashes,  that  is  sour,  that  is  possessed  of  keen  virtues, 
that  is  heating,  and  that  is  heavy  ;  indulgence  also  in  curds,  or  in  food 
that  is  raw  (uncooked),  in  earth,  in  potherbs,  in  food  that  is  composed 
of  inharmonious  ingredients,  or  that  is  deleterious,  or  that  happens 
to  be  mixed  with  poison  ;  or  in  consequence  of  piles,  or  of  absence  of 
exertion,  or  abstention  from  the  use  of  correctives,  or  of  wounds  in 
vital  parts  of  the  body,  or  of  abortions  (in  the  case  of  females) ;  and 
improper  indulgence  in  the  (five)  necessary  acts  (viz.,  the  use  of 
emetics,  purgatives,  errhines,  and  enemata  dry  and  oily).  3-4 


*  What  is  stated  here  is  that  this  disease  is  of  three  varieties  agreeably  to  the  fault  that 
is  excited,  viz.,  wind,  or  bile,  or  phlegm.  It  is,  again,  of  four  varieties,  if  classed  agreeably 
to  another  principle,  viz.,  ‘nija’  <constitutional),  ‘anija’  (accidental),  ‘ekangaja’  (affecting 
one  limb),  and  'sarvaja’  (affecting  the  entire  body).  These  four  classes,  it  should  be  said, 
run  into  one  another. — T. 


1308 


CHAR  AKA -SA  MHITA 


Wounds,  inflicted  by  means  of  pieces  of  wood,  or  fire,  or  weapons,, 
or  stones,  or  poison,  or  iron,  which  afflict  the  outer  covering  of  the- 
body,  are  the  causes jof  the  Accidental  variety  of  this  disease. 

As  regards  the  Constitutional  variety,  it  is  of  three  kinds,  accord¬ 
ing  as  it  affects  the  entire  body,  or  half  the  body,  or  a  particular  limb' 
of  the  body.  4-5 

When  the  wind,  possessing  the  internal  ducts,  vitiates  the  phlegm,, 
the  blood,  and  the  bile,  its  movement  becomes  obstructed  by  them. 

Thus  obstructed,  it  ceases  to  move  freely  and  causes  the  disease 
called  ‘^wayathu’  whose  characteristic  is  swelling.  6 

When  the  wind,  thus  obstructed,  vitiates  the  above  faults  in  the 
upper  part  of  the  body,  the  ‘^wayathu’  that  is  caused  is  called- 
^wayathu’  of  the  upper  part. 

When  it  vitiates  the  said  faults  in  its  own  seat,  (viz.,  the  pakka- 
gaya’  or  that  portion  of  the  stomach  where  digestion  goes  on),  the- 
‘£wayathu’  that  is  caused  is  called  ‘£wayathu’  of  the  lower  part  of 
the  body. 

When  it  vitiates  the  said  faults  in  the  middle  portion  of  the  body,, 
the  ‘^wayathu’  that  is  caused  is  called  ‘^wayathu’  of  the  middle- 
region  of  the  body. 

When  it  vitiates  the  said  faults  in  every  part  of  the  body,  the- 
*£wayathu’  that  is  caused  is  called  the  ‘^wayathu’  of  the  entire  body. 

When  it  vitiates  the  said  faults  in  a  particular  district  of  the  body,, 
the  ‘^wayathu’  that  is  caused  is  called  the  ‘^wayathu’  of  that  parti¬ 
cular  district.  7 

Heat,  as  also  a  burning  (of  the  whole  body  or  the  particular 
district),  and  distention  of  the  ducts, — even  these  constitute  the  incir- 
batory  indications  of  this  disease. 

All  varieties  of  ‘^wayathu’  are  characterised  by  an  excitement 
of  all  the  three  faults.  When,  however,  a  particular  fault  becomes 
more  excited  than  the  two  others,  the  '9wayathu’  is  called  after  that 
fault.  The  remedy  also  which  is  prescribable  is  that  which  is  capable 
pf  conquering  that  fault.  8 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1309 


The  general  symptoms  that  have  been  laid  down  of  ‘^wayathu’ 
;are  a  sensation  of  heaviness  of  the  part  afflicted,  instability  (that  is, 
appearance  and  disappearance  of  the  disease  without  any  ostensible 
cause),  and  elevation.  9 

That  swelling  which  arises  from  (excited)  wind  has  the  following 
characteristics  : 

It  moves  about  (instead  of  being  stationary) ; 

The  skin  above  it  becomes  thin  or  attenuated  ; 

It  presents  a  rough  exterior,  and  in  colour  it  becomes  either  red 
or  dark  ; 

Loss  of  sensation  (as  regards  the  exterior  surface),  erection  of  the 
hair  that  grows  on  the  part  afflicted,  and  (internal)  pain. 
Disappearance  (or  alleviation)  without  apparent  cause, 
ft  goes  down  when  pressed  (and  rises  up  when  the  pressure  is 
withdrawn). 

Its  strength  is  manifested  during  the  daytime.*  1° 

That  swelling  which  is  connected  with  the  bile  has  the  following 
characteristics  : 

It  is  mild  (*.  e.,  soft),  and  has  a  smell  of  its  own  ; 

In  colour  it  is  either  dark,  or  yellow,  or  red  ; 

It  is  accompanied  by  vertigo,  fever,  perspiration,  thirst,  and  a 
sense  of  inebriation ; 

It  has  great  heat,  and  produces  pain  if  touched  ;f 
It  causes  the  eyes  to  become  red  ; 

It  is  accompanied  by  a  burning  sensation,  and  ends  in  suppu¬ 
ration.  11 

That  swelling  which  is  connected  with  phlegm,  has  the  following 
characteristics  ; 

It  produces  a  sensation  of  heaviness  ; 

*  ‘Harsha’  may  mean  also  a  tickling  sensation.— T. 

f  The  correct  reading  is  ‘spar  jaruk’  or  ‘sparqasaha.’  ‘Spar^asaha,’  as  in  some  of  the 
Calcutta  editions,  is  evidently  incorrect.— T. 


I3ict 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


It  is  stationary  'and  does  not  move  about); 

Its  colour  is  pale,  and  it  is  accompanied  by  a  disgust  for  food  ; 

It  causes  (salivary)  discharges  from  the  mouth  ;  it  produces  sleep 
and  vomiting ; 

It  causes  loss  of  appetite ; 

It  takes  a  considerable  time  in  manifesting  itself,  and  it  takes  a 
long  time  in  disappearing  ; 

If  pressure  is  put  upon  it,  it  goes  down  (and  does  not  rise  up 
immediately  after  the  pressure  is  withdrawn)  ; 

It  gains  in  strength  during  the  night,  12 

The  swelling  of  an  emaciated  person,  or  of  one  who  has  been 
weakened  by  ailments,  or  the  swelling  that  is  accompanied  by  vomit¬ 
ing  and  other  supervening  symptoms  of  a  similar  kind,  or  the  swelling 
that  has  its  seat  in  any  of  the  vital  parts  of  the  body,  or  the  swelling 
which  seems  to  be  overspread"  with  lines,  or  the-  swelling  which  is 
characterised  by  discharges,  or  the  swelling  which,  pervades  the  entire 
body  of  a  person  who  has  lost  all  his  strength,  has  a  destructive 
effect  on  life.*  J3 

That  swelling  which  manifests  itself  in  a  person  possessed  of  flesh 
that  swelling  which  appears  in  a  particular  district  of  the  body,  that 
swelling  which  is  new,  and  that  also  which  appears  in  a  strong  man, 
are  easily  curable. 

The  physician  conversant  with  consideration  of  strength,  faults, 
and  time  (meaning  both  season  and  age),  should  treat  this  ailment 
according  to  methods  contrary  to  the  effectsof  the  originating  causes, 
the,  faults;  excited,,  and  the  season  of  the  disease;^  *4 

The  physician  should  treat  swelling  arising  from  undigested  food 
with,  fasts  and  pdehanas,  swellings  that-  are  characterised’  by  any  fault 


*  The  correct  reading,  in  the  beginning  of  the  second  line,  is  ‘sa  hand’  and  not  (as  in 
some  Calcutta  editions)  ‘maharti.’  Then,  again,  ‘hinavalasya’  and  not  ‘bhimavalagcha’  is 
correct;— T. 

That  is,  he  should  apply  such  remedies  as  are  hostile  to,  or  capable  of  conquering,  the 
originating, causes,,  the  faults  excited,,  and-- the  season-  of  the  disease.  ‘Ekadeijaja’  and  not 
‘ekadoshaja,’  as  also  ‘valasthasya’  and  not  avalasthasya’  is  the  correct  reading,— T. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


1311 

or  faults  largely  excited  should  be  treated  with  correctives  (such  as 
purgatives,  emetics,  and  the  rest) ; 

Swellings  arising  in  the  head  should  be  treated  with  cerebral 
purgatives  or  errhines ; 

Swellings  in  the  upper  part  of  the  body  should  be  treated  with 
purgatives  having  a  downward  action  ; 

Swellings  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  body  should  be  treated  with 
emetics  (which  have  an  upward  action)  ;** 

Swellings  arising  from  oily  food  and  drink  should  be  treated  with 
remedies  that  have  drying  effects  ; 

In  swellings  born  of  dry  food  and  drink,  the  physician  should 
prescribe  the  administration  of  remedies  that  oilify  the  system. 

He  should  administer  dry  enemata  in  swellings  born  of  (vitiated) 
wind  and  characterised  by  constipated  bowels. 

In  swellings  born  of  (vitiated)  bile  and  wind,  he  should  prescribe 
ghees  cooked  with  bitter  drugs.  15-16 

In  such  swellings,  if  accompanied  by  swoons,  dislike  for  every¬ 
thing,  burning  of  the  skin,  and  thirst,  he  should  prescribe  ghee  mixed 
with  cow’s  milk,  if,  of  course,  the  administration  of  correctives  be 
desirable. 

Swellings  arising  from  (excited)  phlegm  should  be  conquered  by 
means  of  drugs  mixed  with  alkaline  ashes,  pungents,  and  things  of 
heating  virtues,  as  also  with  cow’s  urine,  whey,  and  wines.  :7 

A  person  afflicted  with  swellings  should  avoid  the  flesh  of  animals 
that  are  domesticated  as  also  of  animals  living  in  marshy  regions, 
salt,  dry  potherbs,  new  rice,  articles  manufactured  with  raw  sugar 
(treacle),  cakes,  food  made  of  curds  and  sesame  seeds,  slimy  articles, 
wines,  sour  things,  fried  barley,  dried  flesh  (or  fish),  stuffing  the 
stomach  with  food,  also  food  that  is  heavy  and  unassimilable,  and 


*  The  second  line  in  the  Calcutta  editions  is  corrupt.  I  adopt  Gangadhara’s 
readings. — T. 


1 3T2 


CHAR  AKA -S AMBIT  Ay 


■food  that  burns  the  stomach,  sleep  at  daytime,  and  also  sexual 
congress.*  18 

Vyosha  (the  three  acrids,  viz.,  dry  ginger,  Piper  longuvt,  and 
black  pepper),  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethum ),  Tiktaka-Rohini 
(Picrorrhiza  Kurroa),  with  the  pul v  of  iron,  (and)  mixed  with  the 
'decoction  of  the  three  myrobalans,  if  drunk,  allays  swelling  born  of 
phlegm. 

Chebulic  myrobalans,  boiled  in  Cow’s  urine,  exercise  a  curative 
effect  on  swellings  born  of  phlegm.  *9 

Chebulic  myrobalans,  ginger,  Pinus  deodafa, (reduced  to  pulv  and) 
mixed  with  water  agreeably  hot,  or  the  powder  of  these  three  along 
with  that  of  Punarnava  ( Boerhavia  diffusa )  mixed  with  water  of  the 
same  kind,  or  all  the  four  combinations  (mentioned  here),  mixed  with 
cow’s  urine,  should  be  drunk  in  all  the  three  varieties  of  swelling  (viz., 
that  arising  from  wind,  that  from  bile,  and  that  from  phlegm). 

When  the  medicine  has  been  digested,  the  patient  should  be 
allowed  a  bath,  and  he  should  take  (boiled)  rice  mixed  with  milk.  2° 

In  the  case  of  swelling  accompanied  by  (excited)  wind,  the 
patient  should  drink  the  paste,  of  the  measure^of  an  aksha  (2  tolas),  of 
PunarnavS  (Boerhavia  diffusa ),  dTy  ginger,  and  the  tubers  of  Cypetus 
rotundas,  mixed  with  milk  of  the  measure  of  a  prastha  (2  seers). 

Or,  Mayuraka  (another  name  for  Apamarga,  that  is,  Achyranthes 
' aspera ),  Mfighadhikfi  (Piper  longum ),  with  Mulfi  (dry  radish),  and 
Nfigara  (dry  ginger),  reduced  to  powder  and  mixed  with  a  prastha 
of  milk,  should  be  drunk.  21 

Or,  a  person  (afflicted  with  this  ailment)  should  drink  milk  boiled 
with  the  powders  of  Danti  (Baliospermuin  montanum ),  Trivrit  (Con¬ 
volvulus  Turpethniri),  Tryushana  (the  three  acrids),  and  Chitraka 
(Plumbago  Zeylanica). 

This  medicine  alleviates  the  excited  faults. 


*  The  text  of  these  verses  is  very  corrupt  as  occuring  in  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay 
editions.  I  adopt  Gang5dhara’s  readings.  ‘Sama9anam,’  which  I  take  to  mean  ‘stuffing  the 
stomach  with  food,’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  intended  for  a  mixture  of  food  that 
is  wholesome  with  food  that  is  unwholesome.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


W 


Or,  milk  of  the  measure  of  two  prasthas,  boiled  with  half  a  pala 
of  each  of  the  (six)  drugs  mentioned  above  till  only  half  the  quantity 
remains,  should  be  drunk  by  one  who  is  afflicted  with  swellings 
accompanied  by  (excited)  bile  and  wind.  22 

In  swellings  accompanied  by  excitement  of  wind  and  bile,  the 
decoction  of  Pitadru  (otherwise  called  Daruharidra,  that  is,  Berberis 
Asiatica),  mixed  with  the  pulv  of  ginger,  (and  boiled  with  milk),  may 
also  be  given  as  a  drink  ; 

Or,  the  decoction  of  Krishna-Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethum ), 
(of  the  variety  having  roots  of  a  dark  colour),  and  Uruvuka  (other¬ 
wise  called  Eranda,  that  is,  Ricinus  communis),  mixed  with  Ushana 
(the  fruits  of  Piper  longum),*  (and  boiled  with  milk),  may  be  given  ; 

Or,  the  decoction  of  the  bark  of  Tvak  ( Cinnamomum  zeylanicum), 
Daru  (Berberis  Asiatica ),  VarshSbhu  (otherwise  called  Punarnava, 
that  is,  Boerhavia  diffusa ),  mixed  with  the  pulv  of  ginger,  (and  boiled 
with  milk),  may  be  given  ; 

Or,  milk  boiled  with  the  decoction  of  Guduchi  ( Tinospora  cordi- 
folia ),  Nfigara  (ginger),  and  Danti  ( Baliospermmn  montanum ),  may 
be  given.  23 

Or,  the  patient  may  live  entirely  on  camel’s  milk  for  seven  days, 
or  for  a  month,  without  taking  any  other  food-and  abstaining  entirely 
from  water  ; 

Or,  he  may  take  cow’s  milk  with  cow’s  urine ;  or  the  milk  of  the- 
buffalo ;  or,  he  may  take  boiled  rice  with  milk  and  drink  cow’s 
urine.  24 

If  a  person  afflicted  with  swellings  born  of  excited  bile  and  wind, 
passes  stools  that  are  liquid  and  that  are  heavy  (so  as  to  sink  in 
water),  he  should  then  drink  whey  mixed  with  the  pulv  of  Vyosha 
(dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum ,  and  black  pepper),  ‘Sauvar- 
chala’  salt,  and  Makshika  (honey).  ®S 

If  one  having  swellings  born  of  bile  and  wind,  has  one’s  bowels 
constipated,  or  passes  stools  consisting  of  undigested  matter  or 


‘Ushana’  may 


also  black  pepper. — T. 


1314 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


stools  that  are  liquid,  owing  to  the  action  of  the  excited  faults, 
one  should  then  take  the  paste  of  chebulic  myrobalans  mixed  with 
treacle,  or  the  pulv  of  Nagara  (dry  ginger)  mixed  with  treacle.  26 

If  a  person  having  such  swellings  does  not  pass  stools  and  the 
downward  wind  (owing  to  constipation  of  bowels),  he  should  take, 
before  meals,  the  oil  of  Uruvaka  (castor-seeds),  with  milk  or  the 
meat-juice  of  such  animals  as  are  wild  or  as  live  in  marshy  regions. 

When  the  ducts  are  obstructed,  and  the  digestive  fire  and  relish 
for  food  are  lost,  one  (afflicted  with  swellings  born  of  wind  and  bile) 
should  drink  well-distilled  wines  and  vinous  spirits.  26 

Take  two  prasthas  in  all,  of  the  following  drugs  (in  equal  mea¬ 
sures),  viz.,  Gandira  (or  Kandira,  that  is,  a  kind  of  potherb  that  grows 
in  watery  grounds  and  is  called  £amatha  in  Bengali),  Bhallataka  (the 
fruits  of  Semecarpus  Anacardium ),  Chitraka  (Plumbago  zeylanica), 
Vyosha  (the  three  acrids),  Vidanga  (Embelia  Ribes),  and  the  two 
varieties  of  Vrihati .  ( viz.,  Solatium  Indicum  and  Solatium  xantho- 
carpum).  These  should  be  boiled  with  a  drona  (64  seers)  of  the  water 
of  whey  on  a  fire  made  of  (dried)  cow-dung.  27 

When  three-fourths  of  the  liquid  remain  in  the  vessel  (a  prastha 
having  evaporated),  and  the  boiling  has  been  completed,  the  vessel 
should  be  taken  down  and  the  contents  allowed  to  cool.  When 
cooled,  a  drona  of  the  water  of  curds  should  be  added,  as  also  a 
hundred  palas  of  refined  sugar. 

The  compound  should  then  be  thrown  into  a  jar  the  exterior 
surface  of  which  has  been  plastered  over  with  the  paste  of  Chitraka 
( Plumbago  zeylanica )  and  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum ). 

The  vessel  should  be  kept  for  ten  days  under  the  welkin  (that  is, 
a  place  which  is  under  the  canopy  of  heaven  and  exposed  to  air 
and  light. 

This  preparation  being  properly  administered,  conquers  swellings, 
fistula-in-ano,  piles,  (intestinal)  worms,  leucoderma,  gonorrhoea,  loss 
of  complexion,  emaciation,  excited  wind,  and  hiccup.*  28-29 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  ‘Gandiradyarishta.’ 


*  ‘Kurchikamastu’  implies  the  watery  part  of  whey,  as  ‘PrSkritamastu’  implies  the  watery 
part  of  curds. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1315 

A  hundred  of  each  of  these  should  be  taken,  viz.,  the' fruits  of 
Kagmarya  (otherwise  called  Gsmbhari,  that  is  Gmelina  arbor ea ), 
(those  of)  Dhatri  (otherwise  called  Amlaka,  that  is,  Phyllanthus 
Emblica ),  black  pepper,  Abhaya  (chebulic  myrobalans),  Aksha 
(otherwise  called  Vibhitaka,  that  is  Terminalia  Bellerica ),  the  fruits 
of  Kshudra  (otherwise  called  KantakSri,  that  is,  Solarium  Xantko- 
carpum),  2lX\6.  Vip’pzM  (Piper  longum).  These  and  a  tulft  (12^  seers) 
of  a  mixture,  that  is  old  of  honey,  and  treacle,  should  all  be  kept 
together  in  a  jar  smeared  with  honey.  3° 

In  the  summer  season  the  articles  should  be  so  kept  for  a  week, 
and  in  the  winter  for  twice  that  time.  Adding  a  drona  (32  seers)  of 
water,  a  mixture  will  result  that  forms  a  drink  for  a  person  afflicted 
with  swellings  born  of  wind  and  phlegm. 

This  drink  called  ‘the  Arishta  of  eight  hundred’  cures  swellings 
and  constipation  born  of  wind  and  phlegm.  It  kindles  the  digestive 
fire  also.*  3°-3i 

Three  palas  of  each  of  these  should  be  taken,  viz.,  the  two  varieties 
of  Punarnava  ( Boerhavia  diffusa  of  the  white  and  red  sorts),  the  two 
varieties  of  Bala  ( Sida  cordifolia  and  Doodia  logopodioides ),  Paths 
(Cissampelos  hernandifolia ),  Vasa  ( Justicia  Adhatoda),  Guduchi 
(Tinospora  cordifolia),  Chitraka  (Plumbago  Zeylanica),  and  Nidig- 
dhika  (otherwise  called  Kantakari,  that  is,  Solarium  Xanthocarpum). 

Boil  these  in  four  ‘dronas’  of  water  down  to  one  ‘drona.’ 

Strain  the  liquid  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth.  When  cooled, 
add  two  tulas  of  old  treacle,  and  one  prastha  of  honey. 

Keep  the  product  for  a  month  in  a  jar  that  has  soaked  a  sufficient 
quantity  of  ghee.  The  jar  should  be  covered  with  the  straw  of  barley. 

After  the  period  of  a  month,  half  a  ‘pala’  of  the  pulv  of  each  of 
the  following  should  be  added,  viz.,  Hema  (otherwise  called  Nage- 


‘Qatuna’  implies  a  hundred  palas.  Where  no  measure  is  indicated,  a  pala  should  be  taken 

The  earthen  vessel  to  be  used  should  be  one  that  has  soaked  as  muchgfiee  as  possible. — T. 
*  Both  the  lines  of  verse  30  are  currupt  as  occuring  in  the  Calcutta  and  Bombay  editions. 
I  adopt  Gangadhara’s  reading. — T. 


CH ARAKA-SAMHIT A. 


15-16 

$wara,  that  is,  Messua  ferrea),  Tvach  (the  bark  of  Cinnamomum 
zeylanicum),  Ela  ( Elettaria  cardamomum ,  black  pepper,  Ambir 
(otherwise  called  Bala,  that  is,  Pavonia  odorata ),  and  Patra  (leaves  of 
Cinnamomum  Tamala ). 

Also  add  some  sweet-scented  article  for  giving  it  a  good  odour  ; 
also  honey  and  ghee  (of  the  measure  last  mentioned,  that  is,  a  prastha 
of  each). 

One  should,  considering  the  strength  of  one’s  disease,  drink  this 
‘arishta’  when  the  food  last  taken  has  been  digested*  32-34 

This  ‘arishta1  conquers  also  the  following  diseases,  viz.,  diseases 
of  the  chest,  chlorosis,  swellings  of  even  aggravated  nature,  enlarge¬ 
ment  of  the  spleen,  fever  (some  texts  have  vertigo),  disgust  for  food', 
gonorrhoea,  abdominal  tumours,  fistula-in-ano,  the  six  varieties  of 
dropsy,  cough,  asthmatic  breathing,  lienteric  dysentery,  leprosy, 
itches,  vitiated  wind  in  blood  and  other  ‘dhatus’  of  the  body,  consti¬ 
pation  of  the  bowels,  hiccup,  leucoderma,  and  malignant  jaundice. 

If  a  person  that  is  afflicted  with  swellings  takes  boiled  rice  with 
meat-juice  (after  drinking  this  ‘arishta’)  he  becomes  endued  with 
brightness  of  complexion,  strength,  longevity,  ‘ojas,’  and  energy.  35-36 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  ‘Punarnavadyarishta.’ 

The  three  myrobalans,  Dipyaka  ( Ptychotis  Ajowan ),  Chitraka 
( Plumbago  zeylanica ),  Pippali  ( Piper  longum ),  the  dust  of  iron,  and 
Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes), — all  these  should  be  powdered. 

Take  a  ‘Kudavika’  (4  palas)  of  this  powder ;  add  twice  that 
measure  of  honey,  and  a  tula  of  old  treacle.  Put  the  product  in  an 
earthen  jar  which  has  soaked  a  sufficient  quantity  of  ghee,  for  a 
month,  covering  it  with  the  straw  of  barley. 


*  The  text  of  these  3  verses  is  currupt  as  occuring  in  the  Calcutta  and  Bombay  editions, 
t  adopt  Gangadhar’s  readings.  He  has,  however,  one  error  to  answer  for.  In  the  first  line 
of  32,  ‘Sapatha,’  and  not  ‘Sapathe,’  is  correct.  In  the  same  line  ‘Vas5,’  and  not  ‘Danti,’  is 
Ihe  correct  reading.  ‘Tame  yavanam,’  and  not  ‘pale  yav5n5m,’  is  correct.  ‘Paratastu’ 
and  not  ‘paritastu’  is  correct. 

In  the  first  line  of  34,  the  last  word  is  ‘patraih’  and  not  ‘lobaih.’  The  other  inaccuracies 
need  not  be  noticed.— T. 


CHARAKA -SAM HIT  A. 


I3i'7 


The  ‘arishta’  thus  prepared,  cures  the  same  diseases  (that  is,  those 
which  are  cured  by  the  ‘arishta’  of  Punarnava  and  the  rest).  37 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of ‘Triphaladyarishta.’ 

Those  ‘arishtas’  which  have  been  pronounced  beneficial  in  piles 
and  in  the  case  of  persons  afflicted  with  chlorosis,  are  also  beneficial 
in  the  cases  of  persons  afflicted  with  swellings. 

Krishna  (otherwise  called  Pippali,  that  is,  Piper  longum ),  Paths 
.( Cissampelos  hernandifolia ),  Gajapippali  ( Pothos  officinalis ),  Nidigdhika 
{Solanum  Xanthocarpum ),  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanicd),  Nagara 
(dry  ginger),  the  roots  of  Pippali  {Piper  longum ),  Rajani  {Curcuma 
longa),  Ajaji  (cumin  seeds),  and  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus), 
should  be  pulverised  and  dissolved  in  hot  water.  When  the  water 
becomes  lukewarm,  it  should  be  drunk. 

This  solution  cures  the  excitement  of  the  three“faults,  and  swell¬ 
ings  that  are  old.  The  paste  of  Bhunimba  (Agathoies  Chereyta ) 
and  Mahaushadha  (ginger),  dissolved  in  hot  water,  produces  the  same 
•effects.  38-39 

Iron  dust,  the  three  acrids,  and  the  ashes  of  incinnerated  shoots 
of  barley,  reduced  to  powder  and  drunk  with  the  decoction  of  the 
three  myrobalans,  produces  the  same  effects. 

The  two  varieties  of  alkaline  ashes  {viz.,  those  of  dry  radishes 
^and  those  of  dry  ginger),  the  four  varieties  of  salt,  iron  dust,  Vyosha 
(the  three  acrids),  and  Phalatrika  (the  three  myrobalans),  the  roots 
of  Pippali  {Piper  longum),  the  kernel  of  Vidanga  {Embelia  Ribes), 
Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus ),  Ajamoda  {Ptychotis  Ajowan), 
Amaradaru  {Pinus  deodara),  Vilwa  {Xigle  marmelos),  Kalingaka  (the 
seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica ),  the  roots  of  Chitraka  {Plumbago 
Zeylanicd),  Patha  {Cissampelos  hernandifolia ),  Yashthika  (liquorice), 
and  AtivishS  {Aconitum  heterophyllum)  : 

Take  a  pala  of  each  of  these  drugs :  add  2  karshas  of  Hingu 
(assafcetida). 

Reduce  all  these  into  a  fine  powder. 

Take  a  drona  (32  seers)  of  the  ashes  of  dried  radishes  and  dry 


318 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


ginger.  (Boil  it  in  water  of  eight  times  the  measure  till  a  fourth  part 
of  the  liquid  remains  in  the  vessel). 

Into  the  decoction  thus  prepared,  throw  the  powdered  drugs 
(mentioned  above).  Stir  the  powder  till  the  liquid  becomes  thick 
without  being  burnt. . 

Of  the  thick  mass  thus  obtained,  boluses  should  be  formed  of  the 
size  of  jujubes. 

When  well  dried,  these  boluses  should  be  taken  according  to  the 
ordinances  laid  down. 

These  boluses  cure  enlarged  spleen,  abdominal  dropsy,  leuco- 
derma,  malignant  jaundice,  chlorosis,  disgust  for  food,  consumption, 
swellings,  violent  diarrhoea,  abdominal  tumours,  the  effects  of  poison, 
calculi,  difficulty  of  breathing,  and  cough  of  even  the  most  violent 
forms.  4°-43 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  ‘Kshara-Gudika’  (boluses  of 
alkaline  ashes). 

The  physician  may  administer  ginger,  either  raw  or  dry,  with  an 
equal  measure  of  old  treacle  (to  a  person  afflicted  with  swelling). 

The  measure  of  this  medicine  should  be  increased  each  day  by 
half  a  pala  till  it  reaches  five  palas  (in  ten  days)  which  is  the  largest 
measure. 

This  measure  should  be  taken  for  a  month. 

Every  day,  after  the  medicine  has  been  digested,  the  patient 
should  take  milk,  the  soup  of  Phaseolus  Mungo  and  other  seeds  of 
the  kind,  as  also  meat-juice  with  boiled  rice.  44 

This  medicine  conquers  abdominal  tumours,  abdominal  dropsy, 
piles,  swellings,  the  several  varieties  of  gonorrhoea,  asthmatic  breath¬ 
ing  (or  cough,  as  some  texts  have),  catarrh  in  the  nose,  tymphanites, 
indigestion,  ansemia  consumption,  mental  derangements,  cough  (or, 
as  some  texts  have,  difficulty  of  breathing),  and  excited  phlegm.  45 

Even  this  is  the  combination  called  ‘Gudfidraka’  (treacle  and 
ginger). 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


1319 


The  expressed  juice  of  raw  ginger  should  be  drunk  every  day  in 
the  same  way,  and  every  day,  when  the  medicine  is  digested,  the 
patient  should  take  boiled  rice  with  milk. 

‘£ilajatu,’  taken  with  the  decoction  of  the  three  myrobalans, 
speedily  cures  swellings  born  of  any  of  the  three  or  all  the  three 
faults.  46 

Even  this  is  the  method  of  administering  ‘(jrlajatu.’ 

Taking  eight  seers. of  the  ten  roots,  a  hundred  chebulic  myro¬ 
balans,  and  a  hundred  palas  of  old  treacle,  boil  them  together.  Into 
the  lickable  (i.  e.,  slightly  thick)  decoction  obtained  by  boiling  these 
properly,  after  it  has  been  strained  through  a  piece  of  cloth,  should 
be  thrown  the  pulv  of  the  three  acrids  mixed  with  the  three  scents 
(viz.,  the  leaves  of  Cinnamomum  Tamala,  the  bark  of  Cinnamomum. 
zeylanicum,  and  the  fruits  of  Elettaria  cardamomum ). 

When  the  contents  are  cooled  by  exposure  to  the  morning  air, 
half  a  prastha  of  honey,  and  a  small  measure  of  the  ashes  of  barley 
shoots,  should  be  added. 

The  patient  should  take  every  day  a  (boiled)  myrobalan,  and  lick 
half  a  pala  of  the  thickened  liquid. 

This  medicine  cures  swellings  of  even  an  aggravated  character, 
as  also  asthmatic  breathing,  fever,  disgust  for  food,  gonorrhoea,  hiccup, 
enlarged  spleen,  and  abdominal  dropsy  and  chlorosis  born  of  any  one 
of  the  three  faults. '  It  also  cures  leanness,  vitiated  wind  in  the  imma¬ 
ture  stage,  blood-bile  and  acid  bile,  loss  of  complexion,  and  the  faults 
of  the  urine,  the  wind,  and  the  semen.  47-49 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  ‘Kansa-Haritaki.’ 

The  roots  of  Patola  ( Trichosanthes  dioica ),  Suradaru  (Pinus  deo- 
dara),  Danti  (Baliospermum  montanum ),  Trayanti  (otherwise  called 
Trayamana  i.  e.,  Ficus  heterophylla ),  Pippali  (Piper  lotiguiri),  Abhaya 
(chebulic  myrobalans),  Vicala  (Cucumis  Colocynthis),  liquorice,  Tikta- 
rohini  (Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ),  Chandana'  (Pterocarpus  santalinus ), 
Nichula  (otherwise  called  Hijjala,  that  is,  Eugenia  acutangula),  and 
Darbbi  (Berberis  Asiatica ) : 

167 


1320 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Take  a  karsha  of  each  of  these  and  boil  them  in.  water  for  obtain¬ 
ing  their  decoction. 

Into  the  decoction  thus  obtained  add  ghee  of  the  measure  of  a 
Ku^ava. 

This  forms  a  drink,  that  cures  erysipelas,  burning  of  the  skin, 
fever,  excitement  of  the  three  faults,  thirst,  the  effects  of  poisons 
introduced  into  the  system,  and  swellings.  5°-5i 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  the  ghee  called  ‘Patola-muladya.’ 

Yamani  (the  seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowari),  Chitraka  ( Plumbago 
zeylanicu),  Dhanya  (coriander  seeds),  P&tha  (Cissampelos  hernandi- 
folia),  Dipyaka  '( Cnidum  diffusum),  Tryushana  (the  three  acrids), 
Amlavetasa  ( Rumex  vesicarius ),  the  (raw  and  dried)  fruits  of  Vilwa 
(AEgle  Marmelos),  the  bark  of  the  fruits  of  Dfidima  {Punica  grana- 
tum),  Yavaquka  (the  ashes  of  the  barley  shoots),  the  roots  of  Pippali 
( Piper  longum ),  and  Chavya  {Piper  Chaba ) ; 

Take  an  aksha  (two  tolas)  of  each  of  these,  pound  them  together. 

The  pounded  mass  should  be  boiled  in  an  adhaka  (8  seers)  of 
water.  (Sixteen  seers  are  taken,  for  the  measure  is  doubled  of 
liquids). 

Add  a  prastha  (2  seers)  of  ghee.  (Four  seers  are  taken,  the  mea¬ 
sure  being  doubled). 

This  preparation  cures  piles,  abdominal  tumours,  and  swellings 
that  are  difficult  of  treatment.  It  kindles  the  digestive  fire  also.  5*S3 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of ‘Yamanikadya-ghrita.’* 

Or,  the  patient  may  drink  that  ghee  which  has  been  boiled  in 
water  of  eight  times  its  measure,  .with  Chitraka  {Plumbago  zeylanica) 
and  Kshara  (the  ashes  of  barley  shoots)  added  to  it.  This  ghee  is 
possessed  of  great  energy. 

The  ghee  called  ‘Kalyanaka,’  or  that  called  ‘Panchagavya,’  or  that 
called  ‘Mahatikta,’  or  that  called  ‘Tikta,’  is  also  beneficial  in  cases 


.  *  The  readings  of  GangSdhara’s  edition  are  followed.  In  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay 
^editions,  this  ghee  is  called  ‘Chitrakadya’  for  the  verses  begin  with  ‘Sachitraka  &c.’— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


*32* 


of  swelling.  (All  these  ghees  have  been  spoken  of  in  the  chapter  on 
Insanity).*  54 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  the  ghee  called  ‘Chitrakfidi.’ 

Take  an  earthen  pot  whose  inward  surface  should  be  laved  with 
the  paste  of  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  zeylanica). 

Throw  a  quantity  of  milk  into  it,  adding  some  acid  for  converting 
it  into  curds. 

When  the  milk  has  been  converted  into  curds,  the  latter  should 
be  properly  churned. 

The  ghee  raised  from  the  churned  curds,  boiled  in  whey,  and 
mixed  with  the  pith  of  the  roots  of  Chitraka  {Plumbago  Zeylanica ), 
is  one  of  the  foremost  medicines  that  cure  swellings.f 

It  also  cures  piles,  diarrhoea  with  fever,  excited  wind,  abdominal 
tumours,  and  gonorrhoea,  and  imparts  strength  to  the  digestive  fire. 

The  patient  may  also  take  his  food  mixing  it  with  the  whey,  that 
is  left  after  extracting  the  ghee  indicated  above,  and  also  the  ghee 
itself  that  is  thus  prepared.  Or,  he  may  take  gruel  of  barley,  boiling 
it  with  the  whey  and  the  ghee  mentioned  above*  56 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  ‘Chitraka-ghrita.’ 

Jivanti  {Ccelogyne  ovalis ).  Ajsji  {Nigella  sativa),  £athi  {Curcuma 
Zerumbet\  Pushkara  (otherwise  called  Kushtha,  i.  e.,  Aplotaxis  auri- 
culata\  Karavi  (otherwise  called  Jiraka,  i.  e.,  cumin  seeds),  Chitraka 
{Plumbago  zeylanica ),  Vilvvamadhya  (the  pulp  of  raw  fruits  of  AEgle 
Mermelos ),  and  YSvaguka  (the  ashes  of  incinnerated  barley  shoots) 

These  should  be  pounded  into  a  paste.  Of  the  paste  thus  prepared 
take  as  much  as  comes  up  to  the  size  of  a  Vadara  (fruits  of  Zizyphus 
Jujuba). 

Prepare  some  gruel  of  barley  and  boil  it  with  the  paste,  men¬ 
tioned  above,  adding  a  measure  of  tamarind  pulp,  and  frying  it  in 


*  The  composition  of  these  ghees  has  been  explained  in  the  previous  lessons. — T. 
f  Earthen  pots  are  used  for  making  curds.  Milk  is  placed  in  the  pot,  with  a  little 
quantity  of  curds  or  some  sour  soup  as  the  juice  of  citrus  acida  or  tamarind,  &c.  The  milk 
is  converted  into  curds  within  12  hours  or  so.— T. 


1322 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


ghee  and  (sesame)  oil.  This  compound  forms  a  medicine  that  is  bene¬ 
ficial  in  piles,  diarrhoea,  exerted  wind,  abdominal  tumours,  swellings, 
diseases  of  the  chest,  and  loss  of  appetite. 

That  gruel  of  barley  also  which  is  boiled  with  the  five  roots 
according  to  the  method  mentioned  above  is  productive  of  the  same 
effects  as  the  gruel  indicated  above.  57-58 

The  soup  of  Kulattha  ( Dolichos  biflorus )  with  the  pulv  of  Pippali 
( Piper  longuni)  added  to  it,  the  soup  of  Mudga  ( Pkaseolus  Mungo) 
with  the  pulv  of  the  three  acrids  and  the  ashes  of  barley  shoots,  and 
the  meat-juice  of  such  fowls  as  use  their  feet  for  finding  their  food, 
or  of  animals  that  belong  to  the  wilderness,  as  also  of  such  animals 
as  tortoises,  iguanas,  peacocks,  and  porcupines,  59  (as  well  as) 

Suvarchala  (otherwise  called  Suryamukhi,  i.  e.,  a  kind  of  potherb), 
Grinjanaka  (carrot),  Patola  ( Trichosanthes  dioied),  Vayasi  (otherwise 
called  Kakamachi,  i.  e.,  Solanum  nigrum),  Mulaka  (radish),  Vetra 
( Calamus  Roiang),  and  Nimba  ( Melia  Azadirachta ), — these  potherbs 
are  beneficial  for  persons  afflicted  with  swellings.* 

Old  barley  and  old  rice  also  are  equally  beneficial. 

The  medicines  that  are  for  internal  administration  have  now  been 
mentioned.  Those  for  external  application  will  now  be  laid  down. 

Different  kinds  of  oils,  of  plasters,  of  medicated  waters  (for  sprink¬ 
ling  over  the  body  as  also  for  washing  it),  and  of  fomentations  for 
inducing  perspiration,  should  be  used  in  the  case  of  those  patients 
in  whose  constitutions  the  wind  predominates.  61 

Oil  boiled  with  the  paste  of  the  following  drugs,  or  the  paste  only 
of  those  drugs,  forms  beneficial  remedies  for  external  application  (in 
this  disease). 

The  drugs  are  £aileya  (a  variety  of  lichen),  Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis 
auriculata ),  Aguru  ( Aquilaria  Agallocha ),  Dfiru  ( Pinus  deodard), 
Kaunti  (otherwise  called  Renuka,  i.  e.,  Piper  aurentiacuvi),  Tvach 
(the  bark  of  Cinnamomum  zeylanicuni),  Padmaka  (a  fragrant  wood 
brought  from  the  central  provinces  and  southern  India),  Ela, 
(seeds  of  Elettari  cardamomum),  Amvu  (otherwise  called  Vala,  i.  e., 
Pavonia  odorata),  Palaga  ( Butea  frondosa ),  Musta  ( Cyperus  rotundui>. 


*  The  leaves  of  the  plants  and  trees  mentioned  should  be  taken. — T. 


CH ARAKA-S  AM H IT  A. 


1323 


Priyangu  ( Aglaia  Roxburghiana ),  Thauneyaka  (otherwise  called  Gran- 
thiparna,  i.  e.,  a  sort  of  gall  caused  by  some  insects  on  trees),  Hema 
(otherwise  called  Nfigakegara,  i.  e.,  Mesua  ferrea ),  Mansi  ( Nardostachys 
Jatamansi),  Talisapatra  (. Pinus  Webbiana ),  Plava  (otherwise  called 
Kaivartamustaka,  i.  e.,  a  large  variety  of  Cyperus  rotundus ),  Patra  (the 
leaves  of  Cinnamomum  Tamala ),  Dhanya  (coriander  seeds),  Srivesh- 
taka  (fermented  cheese),  Dhyamaka  (powdered  sulphur),  Pippali  ( Piper 
longuni),  Sprikka  (  Trigonella  corniculata ),  and  Nakha  (tiger’s  nail). 

As  many  of  these  as  are  obtainable,  should  be  taken  for  boiling 
with  oil.  The  oil  thus  prepared  is  beneficial  for  persons  afflicted  with 
swellings,  if  used  for  rubbing  the  body  with,  and  if  the  patients  have 
constitutions  characterised  by  predominance  of  wind.  6a-63 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  the  oil  called  ‘^aileyadya.’ 

Eranda  (Ricinus  communis ),  Vrisha  (otherwise  called  Vfisaka,  i.  <?., 
Justicia  Adhatoda ),  Arka  ( Calatropis  giganted),  Sigru  ( Moringa 
pterygosperma ),  Kasmaryya  (otherwise  called  GSmbhari,  2.  e.,  Gmelina 
arborea ),  and  Arjjaka-patra  (leaves  of  Ocimum  sanctum ) ; 

These  should  be  boiled  in  water.  In  this  water  the  patient  should 
be  dipt  till  perspiration  sets  in. 

A  little  while  after  he  should  be  bathed  in  water  that  has  been 
heated  in  the  sun. 

After  this,  his  body  should  be  laved  with  unguents.  64 

The  bark  of  milk-yielding  trees  including  Vetasa  ( Calamus 
Rotang \  and  Manjishtha  ( Rubia  cor  difolia),  Lata  (the  roots  of  Andro- 
pogon  muricatus ),  Mrinala  (lotus  stalks),  Chandana  (red  sandal  wood), 
Padmaka  (a  fragrant  wood  brought  from  central  and  southern  India), 
and  Balaka  (otherwise  called  BalS,  i.  e.,  Pavonia  odorata),  should  be 
reduced  to  a  paste. 

This  paste  should  be  used  for  plastering  the  body  of  the  patient 
whose  swellings  are  caused  by  excited  bile. 

Boiling  this  paste  in  oil,  the  oil  thus  prepared  should  be  used  for 
rubbing  the  body  again  of  such  a  patient. 

After  the  process  of  rubbing,  the  patient  should  be  bathed  in 
water  heated  in  the  sun  and  mixed  with  the  sandal  paste  and  the 
paste  of  the  roots  of  Andropogon  muricatus  and  ‘Padmakfishtha.’ 


*324 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


A  bath  also  in  the  decoction  of  the  barks  of  milk-yielding  trees 
Is  regarded  beneficial. 

Beneficial  results  are  also  expected  by  bathing  the  patient  irt 
water  mixed  with  the  milk  of  such  trees. 

After  such  baths,  the  patient’s  body  should  be  laved  with  sandal- 
paste  and  other  unguents.  65-66 

In  the  case  of  swellings  caused  by  (excited)  phlegm,  the  follow¬ 
ing  plasters  and  other  modes  of  treatment  are  beneficial : 

KrishnasikatS  (fruits  of  Piper  longuvi),  old  Pinyaka  (cakes  of 
pressed  mustard  seeds),  Sigru-tvach  (bark  of  Moringa pterygosperma), 
and  Uma  (linseed) : 

These  should  be  reduced  to  a  paste  and  the  paste  used  as  a 
plaster. 

The  body  of  the  patient  should  also  be  sprinkled  over  with  the 
decoction  of  Kulattha  ( Dolichos  biflorus ),  and  dry  ginger,  mixed  with 
cow’s  urine. 

The  patient’s  body  may  also  be  laved  with  an  unguent  made  of 
Chanda  (otherwise  called  Sprikka,  i.  e.,  Trigonella  corniculata)  and 
Aguru  [Aquilaria  Agallocha).  67 

Plasters  made  of  the  kernel  of  the  fruits  of  Terminalia  Bellerica r 
it  has  been  laid  down,  are  alleviative  of  the  painful  sensation  of  burn¬ 
ing  in  all  kinds  of  swellings. 

Liquorice,  Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus ),  the  leaves  of 
Kapittha  ( Feronia  elepkantum),  and  Chandana  (red  sandal  wood),  con¬ 
stitute  a  plaster  (that  is  beneficial)  for  the  pimples  that  arise  irt 
swellings.*  68 

Rasna  ( Vanda  Roxburghii),  Vrisha  (otherwise  called  Vasaka,  i.  e.T 
Justicia  Adhatoda),  Arka  {Calatropis  gigantea),  Triphala  (the  three 
myrobalans),  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes),  Sigru-tvach  (the  bark  of 


*  The  last  word  in  the  first  line  is  not  ‘Pralepah’  (as  in  the  Calcutta  and  Bombay 
editions)  but  ‘Pradishtah’  as  in  GangSdhara’s  edition.  ‘TatpidakSsu’  is  explained  as  ‘£ot'he 
pi^SkSsu.’ — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1325 


Moringa  pterygosperma),  Mushikaparnika  ( Salvinia  cucullata),  Nimba 
(. Melia  Azadirachta ),  Arjjaka  ( Ocimum  sancfum),  the  nails  of  Tiger, 
MurvS  ( Sansviera  Zeylanica ),  Suvarchala  (otherwise  called  Aditya 
Bhaktfi, — Cleome  viscosa),  Tiktakarohini  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa),  K5ka- 
machi  ( Solatium  nigrum )  Vrihati  (Solanum  Indicum),  Kushtha 
( Aplotaxis  auriculatd),  Punarnava  {Boerhavia  diffused,  Chitraka  ( Plum¬ 
bago  zeylanica),  and  Nfigara  (dry  ginger). 

These,  pounded  into  a  paste  with  cow’s  urine,  form  an  excellent 
unguent  for  rubbing  the  patient’s  body  with.  The  patient  may  also 
be  sprinkled  over  with  water  in  which  dry  radishes  have  been 
boiled.  66-70 

Swellings  which  appear  in  different  districts  of  the  body  are  of 
multifarious  kinds  in  consequence  of  differences  in  respect  of  locality, 
the  Dhatus  affected,  shape  and  name. 

Listen  to  us  as  we  mention  a  few  for  particularising  them. 

The  three  faults  (wind,  bile,  and  phlegm),  provoked  by  their 
respective  causes,  produce  dreadful  swellings  in  the  head. 

These  also  produce  swellings  within  the  throat,  causing  a  sort  of 
whizzing  noise  (Ghurghuriks)  therin  and  threatening  a  suspension 
of  the  breath.  Such  swellings  are  called  “£s1uka.’  71-72 

Those  which  appear  in  the  joint  of  the  throat  (with  body),  or  in 
the  chin,  or  in  the  throat,  each  characterised  by  a  burning  sensation 
and  red  colour,  and  hard  breathing,  and  severe  pain,  are  called 
‘Vitanika.’* 

If  the  swellings  called  ‘Vitanika  manifest  themselves  all  round 
the  throat  like  a  necklace,  they  prove  to  be  fatal.  73 

That  swelling  which  is  born  of  the  three  faults,  which  appears 
in  the  palate,  and  which  is  characterised  by  a  redness  of  colour  and 
a  burning  sensation,  is  known  by  the  name  of  ‘Talu-Vidradhi  (swell¬ 
ings  in  the  palate).f 


*  In  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions,  the  name  given  is  ‘Vi451ika.’— T. 
t  I  adopt  the  reading  of  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  and  not  that  of  Ganga- 
dhara.  The  fact  is,  in  these  verses  the  Rishi  is  giving  the  names  of  particular  varieties  of 
swellings  and  their  differentiating  symptoms.  Hence  the  reading  adopted  by  GangSdhara 


'326 


CHARAKA-SA  M  HIT  A 


That  swelling  (or,  rather,  swollen  growth)  which  appears  on  the 
surface  of  the  (root  of  the)  tongue  owing  to  (excited)  phlegm,  is  called 
‘Upajihvika.’ 

That  which  appears  on  the  lower  surface  of  the  (root  of  the)  tongue 
owing  to  the  same  cause,  is  called  ‘Adhijihvikfi.’*  74 

That  'swelling  which  appears  in  the  gum  of  the  teeth,  which  is 
born  of  blood-bile,  and  which  ends  in  suppuration,  has  been  named 
‘Upakuga.’ 

That,  again,  which  appears  in  the  gums  born  of  (excited)  phlegm, 
and  accumulated  blood,  is  called  ‘Danta-Vidradhi.’j-  75 

A  single  swelling  on  the  joining  line  of  the  neck  with  the  body, 
is  called  ‘Galaganda’  (Bronchocele).  Many  such  Swellings  around 
the  neck  are  called  ‘Gandamala’  (Goitre). 

Both  these  varieties  of  swellings  are  regarded  as  curable. 

Those,  however,  that  are  accompanied  with  inflammation  of  the 
schneiderian  membrane,  or  pains  in  the  flanks,  or  cough,  or  fever, 
or  nausea  and  vomiting,  are  said  to  be  incurable.  76 

For  persons  afflicted  with  swellings  like  those  described  above, 
the  treatment  is  the  purging  of  the  veins,  the  stomach,  and  the  head, 
inhalation  of  smoke,  and  drinking  of  old  ghee 

in  the  case  of  swellings  appearing  in  the  mouth,  the  treatment 
consists  of  fasts,  rubbing  of  the  parts  swollen  with  proper  powders, 
and  administration  of  gargles.  77 

In  particular  parts  of  the  body,  large  swellings  (boils)  appear, 
born  of  wind  and  the  other  faults.  These  put  forth  the  symptoms 
of  the  faults  which  beget  them. 


does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  either  consistent  or  correct.  He  omits  the  name  ‘TSluvidradhi’, 
althoughJie  gives  the  symptoms. — T. 

*  ‘Upajihvika’  is  called  Ranula  in  English.  The  fleshy  growth,  which  is  here  regarded 
as  falling  within  ‘£otha’  or  swellings,  and  which  appears  below  the  tongue,  has  no  special 
name  in  Engilsh. — T. 

t  ‘Upakusa’  is  inflammation  of  the  gum,  and  ‘Danta-vidradhi’  is  gum-boil. — T. 

+  ‘Purging  of  the  veins’  means  letting  out  of  blood  ;  ‘purging  of  the  head’  is  the  use  of 
snuffs.— T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SAMHITA. 


32  7 


Those  swellings  which  are  caused  by  (inflamed)  veins,  are  charac¬ 
terised  by  throbbing  (pains). 

Those  which  are  born  of  flesh  are,characterised  by  absence  of  pain. 

Those  which  are  born  of  the  adeps,  are  soft  and  oily,  and 
mobile.*  78 

When  a  boil  is  about  to  make  its  appearance,  the  person  should 
first  be  treated  with  correctives  and  then  some  processes  of  foment¬ 
ation  (for  inducing  perspiration)  should  be  restored  to.  After  this, 
using  a  piece  of  stone,  or  of  wood,  or  the  thumb  alone,  the  rising  boil 
should  be  pressed  for  making  it  disappear  in  the  immature  state 
(that  is,  before  it  suppurates). 

(If  this  fails  to  cure  the  boil),  the  physician  should  then,  opening 
it  by  means  of  the  lancet,  and  taking  out  the  fleshy  core,  and  cau¬ 
terizing  the  part  (with  a  heated  metal  or  stone  caustic),  treat  it  as  he 
treats  abcesses  and  sores.  79 

If  it  is  not  properly  cauterized,  and  if  (without  being  quickly 
cured)  there  remains  a  residue  that  is  uncured,  this  gradually  termi¬ 
nates  in  a  recrudescence  of  the  boil. 

Hence,  physicians  well  conversant  with  treatment,  considering 
the  particular  district  of  the  body  in  which  the  swelling  (or  boil)  has 
appeared,  should  open  it. by  several  incisions  over  it  and  root  it  out 
totally.  80 

When  the  operation  has  been  completely  effected,  such  drugs 
should  be  applied  as  would  cause  the  feculent  matter  entirely  fall  off 
and  disappear. 

If,  notwithstanding  this,  erysipelas  (sets  in  and)  spreads  in  con- 
sequeuce  of  the  (uncured)  sore,  the  physician,  conversant  with  this 
disease,  should  carefully  consider  this  supervening  symptom  and 
allay  it  by  means  of  those  drugs  which  are  applicable  to  it  and  which 
have  been  mentioned  before.  81 


*  Four  kinds  of  swellings  seem  to  be  spoken  of  in  this  verse  :  1.  ‘Aniladibhava’, 

2.  ‘Qir5bhava’,  3.  ‘Mangsabhava’,  and  4.  ‘Medobhava.  The  mention  of  swellings 
caused  by  the  veins,  of  those  born  o/the  flesh,  and  of  those  born  of  the  adeps,  after  that  of 
those  begot  by  wind  and  the  rest,  seems  to  be  a  confusion  of  classification. — T, 

167 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHTTA. 


*1328 

Having  allayed  the  supervening  symptom,  the  physician  'ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  treatment  of  abscesses  and  sores  should  then 
undertake  to  treat  the  opened  swelling  itself  without  loss  of  time.* 

Glandular  sweellings  that  appear  on  the  abdomen,  or  on  the 
stomach,  or  on  the  throat,  or  on  what  are  regarded  as  vital  parts  of 
ithe  body,  should  be  avoided  (by  the  physician).f  82 

That  glandular  swelling  which  is  large  and  fixed  (that  is,  not 
mobile),  should  be  avoided. 

That  also  which  appears  in  infants,  old  persons,  and  those  who 
■are  exceedingly  weak,  should  also  be  avoided. 

As  there  is  no  difference  between  glandular  swellings  and  tumours 
in  respect  of  seat,  cause,  form,  fault,  and  the  ‘dhatu’  affected,  the 
physician  conversant  with  the  ordinances  of  the  medical  scriptures 
should  treat  tumours  according  to  the  method  of  treatment  laid 
down  for  glandular  swellings.J  , 

Those  pimples  which  are  of  a  coppery  colour  and  which  are 
accompanied  with  severe  pains  are  called  ‘Alaji.’  Secretions  take 
place  from  their  mouths.  83-84 

Swellings  that  appear  between  the  flesh  and  the  nails,  that  vitiate 
both  the  flesh  and  the  blood,  and  that  suppurate  very  quickly,  are 
called  ‘Kshata,’ 

That  swelling  which  appears  on  the  groins  or  the  axilla,  which 
is  accompanied  by  fever,  which  takes  a  cylindrical  size,  which  is 
without  pain,  and  whose  surface  is  hard  and  wide,  is  called  ‘VidarikS/ 

It  is  caused  by  (excited)  phlegm,  (excited)  wind,  or  both. 

Such  abscesses  should  be  treated  agreeably  to  the  fault  or  faults 
excited. 


*  I  adopt  the  reading  of  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions.  Gangadhara  inserts  a 
whole  line  which  is  not  to  be  seen  in  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions.  The  line  does 
not  seem  to_be  necessary. — T. 

■j*  Gangadhara  points  out  that  this  line  has  reference  to  ‘Granthi’  and  not  ‘Qotha’.  By 
the  latter  is  understood  ordinary  swellings  or  those  which  take  the  form  of  abscesses.  By 
:the  former,  glandular  swellings  are  indicated. — T. 

J  The  word  for  glandular  swelling  is,  as  already  noted,  ‘Granthi’ ;  that  for  tumours  is 
‘Arbbuda’. — T._ 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SA  MH1TA. 


IJ2CP 


Both  these  kinds  of  swellings  (abscesses)  should  (in  the  immature 
state)  be  opened  (and  the  accumulated  blood  let  out)  ;  or  plasters7 
(of  barley  flour,  linseed,  &c.)  should  be  applied^ 

When  mature  and  suppuration  has  set  in,  they  should  be  treated 
m  the  same  way  as  ordinary  abscesses.  s5-86 

Those  abscesses  which  appear  all  over  the  body  and  are  accom¬ 
panied  with  burning  sensation,  fever,  and  thirst,  are  called  ‘Vish- 
photaka’  (malignant  boils). 

Those  boils  which  are  many  in  number,  which  are  born  of  excited- 
bile  and  wind,  which  take  the  shape  of  fried  paddy  and  appear  over 
the  body  in  such  a  way  as  to  look  like  the  sacred  thread  (of  the 
regenerate  orders),  are  called  ‘Kaksha.’*  g7 

Other  varieties  of  pimples  that  appear  all  over  the  body,  that  are 
large,  or  small,  or  of  intermediate  size,  are  regarded  as  born  of. 
(excited)  bile.  88- 

Pimples  of  small  size,  that  appear  all  over  the  body,  that  are 
accompanied  by  fever,  burning  of  the  skin,  thirst,  itching,  disgust  for 
food,  and  salivary  discharges  from,  the  mouth,  are  called  ‘Romantika’ 
(measles).  These  are  born  of  (excited)  bile  and  phlegm.-]-  89 

Those  pimples  which  appear  all  over  the  body  and  are  of  the 
size  of  the  seeds  of  Cicer  lens ,  are  called  ‘Masurika’  (small  pox).  90 

That  treatment  which  has  been  laid  down  for.  the  alleviation  ofi 
‘Visarpa’  (erysipelas),  and  which  is  beneficial  in  the  several  varieties 
of  leucoderma,  should  be  adopted  in  these  diseases  {i.  e.,' ‘Visarpa,’, 
TCakshS,’  ‘Pidaka,’  ‘RomSntikS,’  and  ‘Masurika.’!).. 

Discovering  the  symptoms  of  the-  particular  fault  that  is  excited,, 
a  small  intestine  frequently  descends  into  and  ascends  from  either  of 


*  Dr.  U.  C.  Dutta,  in  his  edition  of  ‘Nidana’  (in  Bengali),  identifies  ‘KaksbS’  with  acute- 
abscess  near  the  axilla.  This  seems  to  be  incorrect. — T. 

f  This  verse  is  omitted  in  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions.  There  can,  however, 
be  no  doubt  of  its  genuineness.  I  take  it  from  Gangadhara. — T. 

X  /.  e.,  malignant  boils  or  abscesses,  string  of  abscesses  around  the  body,  pimples, 
measles,  and  small  pox. — T. 


1330 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


the  testes  when-  the  latter  happens  to  be  inflated  by  the  action  of 
wind  and  the  rest.*  9* 

That  swelling  (on  the  sack  of  the  testes)  which  is  filled  with  urine 
becomes  soft. 

That,  again,  which  is  filled  with  adeps  becomes  oily  (smooth) 
and  hard.. 

For  treating  hernia,  purgatives,  unguents,  dry  enemata,  and 
plasters  are  prescribable.  When  ripe  (z.  e.,  suppuration  has  set  in), 
they  should  be  treated  like  abscesses.  92 

As  regards  phlegm-born  swellings,  and  those  caused  by  urine  and 
adeps,  they  should  be  opened  with  a  lancet,  and  washed,  and  sewn 
up.  If  they  suppurate,  they  should  be  treated  after  the  manner  of 
abscesses. 

When  an  abscess  arises  beside  the  mouth  of  the  anal  canal, 
caused  by  worms,  or  wounds  caused  by  stones  or  any  sharp-pointed 
thing,  or  by  sexual  congress,  or  straining,  or  the  hard  back  of  a  horse 
that  one  rides,-  and  is  accompanied  by  severe  pains,  it  suppurates 
and  bursts  and  develops  into  what  is  called  ‘Bhagandara’  (fistula- 
in-ano). 

The  treatment  in  fistula-in-ano  consists  of  the  administration  of 
purgatives,  probing,  and  opening  (by  the  lancet).  When  the  sinus 
has  been  cleared,  hot  oil  should  be  applied.  93 

(Of  those  who  are  afraid  of  a  surgical  operation),  the  fistula-in-ano 
should  be  ripened  by  insertion  of  a  thread  steeped  in  some  alkaline 
ashes  and  opened  thereby.  After  this,  it  should  be  treated  after  the 
manner  of  an  abscess.f 


*  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  Wind  and  the  other  faults  affect  the  testes  in  consequence 
of  which  those  become  enlarged..  A  small  intestine  in  the  abdomen  descends  into  and 
ascends  from  either  of  the  testes  thus  affected.  The  intestine  also  shows  signs  of  the 
particular  fault  that  has  affected  the  testes. — T. 

-}•  The  insertion  of  a  ‘Ksharasutra  (thread  steeped  in  alkaline  ashes)  into  the  sinus 
induces  its  ripening  or  suppuration,  without  being  actually  opened  by  the  lancet,  the  result 
becomes  the  same. — T. 


CHARAKA -SAM HIT  A. 


f33i 


In  consequence  of  the  vitiation  of  the  flesh,  the  phlegm,  and  the 
blood,  a  swelling  takes  place  on  the  thighs,  the  calves,  and  dorsa. 
It  is  called  ‘^lipada’  (elephantiasis).*  94 

Ordinances  about  blood-letting  and  the  checking  of  the  (excited) 
phlegm,  as  also  the  application  of  plasters  consisting  of  the  paste  of 
mustard  seeds,  are  desirable  in  (the  treatment  of)  elephantiasis. 

The  wind  and  phlegm  being  partiallly  excited,  and  the  bile  being 
excessively  excited,  cause  a  kind  of  swelling  called  ‘Jalakagardabha’ 
(cutaneous  erysipelas).  It  is  accompanied  by  severe  pains.  Its  eleva¬ 
tion  is  slight,  and  colour  red.  It  ripens  and  suppurates.  It  moves 
about,  and  is  accompanied  by  fever  and  thirst.  95 

The  application  of  plasters,  letting  out  of  blood,  the  adoption  of 
such  processes  as  make  the  system  dry,  correction  of  body  by  admi¬ 
nistration  of  purgatives  and  emetics,  the  administration  of  the 
expressed  juice  and  paste  of  Dhatri  (the  fruits  of,  Phyllanthus  Em- 
blicd ),  and  the  application  of  the  morning  dew,  should  be  resorted 
to  in  treating  cutaneous  erysipelas.  96 

As  regards  other  varieties  of  swellings  (abscesses  and  erruptions),. 
examining  them  by  the  symptoms  they  manifest  in  respect  of  the 
faults  excited,  viz.,  wind  and  the  rest,  they  should  be  alleviated  by 
means  of  plasters,  operations  with  the  lancet  or  strings  steeped  in 
alkaline  ashes,  or  cauterisation.  The  selection  of  the  particular 
means  should  depend  upon  a  consideration  of  the  fault  or  faults 
excited.  97 

It  generally  happens  that  from  wounds  the  wind  and  the  blood 
become  provoked  and  cause  swellings  (abscesses)  that  are  red  in 
colour. 

In  such  cases  that  course  of  treatment  should  be  adopted  which 
is  alleviative  of  erysipelas  and  leprosy. 

In  swellings  (abscesses)  caused  by  the  action  of  poisons,  that 
treatment  should  be  adopted  which  is  alleviative  of  poisons.  98 


*  The  first  line  of  this  verse  is  incorrectly  read  in  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions. 
‘Supachitena’  should  be  ‘Supachitasya’. 

As  regards  the  second  line,  the  reading  ‘prapadoparishtat’  in  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay 
editions  is  better  than  ‘padoparishtat’  in  Gangadhara’s  text.— T. 


1332 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SAM  HIT  A. 


( Here  occurs  a  verse  containing  a  summary ). 

The  symptoms  and  treatment  of  swellings,  which  are  of  three 
kinds  according  to  distinctions  in  respect  of  the  faults  excited,  and 
which  are  of  various  kinds  according  to  distinctions  in  respect  of  the 
parts  of  the  body  where  they  appear,  viz.,  the  whole  body,  or  half  the 
body,  or  particular  districts,  have  been  spoken  of  in  this  Lesson. 

Thus  ends  Lesson  XII,  called  “The  treatment  of  swellings,”  ins 
the  Division  called  “Chikitsita,”  of  the  treatise  of  Agnivega,  as 
revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  XIII. 


We  shall  now  expound  the  treatment  of  diseases  of  the  stomach. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri : 

Unto  Punarvasu,  of  soul  under  perfect  control,  who  was  the  fore¬ 
most  of  all  persons  conversant  with  the  Science  of  Life,  who  was  the 
promulgator  of  the  knowledge  of  medicines,  who  was  seated,  like  the 
deity  Dharma  himself,  engaged  in  the  performance  of  severe  penances 
on  the  Kailasa  mountains  peopled  with  ‘Siddhas’  and  ‘Vidyadharas,’ 
and  which  resemble  the  gardens  of  Nandana,  Agnivega  said  these 
words  :* 

O  holy  one,  verily,  men  are  seen  to  be  afflicted  with  ailments  of 
the  stomach.  Their  faces  are  dried  up.  Their  limbs  are  emaciated. 
The  cells  of  their  stomachs  produce  noises.  Their  digestive  fire, 
strength,  and  capacity  for  taking  food,  are  gone.  They  are  incapable 
of  every  kind  of  exertion.  They  are  cheerless.  For  want  of  treat¬ 
ment  they  lay  down  their  lives  helplessly.  3-4 

I  desire  to  know  accurately  the  causes,  the  varieties,  the  premoni¬ 
tory  indications,  (the  developed)  symptoms,  and  the  remedies  of 
those  diseases,  fully  expounded  by  my  preceptor.  5 

Then  the  Rishi,  thus  questioned  by  his  disciple,  for  the  well  being 
of  all  creatures,  addressed  himself  to  utter  the  following  words 
fraught  with  benefit  to  all  living  beings.  6 

From  vitiation  of  the  digestive  fire,  and  increase  of  faecal  matter, 
diverse  kinds  of  ailments,  especially  those  of  the  stomach,  break  out 
in  human  beings.  7 

When  the  digestive  fire  becomes  weakened,  in  consequence  of  the 
filthy  food  one  takes  at  that  time,  indigestion  sets  in  owing  to  which 
the  faults  become  accumulated. 


*  Dharma  is  the  great  deity  of  Righteousness.  He  is  sometimes  represented  as  the 
great  Judge  of  all  creatures.  He  is  Vishnu’s  self.  Sometimes  he  is  supposed  to  be  Yama, 
the  ruler  of  the  regions  where  the  dead  go  and  meet  with  punishments  for  their  evil  acts. 

‘Siddhas’  are  beings  crowned  with  the  success  of  penances. 

‘Vidyadharas’  are  an  inferior  order  of  celestials.  Like  Gandharvas,’  they  devote  them¬ 
selves  to  the  study  of  music  both  instrumental  and  vocal. 


334 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  accumulated  faults  vibrate  the  digestive  fire  as  also  the  life- 
breaths  called  ‘Prana’  and  ‘Apfina.’  They  obstruct  all  the  ducts  also 
of  the  lower  and  the  upper  regions.  Repairing  then  to  the  space 
between  the  skin  and  the  flesh,  they  cause  loud  sounds  in  the  intes¬ 
tines,  and  produce  diseases  of  the  stomach. 

Listen  now  to  the  originating  circumstances  and  the  symptoms 
of  those  diseases.  8-6 

From  eating  food  that  is  exceedingly  hot,  or  saline,  or  consisting 
of  alkaline  ashes,  or  productive  of  a  burning  sensation,  or  sour,  or 
poisonous  ;  or 

From  improper  food  and  drink  after  administration  of  correctives,* 

From  taking  food  that  is  dry,  or  consisting,  of  inharmonious 
ingredients,  or  impure  ;  or 

From  excessive  emaciation  brought  about  by  enlarged  spleen,  or 
piles,  or  ailments  of  the  ‘Grahani’  (lienteric  dysentery) ;  or 

From  injudicious  administration  of  purgatives  and  the  rest  ;f 

From  neglect  to  treat  the  diseases  that  afflict  the  system  ;  or 

From  dryness  of  the  system,  or  suppression  of  the  urgings  of 
nature ;  or 

From  vitiation  of  the  ducts,  or  the  accumulation  of  undigested 
food  in  the  stomach,  or  cheerlessness  of  both  body  and 
mind,  or  gorging  the  stomach  (with  such  things  as  curds  and 
the  rest) ;  or 

From  suppression  of  stools  caused  by  piles  ;J  or 

From  wounds  inflicted  on  the  intestines  (by  fishbones  and  other 
things  of  the  kind), 


*  ‘Samsarjjana’  is  explained  as  meaning  the  taking  of  food  and  drink  after  the  adminis¬ 
tration  of  correctives. — T. 

t  ‘Karma’  implies  the  five  kinds  of  ‘karma’  or  treatment,  that  is,  the  administration  of 
purgatives,  emetics,  errhines,  and  enemataof  the  dry  and  the  oily  varieties. — T. 

+  I  follow  the  reading  of  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions,  which  is  ‘Arpovali  &c.’ 
Gangadhara  reads  ‘Arijovala  &c.’  If  the  latter  reading  is  accepted,  the  sense  would  be 
‘suppression  of  stools  caused  by  piles  and  hair  (swallowed  with  food).’  ‘Vali  means  the  fleshy 
excrescences  or  growths  which  appear  in  the  anal  canal  or  its  mouth,  in  piles. — T. 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland,  U.  S.  A.: — Youhave  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California : —  . As  each  . 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent.  ...  ...  ... 
there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . .  ... 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A .  /—You  are  entitled  to  the.  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management^will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c. ,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours, 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Ohio,  U.  S.  A.  The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  X  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge: — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  Mew  York Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  A  met  ican  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia: — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance,.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine, 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demboffieiftl  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  oj  Cashmere : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  '  be  completed  unless  be  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North,  Western 
University,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World's  Columbian  Exposition  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U,  S-  A.  :— Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  zq,  East  38th  Street,  New  York :— Nish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Praise,  Dramstadt — The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  Q.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U  S.  A. 
Editor ,  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist : — X  shall  colnmns  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  and 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere ,  iyp,  Boulevatse,  Saint  Germain  : — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  : — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  I 
arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop 
from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients 
according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and 
fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of 
the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street,  Calcutta : — My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya, — X  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
[about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after. — 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing: — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector Your  patriotic, 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  A.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  : — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hypocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gya  It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
•bliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  Wales  : — The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is 
a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji, — The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


PART  XLIII. 


47357 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


(TRAN SLA  TED  INTO  ENGLISH ). 

PUBLISHED  BY 

PARESHNATH  SARMA, 

SON  OF  LATE 

KAVIRAJ  AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  original)  WITH  COMMENT¬ 
ARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 

journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  the  Hindu 

SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C.,  &C. 


CALCUTTA : 

20O)  Cornwallis  Street, 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N.  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRATNA  PRESS, 
12,  SIMLA  STREET,  BYE-LANE. 

1907. 

(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved. ) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters.) 


Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — .  Iam 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention. 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  I  have  received  your  kind.gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office—  . Your 

excellent  translation  . .  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

. Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  worlc,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York ,  U.  S.  A.— I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing,  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris  Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris  :—!  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  Wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University ,  Germany : — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsbureh,  Germany  : — English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  frpjn  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal:—!  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life, 
cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


IMPORTANT  NOTICE. 


I  am  glad  to  announce  that  since  the  death  of  my  father 
Pandit  Avinash  Chandra  Kaviratna,  the  late  translator 
and  publisher  of  the  Charaka  Samhita  and  proprietor  of 
Kaviratna  Aushadhalaya.  the  one  cheap  and  genuine 
Ayurvedic  Dispensary  in  all  India,  situated  at  200  Corn¬ 
wallis  Street,  Calcutta,  the  above  publication  and  the 
management  of  the  Dispensary  and  all  concerns  relating 
thereto  have  been  carried  on  under  the  direct  supervision 
of  Rai  Rajendra  Chandra  Sastri  Bahadur,  m.  a.,  Prem- 
chand  Raichand  Scholar,  and  Librarian  to  the  Bengal 
Government. 

Parts  XL  to  XLII  were  issued  about  a  month  ago. 
Part  XLII  I  just  now  issued  and  Part  XLIV  is  almost 
ready  and  will  be  issued  within  a  few  very  days.  Parts 
XXXV — XLII  I  (9  Parts)  were  issued  during  9  or  10 
months  and  the  re^maining  portion  of  the  Chikitsitasthan 
will  be  completed  within  a  short  period. 

Attention  of  subscribers  and  others  is  earnestly  soli¬ 
cited  to  the  fact  that  if  they  have  any  missing  Parts,  they 
should  lose  no  time  in  asking  for  them,  for  it  will  be 
practically  impossible  for  us  to  supply  them  hereafter. 

It  is  a  matter  of  good  fortune  to  us  that  almost  all  the 
subscribers  to  our  Charaka  are  persons  of  learning  and 
high  social  position.  All  that  is  needed,  therefore,  is 
to  remind  them  of  their  arrears  of  subscription 
to  induce  them  to  remit  the  same  without  delay. 

Subscribers’  encouragement  by  speedy  payments  is  earnest¬ 
ly  solicited  for  enabling  us  to  make  a  faster  progress  in  the 
work  of  publication. 

PARESHNATH  SARMA, 

Proprietor  and  Publisher. 


< CJJARARA-SAMHITA . 


1335 


'of  persons  in  whom  the  faults  have  accumulated,  or  who  are 
addicted  to  sinful  acts,  especially  -of  those  whose  digestive  fire 
■has  been  weakened, 

ailments  of  the  stomach  set  in.  10-13 

Loss  of  appetite,  sweetness  of  taste  (as  regards  -all  things  taken), 
•delay  in  digesting  food  that  is  oily  and  heavy,  a  burning  sensation 
•of  the  chest  produced  by  all  kinds  of  food  and  drink  that  may  be 
taken,  inability  to  understand  whether  the  food  taken  has  been 
digested  or  not  (in  consequence  of  the  stomach  being  regarded  as 
always  full),  inability  to  bear  eating  beyond  the  point  of  gratification, 
slight  swelling  of  the  feet,  continual  decay  of  strength,  hard  breathing 
after  even  slight  exertion,  increase  of  stools,  pains  in  consequence  of 
epistasis  or  suppression  of  urine,  pains  in  the  joints  of  the  pubic 
region,  noise  in  the  intestines,  swelling  of  the  abdomen,  cutting  pains, 
distension  of  the  stomach  after  taking  even  light  and  little  food,  the 
appearance  of  lines  on  the  outer  surface  of  the  stomach  and  abdomen, 
and  disappearance  of  the  lateral  wrinkles  on  the  abdomen, — these 
are  the  premonitory  symptoms  of  diseases  of  the  stomach.  x4-i7 

The  faults  (wind,  bile,  and  phlegm),  becoming  accumulated, 
obstruct  the  sweat  and  water  bearing  ducts,  and  vitiating  the  life- 
breaths  named  ‘Pranna’  and  ‘Apana’  as  also  the  digestive  fire,  produce 
diseases  of  -the  stomach  in  human  beings.  *8 

Noise  in  the  intestines,  flatulence  and  borborygmi,  swelling  of 
both  the  feet  and  the  hands,  weakness  of  the  digestive  fire,  smooth¬ 
ness  and  sheen  of  the  cheeks,  and  emaciation, — these  are  the  symp¬ 
toms  of  diseases  of  the  stomach.  *9 

5n  consequence  of  the  excitement  of  each  of  the  three  faults,  or 
of  all  the  three  faults  together,  of  enlargement  of  the  spleen,  or 
suppression  of  stools,  or  of  sores  (in  the  stomach  and  the  intestines), 
or  of  accumulation  of  water,  eight  kinds  of  diseases  of  the  stomach 
arise.  Listen  now  to  the  symptoms  of  each  of  them.  20 

In  consequence  of  emaciation  brought  about  by  food  that  is  dry, 
•or  insufficient,  or  by  excessive  exertion,  or  by  suppression  of  the 
urgings  of  nature,  or  by  epistasis,  the  wind,  becoming  provoked, 
repairs  to  the  stomach,  the  chest,  the  pubic  regions,  and  anal  canaL  • 
169 


CHARA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


1336 

Repairing  thither,  it  extinguishes  the  digestive  fire,  and  forces 
the  phlegm  upwards,  and  becomes  itself  obstructed  in  its  course. 

Proceeding  then  to  the  space  between  the  skin  and  the  flesh, 
it  produces  and  aggravates  diseases  of  the  stomach.  2I'22 

The  symptoms  manifested  of  this  variety  of  disease  of  stomach 
are  as  follows  : 

Swelling  of  the  abdomen,  the  hands,  the  feet,  and  the  testicles  ; 
cutting  pains  in  the  stomach  (intestines) ;  irregular  distension  and 
contraction  of  the  stomach ;  pains  in  the  abdomen,  and  flanks  ; 
epistasis  or  suppression  of  urine ;  langour  of  the  limbs  ;  breaking 
pains  in  the  joints  ;  dry  cough  ;  emaciation  ;  weakness  ;  disgust  for 
food  ;  indigestion  ;  heaviness  of  the  lower  limbs  of  the  body  ;  sup¬ 
pression  of  the  downward  wind,  of  stools,  and  of  urine  ;  dark  or  red 
colour  of  the  nails,  the  eyes,  the  face,  the  skin,  the  urine,  and  the 
stools  ;  appearance  all  over  the  stomach  of  thin  (minute),  and  dark- 
coloured  lines  and  veins  ;  and  noise  in  the  intestines,  and  hollow 
sound  (like  that  of  drums  when  the  stomach  is  struck). 

The  wind,  in  this  disease,  travels  upwards,  downwards,  and  trans¬ 
versely,  with  noise  and  pain. 

This  disease  should  be  known  as  ‘Vatodara’  (disease  of  the 
stomach  produced  by  the  excited  wind).*  23 

In  consequence  of  indulgence  in  food  that  is  pungent,  or  sour, 
or  saline,  or  very  hot,  or  of  keen  virtues,  or 

of  exposure  to  fire  or  the  sun,  or 

of  indulgence  in  food  that  produces  a  burning  sensation,  or  that 
is  indigestible,  or  of  stuffing  the  stomach  with  food  before  the 
food  last  taken  has  been  digested  the  bile  becomes  quickly 
excited. 

The  accumulated  bile,  overtaking  the  wind  and  the  phlegm,  and 
obstructing  the  ducts  (z.  e.,  causing  constipation  of  the  intestines), 


*  The  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  ‘Kukshipanipada  &c.’  Gangadhara  omits 
‘pani.’ 

Gangadhara  omits  ‘nayana’  and  ‘twak’  in  'nakhanayanavadana  &c.’  There  are  some 
other  omissons  in  Gangadhara.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


‘33  7 


goes  upwards.  Then  destroying  the  digestive  fire  in  the  ‘amfifaya,’ 
it  produces  disease  of  the  stomach.  24-25 

The  symptoms  of  this  disease  are  as  follow  : 

Burning  of  the  skin,  fever,  thirst,  swoons,  diarrhoea,  bitterness  of 
taste  in  the  mouth,  yellowness  of  the  nails,  of  the  eyes,  of  the  face 
of  the  skin,  of  the  urine,  and  of  the  stools  ;  and  the  appearance  all 
over  the  abdomen  of  blue,  or  yellowish,  or  green  or  coppery  lines 
and  veins. 

A  burning  sensation  is  felt  within  the  stomach,  as  also  cutting 
pains,  or  a.  sensation  of  the  presence  there  of  a  smouldering  fire  ; 
and  the  presence  of  heat  on  the  outer  surface,  or  of  perspiration,  or  of 
clammy  and  filthy  sweat. 

The  abdomen,  without  being  hard  becomes  soft  to  the  touch. 

This  disease  should  be  known  as  ‘Pittodara’  (disease  of  the 
stomach  caused  by  the  excited  bile).*  26 

In  consequence  of  the  total  absence  of  physical  exertion,  of  sleep 
at  day  time,  as  also’  of  excessive  indulgence  in  food  and  drink  that 
are  sweet,  or  very  oily,  or  slimy,  or  in  consequence  of  excessive 
indulgence  in  curds,  milk,  and  the  flesh  of  animals  living  in  water 
or  in  marshy  regions,  the  phlegm  becomes  provoked  and  affects  the 
ducts  of  the  body.  Upon  this,  the  wind  becomes  obstructed  and 
affects  the  provoked  phlegm  itself  internally  and  externally,  and 
induces  disease  of  the  stomach.  27-28 

The  symptoms  of  this  disease  are  as  follow : 

A  sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  stomach, f  disgust  for  food,  indi¬ 
gestion,  langour  of  the  limbs,  numbness  of  the  body.J  swelling  of  the 
hands,  the  feet,  the  testicles,  and  the  thighs  ;  nausea,  sleep,  cough, 


*  The  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  ‘dahySt,  dushayate,  &c.’  GangSdhara 
correctly  reads  ‘dahyate,  duyate,  &c.’  The  last  word  is  ‘kshiprapakam’— I  omit  it  in  the 
translation. — T. 

f  ‘Gaurava’  is  explained  by  GangSdhara  as  implying  heaviness  of  the  body.  I  think, 
a  sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  stomach  is  intended  by  it.— T. 

+  ‘Supti’  is  numbness  of  the  body,  that  is,  complete  or  partial  loss  of  the  sense  of 
touch.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA, 


1238 

and  asthmatic  breathing  ;  whiteness  of  hue  of  the  nail's,  the  eyes,  the 
face,  the  skin,  the  urine,  and  the  stools.- 

The  outer  surface  of  the  stomach  (and  abdomen)'  becomes  over¬ 
spread  with  white  lines  and  veins. 

The  stomach  becomes  heavy,  moist  (on  the  outer  surface),  immo¬ 
bile,  and  hard. 

When  these  symptoms  appear,  the  disease  should  be  known  as; 
‘^leshmodara’  (disease  of  the  stomach  born  of  phlegm).  29 

In  consequence  of  a  person  that  is  of  weak  digestive  fire  taking 
food  and  drink  that  are  improper  (unsuitable  to  him),  or  that  consist 
of  hostile  or  inharmonious  ingredients,  or  that  are  heavy, 

Or,  of  women  (clandestinely)-  mixing,  with  one’s  food  and  drink 
such  things  as  menstrual  blood,  or  hair,  or  stools  or  urine,  or 
bones,  or  nails,  &c.,* 

Or  of  mild  poisons  introduced  into-  system,  all  the-  three  faults,. 
i.  e„  the  wind,  bile,  and  the  phlegm,  become  provoked  and 
begin  to  accumulate  slowly  in  the  stomach. 

Acting  there,  they  beget  in  human  beings  disease  of  the 
stomach.  3°-3i 

The  symptoms  of  this  disease  are  as  follow  : 

The  indications  of  every  one  of  the  three  diseases  mentioned 
above  (viz.,  the  wind-born  variety,  the  bile-born  one,  and  the  phlegm- 
born  one),  are  all  present. 

The  colours  also  that  appear  in  those  diseases  on  the  nail's  and 
other  parts  of  the  body,  manifest  themselves  in  this. 

The  outer  surface  of  the  stomach  becomes  overspread  with  lines 
and  veins  of  diverse  hues. 

By  these  symptoms  the  disease  should  be  known  as  one  born  of 
all  the  faults.  32 


*  Wicked  women  in  this  country  practise  diverse  arts  and  do  many  things  for  what  i» 
known  as  ‘Vagikarana’  or  bringing  another,  generally,  of  course,  husbands  and  lovers,  to 
subjestion. — T. 


•  CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


*339 


Tn  consequence  of  the  violent  movement  of  the  stomach,  of  a 
person  who  has  gorged  himself  with  an  excessive  measure  of  food 
and  drink,  caused  by  journeys  on  vehicles  and  improper  exertions 
and  exercises, 

Of  excessive  indulgence  in  sexual  congress,  of  carrying  of  heavy 
burdens,  of  long  journeys  performed  on  foot,  of  exertions  in  vomiting, 
or  of  waste  and  emaciation  due  to  disease,  the  spleen,  which  is. 
lbcated  on  the-  left  side,  falls  away  from  its  place  and  becomes; 
enlarged- 

Or,  the- blood,  generated  in  profusion  by  juices,  &c.,  resulting  from, 
the  food  which  one  takes,,  enlarges  the  spleen.  33-34' 

Thus  one’s  spleen,  becoming  hard  and  like  a  ball  of  stone,  enlarges; 
and  assumes  the  form  of  a  tortoise. 

If  neglected,  it  gradually  displacing  the  abdomen,  the  stomach,, 
and  the  seat  of  the  digestive  fire,  cause  disease  of  the  stomach.*  35 

The  symptoms  of  this  disease  are  as  follow  : 

Weakness,  disgust  for  food,  indigestion,  suppression  of  stools  and 
urine,  a  sensation  of  the  patient’s  entering  a  dark  chamber,  thirst, 
langour  of  the  body,  vomiting,  swoons,  -  prostration  of  all  the  limbs, 
cough,  asthmatic  breathing,  mild  or  slight  fever,  epistasis,  loss  of  the 
digessive  fire,  „ emaciation,  tastelessness  of  the  mouth,  pains  in  the 
joints,  and  ‘£ula’  pains  in  the  stomach  caused  by  the  provoked 
wind. 

Further,  outer  surface  of  the  stomach  and  abdomen  becomes  red 
or  colourless,  or  overspread  with  lines  that  are  blue,  or  green,  or 
yellow. 

The  liver  also,  which  is  in  the  right  side  of  the  stomach,  produces 
similar  consequences  (under  similar  circumstances). 

In  consequence  of  the  causes,  the  symptoms,  and  the  remedies 


*  All  the  editions  read  ‘Pariksbipan’  which  means  displacing  or  throwing  put.  The  idea 
of  the  enlarged  spleen  displacing  the  abdomen,  the  stomach,  and  the  seat  of  the  digestive 
fire  is  not  at  all  clear.  Plence  ‘parikshipana’  is,  in  all  probability,  a  misreading.  Besides, 
the  distinction  between  ‘Jethara’  and  the  seat  of  the  digestive  fire,  is  not  clear. — T. 


1340 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


(in  the  case  of  the  liver)  being  similar  (to  those  in  the  case  of  the 
spleen),  the  disease  of  the  stomach  caused  by  enlargement  of  the 
liver  is  regarded  as  falling  within  the  disease  of  the  stomach  caused 
by  enlargement  of  the  spleen. 

Even  these  are  the  causes  and  symptoms  of  diseases  of  the 
stomach  caused  by  enlargement  of  the  spleen  and  that  of  the  liver.  36 

In  consequence  of  feathers  and  hairs  devoured  with  the  food  one 
eats,  the  anal  canal  becomes  obstructed. 

The  same  result  is  produced  by  epistasis,  or  piles,  or  the  imflam- 
mation  of  the  intestines. 

Through  such  obstruction,  the  passage  of  the  ‘Apfina’  or  down¬ 
ward  wind  becomes  obstructed. 

Provoked  by  this,  the  wind  destroys  the  digestive  fire  and  caus¬ 
ing  the  suppression  of  stools,  the  bile,  and  the  phlegm,  then  produces 
disease  of  the  stomach.  37-38 

The  symptoms  of  this  disease  are  as  follow  : 

Thirst,  burning  of  the  skin,  fever,  dryness  of  the  mouth  and  the 
palate,  stupefaction  of  the  thigh,  cough,  asthmatic  breath,  weakness, 
disgust  for  food,  indigestion,  suppression  of  stools  and  urine,  flatu¬ 
lence,  vomiting,  sneezing,  and  severe  pains  in  the  head,  the  chest,  the 
navel,  and  anus. 

The  stomach  becomes  constipated  (so  that  no  wind  escapes  from 
it).  It  becomes  also  immobile.  Its  outer  surface  becomes  red  and 
overspread  with  blue  lines  and  veins.  Sometimes  these  lines  do  not 
appear. 

Generally,  in  this  disease,  an  elevation  appears  of  the  region  of 
the  navel  like  a  cow’s  tail. 

This  disease  should  be  known  as  ‘Vaddhagudodara’  (disease  of 
the  stomach  characterised  by  obstructed  anus). 

In  consequence  of  gravels,  or  grass,  or  wood,  or  bones,  or  thorns, 
devoured  with  food  one  takes,  one’s  intestines  become  pierced  there¬ 
with.  Wounds  (and  sores)  sometimes,  again,  occur  in  the  intestines 
owing  to  yawns  and  gorging  the  stomach  with  food. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1341 

These  wounds  ripen  and  suppurate,  and  the  juicy  matter  escapes 
out  of  the  holes  caused  (in  consequence  of  the  ripening  and 
suppuration). 

The  juicy  matter  fills  up  the  intestines  and  the  anal  canal,  and 
produces  a  disease  of  the  stomach.  4°-4i 

The  symptoms  of  this  disease  are  as  follow  : 

Generally,  in  this  disease,  the  abdomen  swells  below  the  navel, 
and  terminates  in  ‘Jalodara’  (abdominal  dropsy),  and  manifests  the 
indications  of  the  several  faults  in  the  proportion  in  which  they  are 
excited. 

The  person  afflicted  with  this  disease  passes  stools  that  are  red 
or  blue  or  yellow  in  colour,  slimy,  having  the  smell  of  corpses,  and 
consisting  of  undigested  matter. 

The  patient  is  also  afflicted  with  hiccup,  asthmatic  breathing, 
cough  and  bronchitis,  thirst,  gonnorrhcea,  disgust  for  food,  indigestion, 
and  weakness. 

The  disease,  characterised  by  these  symptoms,  should  be  known 
as  ’Cchidrodara.’  4 2 

Of  a  person  whose  appetite  has  been  weakened  after  taking  medi¬ 
cated  oils,  or  of  one  who  has  become  weak  or  very  emaciated,  when 
his  digestive  fire  has  been  destroyed  in  consequence  of  a  large  mea¬ 
sure  of  water  drunk  by  him,  the  wind,  located  in  the  bladder,  its 
passage  being  obstructed  through  the  ducts,  and  the  phlegm  also, 
enhanced  by  the  water,  coming  into  the  stomach,  increase  that  very 
water.  44 

The  symptoms  manifested  are  these  : 

Absence  for  desire  of  food,  thirst,  discharges  from  the  anus, 
severe  pains  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen,  asthmatic  breathing,  bron¬ 
chitis  and  cough,  and  weakness.  On  outer  surface  of  the  abdomen, 
lines  and  veins  appear  of  various  hues. 

The  stomach  becomes  like  a  (water-carrier’s)  bag  filled  with  water, 
and  sensitive  to  the  touch. 

The  disease,  which  puts  forth  these  symptoms,  should  be  known 
as  ‘Udakodara’  (abdominal  dropsy).  45 


!342 


CHAR  AKA -SAM  HIT  A , 


The  treatment  of  this  disease  should  be  commenced  when  it  has 
just  appeared,  when  supervening  indications  of  an  afflicting  nature 
have  not  begun  to  accumulate,  and  when  all  the  symptoms  have  not 
become  manifest  If  treatment  be  neglected,  the  faults  (excited  in 
all  these  diseases),  leaving  their  respective  places,  (travel  to  other 
parts  of  the  body). 

Through  indigestion  of  the  food  taken,  those  faults  become 
liquefied  and  drench  the  several  joints  and  the  ducts  of  the  body. , 
Perspiration,  its  passage  through  the  outward  ducts  becoming  obs¬ 
tructed,  remains  transversely  and  enhances  the  very  water  (that  has 
■caused  these  diseases).  46 

Under  these  circumstances,  slimy  matter  is  generated,  and  the 
abdomen  assumes  a  round  shape  and  becomes  heavy,  and  stupefied, 
and  overspread  with  the  eruptions  called  ‘Kotta’  (urticaria  evanida). 

Noises  also  cease  within  it. 

It  becomes  soft  to  the  touch.  The  usual  lines  do  not  make  their 
appearance.  If  pressed  (with  the  fingers),  the  accumulated  matter 
(in  the  abdomen)  moves  away  towards  the  navel. 

After  this  (that  is,  in  the  next  stage),  there  is  appearance  and 
increase  of  water. 

The  symptoms  which  then  manifest  themselves  are, — 

Excessive  swelling  of  the  abdomen  ; 

The  disappearance  of  veins  on  the  abdomen  ;  and 

the  semblance  of  the  abdomen  to  a  leathern  bag  filled  with  water 
and  yielding  to, touch  (pressure).  47 

At  this  stage  the  patient  is  afflicted  by  the  following  symptoms : 

Vomiting,  diarrhoea,  malignant  asthma,  thirst,  hard  breathing, 
bronchitis,  hiccup,  prostration,  pains  in  the  sides,  disgust  for  food, 
hoarseness  of  voice,  suppression  of  urine,  and  other  supervening 
ailments. 

Disease  of  the  stomach,  when  characterised  by  such  symptoms, 
should  be  regarded  as  beyond  treatment.  48 

( Here  occur  some  verses’). 

Diseases  of  the  stomach  (dropsy)  arise  from  wind,  bile,  phlegm, 
spleen,  the  union  of  three  faults,  and  also  from  (accumulation  of) 
water. 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITA. 


1343 


The  physician  should  explain  that  each  successive  one  is  more 
difficult  to  cure  than  each  preceding  one  :  (that  is,  dropsy  born  of 
bile  is  more  difficult  than  that  born  of  wind ;  that  born  of  phlegm 
is  more  difficult  than  that  born  of  bile  ;  and  so  on). 

That  variety  of  stomachic  or  abdominal  disease  (dropsy)  which 
is  known  by  the  name  of  ‘Vaddhagudam’  is  generally  seen  to  bring 
about  dissolution  within  a  fortnight  The  same  is  the  case  with  two 
other  varieties  of  dropsy,  viz.,  that  in  which  water  is  accumulated, 
and  that  which  ends  in  the  intestines  being  pierced  (by  bones  or 
prickly  substances  introduced  into  the  system  with  food  or  drink).*  so 

One  whose  eyes  have  become  swollen  like  a  dog’s,  one  whose 
genital  organ  has  become  curved,  one  whose  outer  skin  has  become 
thin  and  is  always  wet  with  perspiration,  as  also  one  whose  strength, 
blood,  flesh,  and  digestion  have  beome  exceedingly  weakened,  the 
physician  should  avoid.  S* 

The  following  ailments,  viz.,  swellings  in  vital  parts,  difficulty  of 
breathing,  hiccup,  disgust  for  food,  swoons,  vomiting,  and  diarrhoea, 
kill  a  person  afflicted  with  abdominal  dropsy .+  5* 

Abdominal  dropsy  of  all  varieties,  is,  from  the  very  outset, 
regarded  as  exceedingly  difficult  of  cure. 

But  that  which  is  newly  born  and  which  afflicts  a  person  who  is 
possessed  of  strength,  and  which  is  not  characterised  by  the  accumu¬ 
lation  of  water,  may  be  cured  by  careful  treatment.  S3 

The  following  are  the  symptoms  of  those  varieties  of  abdominal 
dropsy. which  are  not  characterised  by  the  accumulation  of  water. 

Absence  of  swellings,  redness  of  colour  (of  the  skin),  presence  of 
noise  (in  the  abdomen),  absence  of  a  sensation  of  weight  or  heaviness 
(of  the  abdomen),  rumbling  noise  (in  the  intestines),  appearance  of 
veins  (on  the  abdomen)  in  the  form  of  bovine  eyes  ;  54 


*  “Generally  ends  in  dissolution  within  a  fortnight.”  This  is  taken  as  meaning  that  cases 
occur  in  which  dissolution  is  delayed  beyond  a  fortnight.— T. 

f  The  fact  is,  these  supervening  symptoms  arise  and  bring  about  the  dissolution  of  a 
person  afflicted  by  dropsy.— T. 


?344 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


The  wind,  paralysing  the  region  about  the  navel,  and  discovering 
po  signs  of  escape  (by  the  downward  outlet),  disappears  of  itself. 

The  dropsy  also  of  a  person  who  has  ‘£ula’  pains  in  the  heart,  the 
groins,  the  waist,  the  navel,  and  the  anus,  should  be  known  as  not 
characterised  by  accumulation  of  water.  The  dropsy  also  of  a  person 
who  passes  the  downward  wind  with  harsh  sound  when  his  digestive 
fire  has  not  become  very  much  weakened,  should  also  be  known  to 
be  of  the  same  description. 

When  also  one’s  mouth  is  tasteless  from  accumulation  of  saliva, 
when  one’s  urine  is  scanty,  and  one’s  stools  are  constipated,  one’s 
dropsy  should  be  known  as  not  characterised  by  the  accumulation  of 
water. 

Ascertaining  by  these  symptoms  that  there  is  no  accumulation  of 
water,  the  physician  should  proceed  to  the  treatment  of  abdominal 
dropsy,  guided  by  distinctions  in  respect  of  faults,  strength,  and  time 
(including  both  season  and  age).  55-57 

Abdominal  dropsy,  characterised  by  wind,  of  a  person  possessed 
of  strength,  the  physcian  should,  at  the  outset,  treat  by  means  of  oils. 

Unto  a  person  to  whom  oils  have  been  administered,  and  unto 
whom  the  proper  methods  of  ‘svveda’  (fomentation  for  inducing 
perspiration)  have  been  applied,  the  physician  should  give  oily  pur¬ 
gatives.  58 

When  the  faults  have  been  removed  (or  checked)  by  means  of 
purgatives,  the  reduced  abdomen  should  be  wrapped  round  (bandaged) 
with  a  piece  of  cloth.  By  this,  the  wind,  deprived  of  space  for 
moving  about,  will  fail  to  cause  flatulence.*  59 

From  excessive  increase  of  faults,  as  also  from  obstruction  of  the 
ducts,  there  is  likelihood  of  the  re-appearance  of  dropsy.  Hence, 
continued  purgation  is  necessary  in  treating  the  disease.  60  ' 


*  What  is  said  here  seems  to  be  this  r  when;  the  stomach  and  abdomen  are  properly 
bandaged,  the  hollow  space  within  them  will  be  considerably  lessened.  The  result  will  be 
that  the  wind,  not  having  space  to  move  about,  will  no  longer  cause  flatulence  of  the 
stomach  or  abdomen,— T. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHITA. 


1345 


Having  first  corrected  the  system  by  means  of  purgatives  and  the 
rest,  and  administering  gruels  and  other  kinds  of  light  food,  the 
patient  should  be  given  milk  to  drink  so  that  he  may  gain  strength. 
Milk  should  be  continued  till  the  patient  feels  the  inclination  to 
vomit.  Indeed,  it  should  be  stopped  when  the  patient  has  got  an 
accession  of  strenth.  61 

Verily,  when  the  patient’s  digestive  fire  is  enkindled,  he  should 
have  soups  and  meat-juice,  mixed  with  a  small  measure  of  some 
acid  and  salt. 

If,  however,  flatulence  again  appears,  the  patient  should  again  be 
treated  with  oils,  and  subjected  to  some  process  of  ‘sweda’  for  indu¬ 
cing  perspiration.  When  these  are  over,  he  should  have  dry  enemata 
administered  unto  him.  62 

If  there  is  presence  of  a  thrilling  sensation  in  the  abdomen,  and 
distension  and  contraction,  and  if  there  is  pain  in  the  joints,  the  bones, 
the  flanks,  and  the  back,  and  if,  while  these  symptoms  manifest  them¬ 
selves,  the  patient’s  digestive  fire  remains  strong,  and  if  the  intestines 
be  constipated,  and  his  constitution  becomes  dry,  the  physician 
should  treat  him  with  oily  enemata.  63 

As  regards  dry  enemata  (that  may  be  recommended),  these 
should  consist  of  the  ten  roots  mixed  with  such  drugs  as  are  keen 
purgatives.* 

As  regards  oily  enemata,  such  should  be  selected  as  are:  destruc¬ 
tive  of  the  wind,  boiled  with  some  sour  articles,  and  mixed  with 
castor-oil  or  the  oil  of  sesame  seeds.  64 

Those  who  are  weak,  or  old,  or  of  tender  years,  or  of  delicate 
constitution  by  nature,  or  in  whom  the  faults  have  not  been  agra- 
vated,  or  whose  digestive  fire  burns  strongly,  should  be  regarded 
or  unfit  for  purgation.  65 

The  physician  possessed  of  wisdom  should  treat  such  persons 
with  such  alleviatives  or  (medicated)  ghees,  soups,  meat -juice,  and 


*  ‘Adhobhaga’  or,  rather,  'adhobhagahara,’  is  a  technical  term-  meaning  a  purgative. 
Gangadhara’s  reading  ‘yuktasya’  is  incorrect.  It  should  be  ‘yuktSsyat.’— T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SAM HI  TA. 


1346 

suitable  diet,  as  also  by  administering  enemas,  oils,  &c.,  for  rubbing 
the  body  with,  oily  enemata,  and  milk.*  66 

In  the  case  of  one  afflicted  with  dropsy  born  of  excited  bile,  if  his 
strength  remains  undiminished,  he  should  at  the  outset  be  treated 
with  purgatives.  If,  however,  he  happens  to  become  weak,  oily 
enemeta  should  be  administered  at  the  outset  and  the  patient  should 
then  be  treated  with  enemas  using  milk.  67 

When  the  patient’s  strength,  body,  and  digestive  fire  are  restored, 
medicated  oils  should  be  administered  to  him  and,  after  this,  he 
should  once  more  be  purged. 

As  regards  the  purgatives  that  should  be  used  in  such  cases,  they 
are  as  follow : 

Milk  boiled  with  the  paste  of  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethuvi),  or 
milk  boiled  with  the  seeds  of  Uruvaka  {Ricinus  Communis ),  or  milk 
boiled  with  Ratals,  (otherwise  called  Charmakasha),  or  with  TrSya- 
mSna  ( Ficus  heterophylla )  ;  or  with  Aragbadha  ( Cassia  fistula ). 

If  in  this  disease  the  presence  be  marked  of  excited  phlegm,  milk 
boiled  with  cow’s  urine  should  be  used. 

If  there  is  presence  of  excited  wind,  ghee  boiled  with  bitter  drugs 
should  be  used.  68-69 

In  the  last  two  varieties  of  bile-born  dropsy,  after  purging  the 
patient  (with  such  purgatives),  milk  should  be  given  to  drink.  After 
this,  enemata  and  purgatives  should  once  more  be  resorted  to. 

The  careful  physician  should,  by  having  recourse  to  these  methods 
alternately,  conquer  the  disease,  {viz.,  bile-born  dropsy).  7° 

In  the  case  of  a  patient  afflicted  with  phlegm-born  dropsy,  oils 
and  ‘sweda’  and  correctives  should  be  first  administered  He  should 
next  be  allowed  such  food  and  drink,  mixed  with  articles  that  are 
pungent  and  alkaline,  as  are  destructive  of  phlegm.  7i 


*  In  this  verse  the  Rishi  lays  down  the  coarse  of  treatment  for  those  who  are  unfit  for 
purgation. 

‘Qamana’  means  alleviatives,  consisting  of  such  things  as  medicated  ghees,  soups  of 
Phaseolus  Manga,  &c. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1347 


Indeed,  phlegm-born  dropsy  should  be  conquered  with  drinks 
consisting  of  cow’s  urine  and  different  kinds  of  ‘Arishtas’  (vinous 
spirits),  as  also  with  powders  in  which  iron  prevails,  also  with  alkaline 
drinks,  and  drinks  consisting  of  medicated  oils.  I2 

In  dropsy  caused  by  excitement  of  all  the  faults,  all  the  courses 
of  treatment  laid  down  above  (for  the  simple  varieties)  should  be 
adopted. 

If,  however,  supervening  symptoms  (of  a  painful  nature)  appear, 
the  case  should  be  avoided  by  a  physician  possessed  of  wisdom.  73 

By  epistasis,  pain,  and  suppression  of  urine,  supervening  in 
(enlargement  of)  spleen,  the  physician  should  know  that  it  is  the 
wind  that  has  been  excited  :  by  loss  of  consciousness,  thirst,  burning, 
and  fever,  (supervening  in  the  same  disease),  the  physician  should 
know  that  it  is  the  bile  that  has  been  excited  ;  by  heaviness  (of  the 
body),  disgust  for  food,  and  hardness,  (supervening  in  the  same 
disease),  the  physician  should  know  that  it  is  the  phlegm  that  has 
been  excited. 

By  all  these  symptoms  appearing  together,  the  physician  should 
know  that  all  the  faults  have  been  excited  together. 

Then,  again,  when  the  symptoms  of  excited  bile  are  manifested, 
the  physician '  should  know  that  blood  has  accumulated  (in  the 
spleen).  Excessive  thirst  also  appears  when  this  is  the  case.*  74-75 

As  regards  the  treatment  of  these  varieties  of  the  disease,  it 
should  be  in  accordance  with  the  fault  that  has  been  excited  as  also 
with  the  strength  of  the  patient.  The  treatment  consists  of  the 
application,  with  discretion,  of  oils,  of  ‘sweda,’  of  purgatives,  and  of 
enemata  both  oily  and  dry. 

Or,  blood  should  be  let  out  by  piercing  the  left  arm. 

Or,  the  medicated  ghee  called  “Shatpala-ghrita,”  or  that  called 
“Pippali-ghrita,”  should  be  administered. 

Or,  chebulic  myrobalans  with  treacle  should  be  administered  ;  or, 
the  diverse  kinds  of  alkaline  ashes,  or  the  diverse  kinds  of  ‘Arishta’ 
(vinous  spirits). 


The  original  is  so  terse  that  I  have  been  obliged  te  expand  it  in  English  version.— T. 


*348 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Thus  has  been  laid  down  the  course  Of  treatment. 

Listen  now  to  the  various  Combinations  of  ‘Samjamana7 
(alleviatives).  76-77 

Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  Danti 
(i Croton  polyandrum ),  assafcetida,  and  chebulic  myrobalans,  taken  in 
equal  measures,  and  mixed  with  ‘Vit’  salt  of  a  measure  that  is  half 
of  the  united  measure  of  the  five  drugs  mentioned  before,  should  be 
reduced  to  powder  and  administered  to  the  patient,  with  hot  water 
(as  the  vehicle).*  78 

Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes ),  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica),  £unthi 
(dry  ginger),  with  ghee,  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  and  Vacha  ( Acorus  Calamus) : 
these  should  be  roasted  (burnt)  on  a  piece  of  earthenware  placed  on 
fire.  Adding  milk  to  the'burnt  drugs,  the  patient  should  drink  the 
preparation.  It  is  curative  of  both  abdominal  tumours  and  enlarge 
ment  of  spleen.  78 

The  stems  (cut  into  pieces),  of  Rohita-creeper  ( Andersonia  Rohir 
tuka ;  syn.  Amoora  Rohituka ),  boiled  in  the  decoction  of  chebulic 
myrobalans,  or  in  cow’s  urine,  and  kept  (in  either  case)  for  seven 
nights,  should  be  drunk  by  the  patient  in  abdominal  dropsy  arising 
from  enlarged  spleen.  79 

This  medicine  cures  anaemia,  abdominal  tumours,  gonorrhoea, 
piles,  enlarged  spleen,  all  kinds  of  abdominal  dropsy,  and  intestinal 
worms. 

After  the  medicine  has  been  digested,  the  patient  should  take 
boiled  rice,  &c.,  with  meat-juice  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  wild 
animals.  8o 

Taking  the  bark  of  Rohitaka  ( Andersonia  Rohituka ),  and  cutting 
the  same  into  small  pieces,  five  and  twenty  palas  thereof,  mixed  with 
two  ‘prasthas’  of  jujubes,  should  be  boiled  together  for  obtaining 
a  decoction. 

Taking  a  ‘pala’  of  each  of  the  five  drugs  called  ‘Panchakola’  {viz., 
the  fruits  of  Piper  longum ,  the  roots  of  the  same,  Piper  Chaba , 


*  X  adopt  the  reading  of  GangSdhara.  Some  editions  read  ‘chitrakadaigunabhayam’ 
for  ‘HingunSbbayam.’ — T. 


CHAR  AKA -SAM HIT  A. 


1349 


Plumbago  zeylanica ,  and  dry  ginger),  and  adding  the  bark  of  Rohitaka 
{Andersonia  Rohituka),  of  measure  equal  to  the  united  measure  of 
those  mentioned  before,  a  paste  should  be  prepared  by  grinding 
them  together. 

Take  a  ‘prastha’  of  ghee ,  and  adding  thereto  the  decoction  and  the 
paste  mentioned  above,  boil  these  together.  81-83 

Administered  (in  proper  dose  and  with  proper  vehicle),  this  ghee 
quickly  allays  enlarged  spleen,  as  also  abdominal  tumours,  abdominal 
dropsy,  asthma  and  difficulty  of  breathing,  intestinal  worms,  chlorosis, 
and  ansema.  84 

The  physician  should,  in  those  cases  of  enlarged  spleen  in  which 
the  wind  and  the  phlegm  becoming  exceedingly  provoked,  have 
recourse  to  cautery  by  means  of  heated  metals  and  fires,  as  also  to 
the  application  of  ‘sweda.’ 

In  those  cases,  however,  of  enlarged  spleen  in  which  the  bile  is 
predominant,  the  physician  should  administer  those  drugs  which  are 
included  in  the  group  called  ‘Ji va.niya./  as  also  (medicated)  ghees, 
and  enemata  composed  of  milk.  s5 

Further,  blood-letting,  the  administration  of  correctives,  and  the 
drinking  of  (medicated)  milk  and  ghee  should  be  resorted  to.  The 
physician  may  give  unto  one  afflicted  with  dropsy  born  of  enlarged 
spleen,  light  food  (boiled  rice)  mixed  with  soups  (of  the  seeds  of 
Phaseolus  Mungo,  &c.)  and  other  kinds  of  meat-juice,  mixed  with  such 
medicines  as  are  possessed  of  the  virtue  of  kindling  the  digestive  fire. 

In  enlargement  of  the  liver,  owing  to  its  similarity  to  enlargement 
of  the  spleen,  all  the  medicines  (as  also  the  course  of  regimen,  &c.,) 
laid  down  for  spleen,  apply  equally.*  86-87 

Unto  one  afflicted  with  that  variety  of  dropsy  which  is  called 
‘Vaddhodari’  (vide  aphorism  ante  of  this  lesson),  the  physician 
should  first  apply  ‘sweda,’  and  then  (cow’s)  urine  mixed  with  drugs 
of  keen  virtues ;  also  dry  enemata  mixed  with  oils  and  salt,  and 
enemeta  of  the  oily  kind.  88 


*  Drugs  are  called  ‘Dipaniya’  when  they  kindle  the  digestive  fire  and  enhance  ther 
appetite.— T. 


135° 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


Such  food  also  should  be  administered  as  facilitates  the  purging 
of  the  intestines.  Purgatives  of  keen  virtues  and,  generally,  such 
courses  of  treatment  as  are  alleviative  of  epistasis  and  destructive 
of  the  wind,  are  also  recommended.  89 

In  cases  of  ‘Chitrodara’  (vide  aphorism  ante  of  this  lesson), 
that  course  of  treatment,  with  the  exception  of  ‘sweda,’  should  be 
adopted  which  has  been  laid  down  for  dropsy  born  of  phlegm.  Also 
the  surgical  process  of  tapping  should  be  resorted  to  for  letting  out 
the  water  as  it  accumulates. 

This  variety  of  dropsy  being  incurable,  the  physician  should  seek 
to  suppress  it  by  this  method  of  treatment  (and  prolong  the  life  of 
the  patient).  90 

The  physician  should  avoid  one  afflicted  with  ‘Chitrodara’  who 
has  such  supervening  symptoms  as  thirst,  cough,  and  fever  ;  who  has 
suffered  loss  of  flesh  ;  whose  digestive  fire  has  been  weakened  ;  the 
measure  of  whose  food  has  been  decreased  ;  and  who  labours  under 
a  difficulty  of  breathing,  or  who  suffers  from  ‘£ula’  pains.  91 

In  that  variety  of  dropsy  which  is  called  ‘Udakodara,’  the  physi¬ 
cian  should  give,  at  the  outset,  such  medicines  as  are  destructive  of 
water. 

Diverse  kinds  of  alkaline  enemata  also  as  have  (cow’s)  urine  for 
one  of  their  ingredients,  and  as  are  possessed  of  keen  virtues,  should 
be  prescribed.  92 

Further,  the  physician  should  treat  one  afflicted  with  this  variety 
of  dropsy  with  such  food  and  drink  as  are  called  ‘Dipaniya’  and  as 
are  destructive  of  phlegm. 

The  physician  should  also  gradually  restrain  the  patient  from 
water  and  other  liquids,  as  also  from  food  in  which  the  fluid  element 
predominates.*  93 


*  ‘Dipaniya’  means,  as  already  explained,  drugs  or  articles  that  kindle  the  digestive 
fire. 

‘Anupurvaqah’  implies  gradually.  The  physician  should  not  suddenly  stop  water,  &c., 
but  do  it  slowly.  ‘Udakadibhyah’  means  water  and  other  liquids  ;  ‘dravebhya’  means  food 
in  which  the  liquid  element  predominates. — T. 


CBARAKA-S  AM-HIT  A. 


*35* 

Almost  all  varieties  of  abdominal  dropsy  are  born  of  a  union  of 
(vitiated)  faults.  Hence,  the  physician  should,  in  almost  all  cases  oif 
this  ailment,  adopt  such  treatment  as  is  alleviative.of  wind  and  the 
other  faults.  94 

When  the  abdomen  is  filled  with  the  (vitiated)  faults,  the  digestive 
fire  becomes  weakened.  Hence,  such  food  should  be  prescribed  as 
is  light  and  capable  of  kindling  the  digestive  fire.  95 

Red  ‘£ali’  rice,  barley,  the  seeds  of  Mudga  ( Phaseolus  Mungo), 
and  (the  flesh  of)  wild  animals  and  birds,  cow’s  urine,  ‘Asayas,’ 
‘Arishtas,’  honey,  and  wine  called  ‘Sidhu,’  are  prescribable.*  96 

.  Gruels,  and  other  kinds  of  food  (in  the  form  of  ‘Manda,’  ‘PeyS,’ 
‘Vilepi,’  &c.),  should  be  taken  by  the  patient,  with  soups  (of  the  seeds 
of  Phaseolus  Mungo  and  other  varieties  of  pulse),  and  meat-juice 
(prepared  from  the  flesh  of  wild  animals  and  birds). 

Further,  gruels  and  such  food  should  be  mixed  with  things  that 
are  partially  sour,  partially  oily,  and  partially  pungent,  as  also  boiled 
with  the  five  roots.  97 

The  following  should  be  avoided,  by  persons  afflicted  with  abdo¬ 
minal  dropsy  (of  whatever  variety  it  may  be). 

The  flesh  of  aquatic  animals  (such  as  fish  and  the  rest),  that  of 
animals  living  in  marshy  regions  (such  as  the  wild  boar  and  the  rest), 
potherbs,  food  in  which  the  paste  of  sesame  seeds  occur,  physical 
exercise,  fatiguing  walks,  sleep  at  daytime,  the  riding  of  animals  and 
cars  and  other  vehicles,  and.  drinks.f  98 

One  afflicted  with  abdominal  dropsy  should  not  also  take  food 
that  is  hot,  or  saline,  or  sour,  or  that  causes  a  burning  sensation  in 
the  stomach,  or  that  is  heavy.  He  should  also  avoid  the  drinking 
of  water.  99 


*  In  the  second  line  of  the  verse,  Gangadhara  reads  ‘payomutra  &c.’  Other  editions 
have  ‘gomutra  &c.’  The  latter  reading  is  correct.  ‘Asavas’  and  ‘Arishtas’  are  medicated 
spirituous  liquors.  When  raw  vegetables  are  used  for  fermentation,  the  resulting  fluid  is 
called  ‘Asava.’ 

The  reading  ‘tath5  suram’  in  some  texts  is  not  correct. — T.  ' 

+  Gangadhara’s  reading — ‘yanapanancha’  at  the  end  of  the  second  line,  seems  to  be 
correct.  Other  editions  have  ‘yanayanancha’  which  scarcely  yields  any  sense, — T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


13*2 

Whey  that  is  neither  excessively  thick  nor  excessively  thin,  and 
that  is  agreeble  to  the  taste,’,  is  beneficial  in  all  varieties  of  abdominal 
dropsy. 

In  that  variety  of  abdominal  dropsy  which  is  caused  by  all  the 
faults  excited  together,  such  whey  becomes  beneficial  if  mixed  with 
the  three  acrids,  {viz.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of  Piper  lottgum,  and 
black  pepper),  alkaline  ashes,  and  salts.*  i°° 

One,  afflicted  with  abdominal  dropsy  born  of  excited  wind,  should 
drink  whey  mixed  with  (the  pulv  of  the  fruits  of)  Piper  lottgum, 
and  salt. 

One,  afflicted  with  abdominal  dropsy  born  of  excited  bile,  should 
drink  whey  that  is  sweet  and  agreeable  to  the  taste,  being  mixed 
with  sugar  and  liquorice.  101 

One,  afflicted  with  abdominal  dropsy  born  of  excited  phlegm, 
should  drink  whey  that  is  mixed  with  Yamfini  {Ptychotis  Ajowati), 
‘Saindhava  salt’  Ajfiji  {Nigella  sativa ),  and  honey  that  is  distinctly 
sour,  and  that  is  not  very  thiaf  wj 

One,  afflicted  with  abdominal  dropsy  born  of  enlarged  spleen  (or 
liver),  should  drink  whey  that  is  mixed  with  honey,  oils,  VachS 
( Acorns  Calamus ),  dry  ginger,  ^atahva  (otherwise  called  Madhurika, 
i,  /.,  Fceniculum  vulgare  or  fennel  seeds),  Kushtha  {Aplotaxis  aieri- 
culata ),  and  ‘Saindhava’  salt. 

One,  afflicted  with  abdominal  dropsy  characterised  by  the  accu¬ 
mulation  of  water,  should  drink  curds  mixed  with  the  three  acrids.J  io& 

One,  afflicted  with  abdominal  dropsy  characterised  by  epistasis, 
should  drink  whey  that  is  mixed  with  Habusha  (aromatic  black 
stalks  like  those  of  black  pepper),  Yamani  {Ptychotis  Ajowan),  Ajaji 
{Nigella  sativa),  and  ‘Saindhava  salt.’ 


*  Dropsy  born  of  all  the  faults  is  ealled  ‘Nichayodara’  or  ‘Sannipfitodara.’  Of  course, 
‘Nichaya*  means  like  ‘SanrtipSta’  (collection  of  faults).— T. 

f  ‘VyaktSmlam’  implies  ‘distinctly  sour’,  i.  e.,  ‘ not  partially  sour.’ 

‘•NStipelavam’  is  ‘not  very  thin’.— T. 

X  ‘JStSra’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  curds  made  of  milk  mixed  ‘with  water.  Gener¬ 
ally,  three  parts  of  milk  with  one  part  of  water  is  used  for  conversion  into  curds.— X. 


CH A  RA  KA  -  S A  M HIT  A . 


1353 

One,  afflicted  with  that  variety  of  abdominal  dropsy  which  is 
called  ‘Chitrodara’  (i.  e.,  in  which  the  intestines  are  afflicted  with  sores 
caused  by  thorns  or  hard  substances  swallowed  with  food),  should 
drink  whey  that  is  mixed  with  (the'  pulv  of  the  fruits  of)  Piper 
longum),  and  honey.  i°4 

Unto  persons  that  are  afflicted  with  (excited)  wind  and  phlegm, 
with  heaviness  of  the  body  and  disgust  for  food,  with  weakness  of  the 
digestive  fire  and  diarrhcea,  whey  is  regarded  as  veritable  nectar.  i°5 

When  one  ailing  under  abdominal  dropsy  is  afflicted  by  swellings, 
epistasis,  thirst,  and  swoons,  elephant’s  milk  becomes  as  veritable, 
nectar. 

When  such  persons  have  been  cleansed  by  correctives  and  (as  a 
consequence  thereof)  become  weakened,  the  milk  of  kine,  of  goats, 
and  of  buffalos  becomes  as  veritable  nectar  unto  them.  106 

In  all  varieties  of  abdominal  dropsy,  plasters  should  be  applied 
made  of  the  paste  of  the  following  taken  in  equal  measures,  viz,, 
Devadaru  (Pinus  deodara ),  Palaga  ( Butea  frondosa),  Arka  (Cala- 
tropis  gigantea),  Hastipippali  (Potkos  officinalis),  £igru  (Moringa 
pterygosperma),  and  Acwagandha  ( Physalis  Jlexuosa ),  the  paste  being 
prepared  by  pounding  these  together  with  cow’s  urine.  I07 

Taking  the  following  drugs,  viz,,  Vrischikali  (Tragea  involucrata ), 
Vacha  ( Acorus  Calamus ),  Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis  auriculata ),  Panchamuli 
(the  five  roots),  PunarnavS  < 'Boerhavia  diffusa ),  Varshabhu  ( Boerhavia 
diffusa  of  the  red  variety),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  and  Dhanya  (corian¬ 
der  seeds),  boil  them  in  water,  and  sprinkle  that  water  over  the 
stomach  and  abdomen  of  the  patient.  108 

Take  the  following,  viz.,  Palaja  (Butea  frondosa),  Kattrina  (An- 
dropogon  schcenanthus),  and  Rasna  (  Vanda  Roxburgkii),  boil  them  in 
water,  and  sprinkle  that  water  over  the  stomach  and  abdomen  of  the 
patient 

The  eight  varieties  of  urine  also  should  be  applied  to  persons 
afflicted  with  abdominal  dropsy  for  purposes  of  sprinkling,  and 
drinking.  109 

The  several  kinds  of  ‘Dipaniya’  ghees  are  now  being  laid  down  for 
persons  afflicted  with  abdominal  dropsy  that  are  of  dry  constitutions, 


1354 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


or  that  have  constitutions  in  which  the  wind  predominates,  or  that 
are  desirous  of  having  correctives  administered  unto  them.  110 

Take  two  ‘prasthas’  of  ghee  and  boil  it  with  the  paste  of  the  fruits 
of  Pippali  (Piper  lotigum ),  Pippalimula  (roots  of  Piper  longum), 
Chavya  ( Piper  Chaba ),  Chitraka  {Plumbago  zeylatiica ),  and  ashes  of 
barley  shoots,  the  measure  of  each  of  these  being  half  a  ‘pala  as 
also  with  the  expressed  juice,  measuring  half  a  ‘tula,’*  of  the  ten  roots 
and  an  ‘adhaka’  of  the  cream  of  curds.  The  ghee  thus  prepared  is 
curative  of  abdominal  dropsy.  m-112 

This  ghee  cures  also  other  kinds  of  dropsical  swellings,  suppression 
of  the  wind,  abdominal  tumours,  and  piles. 

The  ghee  thus  prepared  is  called  ‘Panchakola-ghee.’ 

Even  this  was  laid  down  by  Atri’s  descendant  of  dark  c.om- 
plexion.  ”3 

Taking  a  ‘prastha’  of  ghee  and  oil,  and  also  an  ‘adhaka  of  ‘Mastu’ 
(the  watery  part  of  curds),  boil  the  compound  with  (the  paste  of) 
Nagara  (dry  ginger)  and  the  three  myrobalans. 

This  ghee  should  be  drunk.  It  cures  abdominal  dropsy. 

It  is  also  beneficial  in  abdominal  tumours  born  of  (excited) 
phlegm  and  wind. 

This  ghee  is  called  ‘Nagaradya-ghee.’  It  is  highly  praised  by 
Atri’s  son.  ”4-i  15 

A  ‘prastha’  of  ghee,  boiled  with  water  of  four  times  that  measure, 
and  cow’s  urine  of  twice  that  measure,  and  a  ‘pala’  of  the  paste  of 
Chitraka  ( Plumbago  zeylanica ),  mixed  with  the  ashes  of  barley 
shoots,  should  be  drunk  by  one  afflicted  with  abdominal  dropsy.  ”6 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  ‘Chitraka-ghrita.’f 


*  A  ‘tula’  is  equal  to  twelve  and  a  half  seers  ;  and  an  ‘adhaka’  is  equal  to  8  seers.  A 
‘prastha’  being  equal  to  2  seers,  two  ‘prasthas’  would  be  equa.1  to  4  seers.  In  practice, 
8  seers  oi  ghee  are  taken. — T. 

*  In  practice  2  ‘prasthas’,  that  is,  4  seers,  of  ghee  are  taken.  The  measure  of  water, 
therefore,  should  be  66  seers  j  and  that  urine,  8  seers.  As  regards  Chitraka,  the  roots  are 
directed  to  be  taken. — T. 


CHAR  A  K AS AM HIT A. 


'355 


Ghee  boiled  with  the  decoction  of  Yava  (barley),  Kola  (Jujubes ), 
and  Kulattha  (Dolichos  bijlora),  as  also  the  decoction  of  the  five 
roots,  and  also  with  SurS.  and  Sauvira  (varieties  of  wine),  should  b^ 
drunk  by  one  afflicted  with  abdominal  dropsy.  ll7 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  “Yav&dya-ghrita.” 

Unto  one  whose  system  has  been  sufficiently  oiled  by  the  above- 
mentioned  ghees ,  whose  strength  has  been  increased  thereby,  whose 
wind  has  been  allayed,  and  the  seats  of  the  above  faults  have  been 
rectified,  the  physician  should  administer  such  purgatives  as  have 
been  laid  down  in  the  Division  called  ‘Kalpa.’*  118 

Take  the  following  drugs,  viz.,  the  roots  of  Patola  ( Tiichosanthcs 
dioica),  Rajani  {Curcuma  longa),  Vidanga  [Embelia  Ribes),  the  three 
myrobalans  without  their  seeds,  Kampillaka  ( Mallotus  Philippensis ), 
Nilini  ( Indigofera  tinctoria ),  and  Trivrit  [Convolvulus  Turpethum ],  and 
reduce  them  to  pulv. 

The  measure  of  the'  six’  first  should  be  a  ‘karshika’  (2  tolas)  each  ; 
that  of  the  following  three  should  be  twice,  thrice,  and  four  times.f 

The  last  three  should  be  reduced  to  pulv.  Mixing  the  pulvs 
together,  and  dissolving  the  compound  in  cow’s  urine,  one  should 
drink  a  ‘mushti’  thereof  (a  ‘mushti’  being  equal  to  1  ‘pala’). 

Thus  purged,  the  patient  should  take  light  food  (in  small  measure) 
mixed  with  the  meat-juice  of  wild  animals ;  or  he  should  drink 
‘manda’  and  ‘peya,’  and  also  milk  boiled  with  the  pulv  of  ‘Vyosha’ 
(the  three  acrids,  viz.,  Piper  longum ,  dry  ginger,  and  black  pepper). 

This  should  be  the  regimen  of  the  patient  for  six  days. 

The  pulv  (mentioned  above)  should  again  be  drunk  mixed  with 
cow’s  urine. 

This  should  be  done  separately. 

This  pulv  cures  all  varieties  of  abdominal  dropsy,  even  those  in 
which  water  has  accumulated. 


f  The  first  word  of  the  second  line  of  the  verse  is,  in  the  Calcutta  edition,  ‘Srasta.’ 
This  is  evidently  wrong.  Gangadhara  reads  ‘saste’,  meaning  ‘checked’,  that  is,  rectified  or 
restored  to  the  normal  condition. — T. 

£  The  measure  of  Tatolamula’  and  the  five  following  should  be  a  ‘karshika’  or  2  tolSs  ; 
that  of  ‘Kampillaka’,  4  tolSs  ;  that  of  ‘Nilini’,  6  tolSs  ;  and  that  of  ‘Trivrit’,  8  tolas. — T. 


■356 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MHITA . 


It  also  cures  jaundice,  chlorosis,  and  dropsical  swellings,  119-123 

Reducing  the  following  to  powder,  viz.,  Gavakshi  ( Cucumis  Colo- 
cynthis),  £ankhini  (Pladera  decussata ),  Danti  ( Baliospermum  monta- 
num ),  the  bark  of  Tilwaka  ( Symplocos  racentosa ),  and  Vacha  ( Acorus 
calamus),  one  should  drink  it,  dissolving  it  in  the  decoction  of  grapes, 
or  the  urine  of  the  cow,  or  the  decoction  of  Kola  ("jujubes  of  the  large 
variety,  or  the  decoction  of  Karkandhu  (jujubes  of  the  small  variety), 
or  with  ‘Sidhu’  (wine).  124 

Taking  equal  measures  of  Yamani  (Ptyckotis  Ajowan),  Habusha 
(black  stalks  like  those  of  black  pepper),  coriander  seeds,  the  three 
myrobalans,  Upakunjika  (otherwise  called  Krishna-jiraka  of  the  large 
variety,  i.  e.,  the  seeds  of  Nigella  sativa),  Karavi  (Krishna-jiraka  of  the 
small  variety),  Pippalimula  (the  roots  of  Piper  longum),  Ajagandha 
(Pkysalis  jlexuosa ),  £athi  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet),  Vacha  ( Acorus  cala¬ 
mus),  £atahva  (otherwise  called  Salupha,  i.  e.,  dill  seeds),  Chitraka 
(Plumbago  zeylanica),  Vyosha  (three  acrids),  Svarnakshiri  (Cleome 
felinct),  Sachitraka  (otherwise  called  Eranda,  i.  e.,  Ricinus  communis ), 
the  two  varieties  of  Kshara  (or  alkaline  ashes,  viz.,  those  of  green 
barley  shoots,  and  those  called  Sarjjikshfira,  i.  e.,  carbonate  of  soda), 
Pushkaramula  (not  being  available,  the  root  of  Aplotaxis  auriculata 
is  substituted1*,  Kushtha  (Aplotaxis  auriculata ),  the  five  varieties  of 
salt),  and  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes). 

Add  Danti  (Baliospermum  montanum)  of  measure  three  times  that 
of  each  of  the  above. 

Also  add  Trivrit  (Convolvulus  Turpethum)  reduced  to  powder 
and  of  measure  equal  to  twice  that  of  each  of  the  group  mentioned 
first. 

Also  add  Vifala  (Cucnmis  colocynthis)  of  measure  equal  to  that 
of  Trivrit. 

Of  the  pulv  of  ££tala  (otherwise  called  Charmakasha,  a  shrub) 
add  a  measure  that  is  four  times  that  of  Yamani  or  the  others  of  the 
first  group. 

The  pulvs  of  all  these  should  be  mixed  together.  The  compound 
is  called  ‘Narayana-churna.’  It  is  capable  of  curing  a  variety  of 
ailments. 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA.  1357 

Encountering  this  medicine,  diseases  disappear  like  Asuras  at  the 
sight  of  Vishnu.  125-128 

Those  suffering  under  abdominal  dropsy  should  take  the  above 
powder  with  whey. 

Those  ailing  under  abdominal  tumours  should  take  it  with  the 
decoction  of  jujubes. 

Patients  suffering  from  suppression  of  the  wind,  should  take  it 
with  wine. 

In  diseases  born  of  excited  wind,  this  powder  should  be  adminis¬ 
tered  with  that  variety  of  wine  which  is  called  ‘Prasanna.’  129 

In  constipation  of  the  bowels  (when  stools  are  entirely  suppressed) 
this  medicine  should  be  administered  with  the  cream  of  curds. 

In  piles,  it  should  betaken  w,ith  the  decoction  of  Punica  Granatum. 

In  cutting  pains  in  the  anus,  it  should  be  administered  with  the 
infusion  of  tamarind. 

In  indigestion  it  should  be  administered  with  hot  water. 

It  should  be  administered  with  the  same  vehicle  in  fistula-in-ano, 
chlorosis,  asthma,  cough  or  bronchitis,  suppression  of  the  voice, 
diseases  of  the  chest,  lienteric  dysentery,  leprosy,  in  loss  of  appetite, 
fever,  bites  of  poisonous  animals,  cases  of  poisoning  by  vegetable 
roots,  cases  of  poisoning  caused  by  licking  insects,  and  cases  of 
poisoning  by  artificial  means. 

This  medicine  is  also  a  purgative.  It  may  be  taken  as  a  purga¬ 
tive  by  one  whose  stomach  has  previously  been  oilified  by  the  admi¬ 
nistration  of  proper  oils.  >30-132 

Even  this  is  the  composition,  and  these  the  uses,  of  the  medicine 
called  ‘Narayana-churna.’ 

Habusha  (black  aromatic  stalks  like  those  of  black  pepper),  K5n- 
chanakshiri  (otherwise  called  Svarnakshiri,  i.  e.,  Cteome  felind),  the 
three  myrobalans,  Katurohini  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ),  Nilini  (wild 
indigo),  TrSyamana  {Ficus  heterophylla),  (^atala  (otherwise  called 
Charmakasha,  a  small  shrub),  Trivrit  {Convolvulus  Turpetkum),  Vacha 
{Acorus  Calamus ),  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  Kala-lavana  (black  salt — a  variety 
of  'Vit’  salt),  and  Pippali  (fruits  of  Piper  longum) : 


1358 


CHARARA-SAMHITA . 


Take  all  these  in  equal  measures  and  reduce  them  into  powder. 

This  powder  should  be  taken  with  any  of  these  vehicles,  viz., 
the  expressed  juice  of  pomegranate  fruits,  the  decoction  of  the  three 
myrobalans,  meat-juice,  urine  of  the  cow,  and  lukewarm  water.  I33-I34 

This  medicine  should  be  administered'  in  all  cases  of  abdominal 
tumours,  in  cases  of  enlarged  spleen,  in  all  varieties  of  abdominal 
dropsy,  in  leucoderma,  in  leprosy  (skin-diseases)  accompanied  by 
pains  and  excited  wind,  in  cases  of  irregularity  of  the  digestive  fire 
(that  is,  when  the  digestive  fire  once  becomes  keen  and  then  weak), 
in  dropsical  swellings,  in  piles,  in  chlorosis,  in  anaemia,  and  in  malig¬ 
nant  jaundice.  .  ..  .  . 

This  medicine,  by  also  purging  the  patient,  alleviates  excited 
wind,  bile,  and  phlegm.  135-136 

Even  this  is  the  composition,  and  these  the  uses,  of  the  medicine 
called  ‘Habushadya-churna.’ 

The  bark  of  Nilini  (Indigofera  tinctoria),  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids), 
the  two  varieties  of  Ksh&ra  (viz.,  the  ashes  of  barley  shoots  and 
SarjjikshSra  or  carbonate  of  soda),  the  five  varieties  of  salts,  and 
Chitraka  (Plumbago  zeylanicci),  should  be  reduced  to  powder. 

This  powder,  mixed  with  ghee,  should  be  drunk  by  one  afflicted 
with  abdominal  dropsy.  It  is  very  effective  in  this  disease.*  137 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  the  powder  or  pulv  called 
‘Nilinadya.’ 

A  ‘drona’  of  milk  (equal  to  32  seers,  in  practice  double  the  mea¬ 
sure  is  taken),  mixed  with  half  a  ‘prastha’  of  the  milk  of  Sudha  (or 
Snuhi,  i.  e.,  Euphorbia  neriifolia ),  should  be  converted  into  curds. 

The  curds  should  be  converted  into  ghee  by  the  usual  process  of 
churning. 

This  ghee  boiled  with  Trivrit  (Convolvlus  Turpethuvi )  should  be 
drunk.  138 

Also  taking  a  ‘prastha’  of  the  ghee  prepared  according  to  the 
above  process,  boil  it  with  water  eight  times  its  measure,  and  mix  it 


*  Some  editions  read  ‘Nilinim  Nichulam  &c.’  Gangadhara’s  reading— Nilini-cchallakam’ 
ms  to  be  correct.  The  Bengali  word  ‘cabala’  is  evidently  a  curruption  of  ‘cchallaka’.— T. 


CHAR  A  KA  -SAMHTTA . 


*3  59 


with  a  ‘pala’  of  the  thickened  milk  of  Snuhi  ( Euphorbia  neriifolia\ 
and  six  ‘palas’  of  the  paste  of  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethum). 

Ghee  thus  prepared  should  be  drunk  for  the  alleviation  of  abdomi¬ 
nal  tumours,  of  the  effects  of  poisons  introduced  into  the  system,  and 
of  abdominal  dropsy.*  *39 

Take  an  ‘adhaka1  of  the  cream  of  curds,  and  a  ‘pala’  of  the  thick- 
■ened  milk  of  Snuhi  [Euphorbia  neriifolia),  and  a  ‘pala’  of  ghee.  Boil 
these  together. 

One  should  drink  a  proper  measure  -of  this  ghee  for  the  alleviation 
•of  abdominal  dropsy.  *4° 

After  taking  each  of  these  medicated  ghees ,  the  patient  should 
'drink  either  milk  or  meat-juice  well-prepared.'f 

After  the  ghee  has  been  digested  and  the  patient  purged,  he 
should  drink  luke- warm  water  in  which  dry  ginger  has  been  boiled. 

He  should,  after,  this  drink  the  ‘peya’  or  soup  of  Kulattha  [Dolichos 
•biflora). 

If  the  patient’s  constitution  happens  to  become  dry,  he  should 
'(after  taking  these  drinks)  eat  boiled  rice  mixed  with  milk. 

He  should,  indeed, -repeatedly  take  the  ghees  indicated  above,  one 
after  another. 

The  physician  skilled  in  treatment  should  prescribe  these  well- 
tested  ghees  for  the  alleviation  of  abdominal  tumours,  the  effects  of 
poisons  introduced  into  the  system,  and  abdominal  dropsy. 

Ghee  boiled  with  the  paste  of  Pilu  [Salvadora  Indica)  cures  the 
epistasis  of  a  person  afflicted  with  abdominal  dropsy. 

Ghee  boiled  with  Nilini  (and  other  drugs),  that  cures  abdominal 
tumours,  is  also  prescribable  in  similar  epistasis. 

The  diverse  kinds  of  (other)  medicated  ghees  mentioned  above 
'serve  the  same  end. 


*  Tbe  last  line,  viz.,  ‘gulmanam  &c.’,  is  omitted  in  Gangadhara’s  edition.  It  is  placed 
tower  down. — T. 

,f  Some  editions  add  ‘peyli’  as  one  of  the  drinks, — T. 


172 


1360 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


When  the  faults  of  persons  afflicted  with  abdominal  dropsy  are 
gradually  corrected  by  such  treatment,  they  should  have  for  regimen 
meat-juice  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  wild  animals.  np-HS 

For  the  complete  correction  of  the  faults  that  may  still  remain, 
I  shall  now  lay  down  the  following  (course  of  treatment) : 

A  person  in  such  a  state  should  drink  the  paste  of  Chitraka 
{Plumbago  Zeylanica )  and  of  Amaradaru  {Pinus  deodara ),  dissolving 
it  in  milk.*  146 

Also  taking  the  paste,  of  the  measure  of  a  jujube,  of  each  of  these, 
viz,,  Mangsa  (otherwise  call  Jatamansi,  i.  e.,  Nardostachys  Jatamansi ), 
Hastipippali  {Pothos  officinalis ),  Vigwabhesaja  (dry  ginger),  Vidanga 
{Embelia  Ribes ),  Chitraka  {Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  Danti  {Baliospermuvi 
montanuni),  Chavya  {Piper  Chaba\  and  Vyos.ha  (the  three  acrids), 
and  boiling  it  with  milk,  one  should  drink  it. 

This  drink  conquers  enlargement  of  the  abdomen. 

One  may  also  drink  the  decoction  of  the  three  myrobalans,  Danti 
{Baliospermum  montanuni )  and  Rohitaka  {Andersonia  Rohituka),  mix¬ 
ing  it  with  the  pulv  of  the  three  acrids  and  the  ashes  of  barley  shoots. 

When  the  medicine  taken  has  been  digested,  the  patient  should 
eat  boiled  rice  with  meat-juice  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  wild  animals. 

Or,  the  patient  may  take  flesh,  boiling  it  with  the  milk  of  Snuhi 
{Euphorbia  neriifolia )  and  ghee.  H7-W9 

The  physician  should  then  prescribe,  as  an  after-drink,  milk  or 
chebulic  myrobalans  with  cow’s  urine.f 

Or,  causing  the  patient  to  abstain  from  rice  (or  other  kind  of 
food),  he  should  be  given  for  a  week  the  urine  of  the  buffalo  or 
buffalo  milk.  *5° 


*  The  root-bark  of  Chitraka  is  taken.  The  grammar  of  the  second  line  is  doubtful.  The 
instrumental  dual  (Chitrokamaradarubhyam)  is  followed  by  ‘kalkam’.  The  genetive  dual 
is  expected.  Of  course,  the  instrumental  dual  may  be  barely  justified  in  this  way : 
‘tabhyam  kalkam  kritwa,  tat  kalkam  pivet’. — T. 

■f  The  paste  of  chebulic  myrobalans  should  be  dissolved  in  cow’s  urine  and  given  to  the 
patient.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1361 


Or,  the  patient  should  be  given  camel’s  milk  for  a  month,  mixed 
with  the  pulv  of  the  three  acrids,  or  goat’s  .milk  for  three  months, 
mixed  with  the  pulv  of  the  same  (making  him  abstain  all  the  while 
from  rice  or  any  other  kind  of  food). 

Or,  he  should  be  given  a  thousand  chebulic  myrobalans  (increas¬ 
ing  their  number  day  by  day),  causing  him  to  subsist  on  milk  all  the 
while;  or  ‘(julajatu’  may  be  given  to  him,  under  the  same 
conditions.  »5i 

Or,  the  physician  may  administer  ‘Guggulu’  (the  exudation  of 
{Balsamodendron  Mukul)  agreeably  to  the  method  in  which  ‘£il3jatu’ 
is  administered. 

The  expressed  juice  of  ginger,  or  the  decoction  of  dry  ginger,  is 
regarded  as  beneficial  as  milk.*  152 

Oil,  boiled  with  the  expressed  juice  of  ginger  of  measure  that  is 
ten  times  its  own,  is  regarded  as  equally  beneficial. 

The  oil  of  the  fruits  of  Danti  ( Baliospermum  montanum)  and  of 
those  of  Dravanti  (Antkericum  tuberosum)  is  beneficial  in  abdominal 
ailments.  r53 

If  ‘£ula’  pains,  epistasis,  and  constipation  of  the  intestines,  super¬ 
vene,  the  oil  of  Danti  ( Baliospermum  montanum )  and  Dravanti 
(Anthericum  tuberosum)  is  prescribable,  mixed  with  the  cream  of 
curds,  the  soup  of  Phaseolus  Mungo ,  and  meat-juice. 

The  oil  obtained  from  the  seeds  of  Sarala  ( Pinus  longifolia),  and 
Madhugigru  (red  variety  of  Moringa  pterygosperma),  as  also  that 
obtained  from _the  seeds  of  the  garden  radish,  is  beneficial  in  cases 
of  abdominal  dropsy  born  of  excited  wind,  used  as  ointment  for 
rubbing  the  body  and  also  .as  a  drink. 

In  cases  of  abdominal  dropsy  in  which  the  abdomen,  from  excited 
phlegm,  becomes  distended  and  hard,  if  such  symptoms  as  stupefac¬ 
tion,  and  disgust  for  food,  hiccup,  and  weakness  of  the  digestive  fire, 


*  By  ‘(Jringavera’  is  meant  dry  ginger,  while  ‘ardraka’  means  raw  ginger.  When  the 
‘rasa’  of  both  is  mentioned,  it  seems  that  the  decoction  of  the  first  and  the  expressed  juice  of 
the  last  are  intended. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1362 

supervene,  and  if  the  patient  happens  to  be  a  habitual  drinker  ofT 
alcoholic  spirits,  the  physician  of  knowledge  and  experience  should' 
then,  for  checking  the  phlegm,  administer  ‘arishtas’  and  alkaline 
ashes,  duly  considering  the  measure  in  which  the  phlegm  itself  and 
the  other  faults  have  been  excited,  rSMSfr 

Pippali  {Piper  longum),  Tinduka  (Diospyros  glutinosa),  assafcetida, 
Nagara  (dry  ginger),  Hastipippali  ( Pothos  officinalis ),  Bhallataka 
{Semecarpus  Anacardium ),  the  seeds  of  £igru  ( Moringa  pterygos- 
perma ),  the  three  myrobalans,  Katurohini  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa),  Deva- 
daru  ( Pinus  deodizra),  the  two  varieties  of  Haridra  (viz.,  Curcuma 
long  a  and  Berber  is  Astatic# ',  S’arala  ( Pinus  longifolia),  Ativisha 
( Aconitum  heterophyttum ),.  Sthirai  (. Hedysarum  Gangeticum ),  Kushtha 
( Aplotaxis  auriculatd),  Musta  {Cyperus  rotundas'),  and  the  five  varieties- 
of  salt : 

Equal  measures  of  these,  with  curds,  ghee,  fat,  marrow,  and  oil,, 
should  be  inci-nnerated  within  a  closed  pot. 

After  the  taking  of  meals-,  one  should  drink  a  ‘karsha’  of  the' 
ashes  thus  prepared,  mixing  it  with  wine,  cream  of  curds,,  hot  water,, 
‘sura’  and  ‘asava,’ 

» 

This  medicine  cures-  diseases  of  the  chest,  dropsical  swellings,, 
enlargement  of  the  liver,  abdominal  tumours,  piles,  abdominal- 
dropsy,  ‘Visuchika,’  epistasis,.  and  hard  abdominal  tumours  called 
‘VatashtilS.’  157-160 

The  ashes  of  the  dung  of  goats  should  be  boiled  in  cow’s  urine- 
(of  eight  times  their  measure).  The  boiled  product  should  then  be: 
strained1  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth. 

Into  the  liquid  that  is  obtained,  should  be  thrown  the  following,. 
viz.,  the  roots  of  Pippali  ( Piper  longum),  the  five  salts,  the  fruits  of 
Pippali  ( Piper  longum ),  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica),  £unthi  (dry 
ginger),  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpe- 
thum),  and  VachS  {Acorus  Calamus),  the  ashes  of  barley  shoots, 
‘Sarjjikshara  (carbonate  of  soda),  £&tala  (a  shrub  otherwise  called 
Charmakasha),  Danti  ( Baliospermum  montanum),  Svarnakshiri  ( Cleome 
felina),  and  VishanikS  (otherwise  called  Meshajringi,  i.  e.,  Asclepias 
geminata).  The  measure  of  each  of  these  should  be  two  tolas. 

Pills  or  boluses  should  then  be  made  of  the  size  of  jujubes. 


CH ARAKA  -  SA  M HIT  A, . 


i3<%; 

The  boluses  should  be  taken,  with  ‘Sauvira’  wine.*  161-163 

The  medicine  mentioned  above  is  beneficial  in  dropsical  swellings,, 
in  indigestion,  and  in  even  violent  forms  of  that  variety  of  abdominal 
dropsy  which  is  characterised  by  accumulation  of  water.  164 

Gruel  made  of  the  rice  of  ‘Shastika’  paddy  macerated  in  cow’s 
urine,  and  boiled  in  milk,  may  be  ‘given  in  copious  measure  to  a 
person  (afflicted  with-  abdominal  dropsy). 

The  patient  should,  after  this,  drink  the  expressed  juice  of  the- 
sugarcane,  " 

This  regimen  alTays  all  varieties  of  abdominal  dropsy. 

In  consequence  of  this  treatment,  the  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm 
become  restored  to  their  proper  places  in  the  system. 

Thus  attacked  by  a  physician  of  skill,  the  excitement  of  these- 
is  allayed.  165-167 

When  the  stools  become  hard  of  a  person  afflicted  with  abdo¬ 
minal  dropsy,  the  leaves  of  the  following,  viz.,  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus 
Turpethum),  £ankhini  (A  ndropogon  aciculatum),  Danti  {Baliospermu m 
montanum ),  Sudha  (otherwise  called  Snuhi,  i.  e.,  Euphorbia  neriifolid ), 
and  Putika  ( Basella  Rubra),  boiled  in  water,  should  be  given  to  him 
to  take  before  meals.  *68 

After  this,  when  the  stools  have  lost  ther  hardness  without  the 
faults  having  been  completely  allayed,  the  physician  conversant  with 
the  scriptures  should  give  unto  him  milk  mixed  with  (cow’s)  urine. 

This  drink  is  highly  efficacious  in  allaying  the  lingering  faults.  l69 

If  the  wind  (becoming  excited)  generates  pains  in  the  flanks,  or 
paraplegia,  or  afflictions  of  the  chest,  the  physician  should  cause  the 
patient  to  take  the  same  oil  with  the  ashes  of  (the  fruits  of)  Vilwa 
(AEgle  marmelos ).  *7<» 

Also  cooking  the  same  oil  with  the  strained  ashes  of  each  of 
these,  viz.,  Agnimantha  ( Premna  serratifolia),  £yonaka  ( Bignonia 


*  The  drugs  to  be  added  should  first  be  reduced  to  powder  or  pulv.  Mixed  with  the 
strained  liquid,  these  form  a  pill-mass.  When  boluses,  again,  are  formed,  they  should  be 
administered  with'Sauvira’  wine.— T.  - 


.1364 


\CHARA  K A-S  AM  HIT  A. 


Jndica),  Palaga  Butea  frondosa ),  sesame  blades,  Bala  (Si da  cordifolid), 
Kadali  (Musa  sapienta),  and  Apamarga  (Ackyranthes  asp  era),  the 
physican  should  administer  it  for  alleviation  of  abdominal  dropsy. 
This  medicine  alleviates  also  the  chest-afflictions  of  such  a  patient 
that  are  born  of  excited  wind.  171-172 

If  the  patient  afflicted  with  abdominal  dropsy  has  his  phlegm 
obstructed  by  the  wind,  or  by  the  bile,  or  has  his  wind  obstructed 
by  both  the  phlegm  and  the  bile,  and  if  his  strength  has  not  been 
diminished,  the  physician  should  then  administer  to  him  the  oil  of 
castor-seeds,  mixed  with  the  medicines  (already  mentioned)  that  are 
alleviative  of  abdominal  dropsy.  Such  oil  is  beneficial  in  cases  of 
this  kind.  *73 

If  a  patient,  who  has  been  sufficiently  purged  (by  means  of  the 
medicines  mentioned  above),  is  again  assailed  by  flatulence  of  the 
stomach,  the  physician  should  treat  him  with  enemata,  well  oiled, 
consisting  of  acids  and  salts.  r74 

If  it  is  the  wind  that  being  obstructed  causes  such  flatulence, 
then  the  physician  should  treat  the  patient  with  keen  enemata  mixed 
with  cow’s  urine  and  (alkaline)  ashes.  !7S 

If  after  administering  all  these  medicines  the  physician  finds 
that  the  abdomen  has  not  been  reduced  and  the  three  faults  have 
.  not  been  alleviated,  he  should  then  inform  the  patient’s  kinsmen  and 
well-wishers  ar.d  wives  and  Brahmanas  and  the  king  and  preceptors 
that  his  condition  has  become  very  doubtful.  He  should  continue 
the  treatment,  saying  that, — ‘if  treatment  be  stopped,  death  would 
be  inevitable  ;  but  if  treatment  be  continued,  death  may  or  may  not 
come.”  Having  said  this,  he  should,  with  the  permission  of  the 
patient’s  well-wishers,  administer  to  the  patient  poison,  mixing  it 
with  his  food  and  drink.  176-178 

The  physician  possessed  of  thorough  knowledge  should,  carefully 
considering  all  things,  cause  the  person  ailing  under  abdominal 
dropsy  to  eat  that  fruit  into  which  a  snake  in  wrath  has  cast  its 
venom.  *79 

By  means  of  such  poison,  the  aggregate  of  excited  faults  which 
have  become  immobile,  which  have  penetrated  particular  parts  of  the 
•  body,  or  which,  deviating  from  their  respective  courses  have  begun 
to  move  along  other  roads,  soon  becomes  separated,  and  the  faults 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


13  65 

begin  to  move  in  their  own  courses,  in  consequence  of.  the  agitating 
property  of  poison.  180 

When  his  faults  have  been  allayed  by  such  poison,  the  physician 
should  cause  him  to  be  bathed  by  pouring  cold  water  upon  him,  and 
also  cause  him  to  drink  milk  or  gruel  of  barley  the  measure  of  which: 
should  be  determined  by  the  strength  of  the  patient.  181 

The  physician  should  also  cause  him  to  eat  the  leaves  (as  pot¬ 
herbs)  of  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpetkum ),  of  Mandukaparni  {Hydro- 
cotyle  Asiatica),  of  Yava  (barley),  of  Vastuka  {Chenopo dinin'),  or  the 
pot-herb  called  KalasSka  (otherwise  named  Kulattha,  that  is  Dolichos 
biflora).  Each  of  these  should  be  boiled  in  the  decoction  of  SurasS 
(■ Ocimunt  sanctum).  182 

Nothing  sour  or  saline  should  be  added  while  these  pot-herbs  are 
boiled  ;  nor  should  oil  or  ghee  should  be  added.  The  pot-herbs  may 
or  may  not  be  properly  boiled.  The  patient  should  take  these  pot¬ 
herbs  for  a  month,  abstaining  all  this  time  from  rice  (or  other  subs¬ 
tantial  food).  When  he  feels  thirsty,  he  should  drink  the  decoction 
of  Surasa  {Ocimunt  sactum).  183 

When  the  excited  faults  have  thus  been  allayed  by  means  of 
these  pot-h^rbs  given  for  a  month,  after  the  expiration  of  this  period 
the  physician  should  give  to  the  exhausted  patient  elephant’s  milk 
which  is  highly  strength-giving.  184 

In  cases  of  abdominal  dropsy,  the  following  should  be  the  treat¬ 
ment  adopted  by  surgeons  of  experience  : 

The  left  part  of  the  abdomen,  four  fingers  below  the  navel,  the 
physician  of  intelligence  should  open  by  means  of  a  lancet  of  the 
same  length  (i.  e.,  the  width  of  four  fingers). 

Having  opened  the  entrail  (z.  e.,  caused  the  incision'1,  the  physician 
should  look  carefully  into  the  entrail  that  has  been  stopped  as  also 
that  which  may  be  affected  by  sores  ;  he  should  then  rub  the  afflicted 
entrail  with  ghee ,  and  carefully  feeling  (with  his  fingers)  take  out  the 
hairs  or  other  foreign  articles  (that  have  .produced  the  sore).* 


*  ‘Vaddha  antra’  evidently  implies  an  entrail  that  has  been  stopped  up  or  closed  ; 
‘kshata  antra’  implies  one  that  is  affected  with  sores.  Vipaty  antram,’  literally  ‘opening 
the  entrail,’  I  think,  means  ‘having  caused  the  incision.’ 

Charaka  is  silent  about  surgical  treatment.  This  passage  may  be  an  interpolation. — T. 


L36  6 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


The  particular  entrail  which  happens  to  be  obstructed  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  attachment  thereto  of  hairs  and  other  foreign  matter,, 
should  be  cleased  of  the  obstruction.  185-187 

(In  case  of  ‘Cchidrodara’)  the  ‘cchidrodara’  (or  holes)  in  the  entrail 
should  be  caused  to  be  bitten  by  many  large  ants. 

When  the  holes  are  seen  to  be  bitten  by  the  ants,  the  ants  should 
be  cut  off  (their  mouths  sticking  to  the  entrails).  188 

The  entrail  should  then  be  thrust  back  (i.  e.,  restored  to  its  place) 
by  proper  means,  and  the  incision  made  sewed  up  with  a  needle* 

As  regards  all  those  varieties  of  ‘Udara’  (abdominal  dropsy)  in 
which  water  has  been  accumulated,  the  physician  should  have 
recourse  to  the  operation  called  tapping.  189 

In  the  case  of  tapping  also,  it  should  be  done  on  the  left  side  of 
of  the  abdomen,  below  the  navel.  The  water  should  be  let  out  by 
■means  of  a  tube. 

Letting  the  water  out  and  pressing  the  abdomen  (so  that  no  water 
may  remain  within  it),  the  physician  should  bandage  the  abdomen 
by  means  of  cloths.  *9° 

So  also  the  entire  abdomen  of  a  person  which  has  been  reduced 
•by  means  of  enemata  and  purgatives,  should  be  bandaged  with  cloths. 

When  the  water  has  been  let  out,  the  patient  should  first  observe 
fasts  and  then  take  ‘peyS’  (thin  gruel  of  rice  or  other  corn)  without 
■any  kind  of  oily  substance  and  salt.  191 

After  this,  the  patient  should  for  six  months  live  upon  milk  only, 
Tor  the  next  three  months  he  should  live  on  ‘peya’  mixed  with  milk. 


*  It  is  curious  to  see  how  Gangadhara  misunderstands  the  whole -passage  beginning  with 
185.  The  fact  is,  the  surgical  treatment  of  two  different  varieties  of  ‘•Udara,’  viz.,  ‘Vaddho- 
dara’  and  ‘Cchidrodara,’  is  laid  down  in  this  passage. 

Partially  following  Gangadhara,  one-of  the  Bengali  translators 'has  made  a  mess  of  the 
■passage.  He  misunderstands  it  so  far  as  to  say  that  the  ‘cchidras’  or  holes  are  to  fee 
•made  by  the  physician  himself.  Hindu  surgeons  used  large  ants  (those  of  a  black 
colour,  called  ‘deo’  in  Bengali)  for  the  purpose  of  stopping  arteries,  &c.,  and  preventing 
the  discharge  of  blood.  If  the  ants,  after  they  have  bitten,  are  divided  in  the  middle,  their 
mortis  continue  biting.  It  seems  that  ants  were  used  in  stopping  holes  as  well.— T. 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland ,  U.  S.  A.:— You  have  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco ,  California: —  . . As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent . . 

there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis ,  Ohio,  U.  S.  A.  : — The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge : — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York-. — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  Ametican  fournal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia-. — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
.literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

-  H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia .—I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  oj  Cashmere : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-Western 
University,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  Worlds  Columbian  Exposition  I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  .—Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  ig.  East  3Sth  Street,  New  York  .-—Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Dersclhofber  Praise,  Dramsladt The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis ,  U.  S.  A . 
Eaitory  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist : — I  shall  columns  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  and 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  E tr anger e,  174,  Boulevatsc,  Saint  Germain  : — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  -.—An -l  go  over  each  fasciculus  I 
arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop 
from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients 
according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and 
fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of 
the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street,  Calcutta  :— My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya,— I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
[about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after.— 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia:— I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  My  mousing  /—The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector  t— Your  patriotic, 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . ...\ou 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  A.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  :— I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hypocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gya  :— It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  Wales-.- The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  :— Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is 
a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji,— The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  bat  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


tpl? 


47  357 


PART  XLIV. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


( TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH). 


PUBLISHED  BY 


PARESHNATH  SARMA, 


KAVIRAJ  AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  original)  WITH'COMMENT- 
AR1ES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 

susruTa-samhita  ;  editor  of  chikitsa-sammilani  (Medical 
journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  the  HINDU 
SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C.,  &C. 


CALCUTTA : 

200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


1907. 

(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved.) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN* 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters.) 

Professor  Max  Mullef  I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  Of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — ...  .  I  am 

surprised  that  yoUr  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention. 
a . Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K;  C;  I;  E;  I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  Of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting; 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C;  I.  E;  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office — . Your 

excellent  translation . -a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . 

X  shall  draw  the'  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

. Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York,  Ut  S  At  I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  giad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail'to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H;  Edgren,  Esq;,  Cothenburgll,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A;  V.  Williams  Jackson.-,  Colunibia  College ,  New  Yorkj  Ut  S.  A. — I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true'  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  afe  doing,  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  Of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons;  A.  Barth.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  th03e-whcr  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons;  B;  St;  Hailaire,  Paris : — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University ,  Germany : — The  work  you  have  Undertaken 
Will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsbunh,  Germany  : — English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  View,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M;  A;,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  iustnictionj  Bengal : — I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which.a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life, 
cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


136  7 


For  the  next  three  months  he  should  take  the  rice  of  such  paddy  as 
‘£yamaka’  and  ‘Koradushaka,’  with  milk,  but  devoid  of  salt. 

Conducting  himself  thus  for  one  year,  one  may  conquer 
abdominal  dropsy  characterised  by  accumulation  of  water,  even  when 
it  has  manifested  itself  in  a  pronounced  way.  192-193 

After  administering  the  several  kinds  of  medicines  laid  down 
for  abdominal  dropsy,  the  physician  should  give  the  patient  milk 
in  order  to  keep  up  the  proportion  between  the  ‘doshas’,  as  also  for 
maintaining  his  strength  and  the  compactness  of  his  body.*  194 

This  is  to  be  done  (/.  e.>  milk  given)  since,  unto  dropsical  patients 
weakened  by  administration  of  medicines  and  afflicted  by  the  waste 
of  all  the  ‘dh&tus’,  milk  is  as  beneficial  as  nectar  to  the  deities.  195 

( Here  are  two  verses  containing  a  summary .) 

The  causes,  the  incubatory  symptoms,  the  symptoms,  both  in 
brief  and  extenso,  the  supervening  ailments,  violence,  or  intensity, 
curability  and  incurablity,  the  indications  of  the  accumulation  or 
otherwise  of  water,  and  treatment  of  the  eight  varieties  of  abdominal 
dropsy,  in  brief  and  in  extenso,  have  been  laid  down  by  the  Rishi  in 
this  Lesson  on  the  treatment  of  Abdominal  dropsy.  1-2 

Thus  ends  Lesson  XIII,  called  ‘the  Treatment  of  dropsy,’  in  the 
Division  called  ‘Chikitsita’  of  Agnivega’s  treatise  as  revised  by 
Charaka. 


*  ‘Doshanubandha’  means  the  relation  or  proportion  between  the  ‘doshas.’  In  the 
constitution  of  the  patient  there  is  a  certain  proportion  of  the  ‘doshas.’  That  proportion 
should  be  maintained  ;  i.  e.,  no  particular  ‘dosha’  should  be  allowed  to  predominate  over 
the  others.  ‘Dosha’  here  may  be  taken  to  mean  not  simply  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,  but 
all  the  ingredients  of  the  body.— T. 

173 


LESSON  XIV. 

TREATMENT  OF  PILES. 

Now  we  shall  expound  the  treatment  of  Piles. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  son  of  Atri.  1 

Agnivega  asked  the  ascetic  Punarvasu  when  he  was  seated  with 
collected  mind  after  having  gone  through  his  silent  recitation  (of 
holy  texts)  and  when  he  was  prepared  to  answer  the  questions 
put  to  him,  about  the  treatment  of  Piles  for  their  cure.  2 

The  ascetic  then  declared  unto  him  the  causes  that  provoke 
the  disease,  the  seat  of  the  ailment,  its  symptoms,  its  treatment,  and 
the  distinctions  that  determine  its  curability  and  incurability.  3 

In  this  connection,  O  Agnivega,  it  is  said  that  Piles  are  of  two 
kinds,  viz.,  those  that  are  congenital,  and  those  that  appear  in  a 
person  sometime  after  his  birth.  4 

Of  these,  the  cause  of  congenital  piles  is  the  vitiation  of  both  the 
menstrual  blood  (of  the  mother)  and  the  vital  seed  (of  the  father).  5 

As  in  the  case  of  all  other  congenital  diseases,  the  causes  are  two¬ 
fold  of  the  vitiation  of  the  vital  seed  and  the  menstrual  blood,  viz., 
transgressions  on  the  part  of  the  mother  and  the  father,  and  the 
(immoral  or  wicked)  acts  (of  the  patient  himself)  of  former  lives.  6 

Those  piles  are  called  ‘congenital’  because  they  are  born  with  the 
birth  of  the  body. 

The  class  of  ailments  to  which  Piles  belong  is  that  which  consists 
of  the  growth  of  superfluous  flesh.  7 

The  seat  of  all  kinds  of  Piles  (i.  e.,  both  congenital  and  non-con- 
genital)  is  within  a  distance  measured  by  the  width  of  four  fingers 
and  a  half  inwards  from  the  mouth  of  the  rectum. 

There  are  three  rings  in  the  rectum.  (These  are  called  Valis). 
The  innermost  one  is  of  the  width  of  a  finger  and  a  half ;  the  next  is 
of  the  same  width ;  the  third  is  of  the  width  of  one  finger,  The 


CHA  RAKA  -SAM HIT  A . 


1369? 

remaining  space  is  of  the  width  of  half  a  finger.  (This  is  called  the1 
mouth  of  ttie  rectum}.*  8 

Some  lay  down  many  parts  of  the  body  as  the  seats  of  Piles,  vis.,. 
the  genital  passage  (in  case  of  females),  the  genital  organ  (in  the  case' 
of  males),  the  throat,  the  palate,  the  mouth,  the  nostrils,  the  ears,  and 
the  eye-lids.  9 

The  above,  however,  are  seats  of  the  disease  called  AdhimSngsa’’ 
or  fleshy  growths. 

In  this  treatise  those  fleshy  growths  only  which  manifest  them¬ 
selves  in  the  rectum  are  called  Piles. 

The  (true)  seat  of  Piles  rs  the  adeps,  the  flesh,  and  the  skin  (of  the 
rectum).  10 

Of  congenital  Piles,  some  are  small ;  some  are  large ;  some  are 
long ;  some  are  short ;  some  are  round ;  some  are  of  rough  and 
and  irregular  shape  ;  the  extremities  of  some  are  knotted  inwards  ; 
the  extremities  of  some  are  knotted  outwards ;  some  are  matted 
together  ;  some  point  inwards  ;  some  point  outwards. 

The  complexions  of  all  these  varieties  are  determined  by  the 
faults  that  cause  them.  11 

Attacked  by  this  variety  of  Piles,  one  becomes,  from  the  period 
of  one’s  birth,  exceedingly  emaciated,  divested  of  colour,  weak,  and 
cheerless.  His  wind,  urine,  and  stools  become  constipated.  He  also 
gets  gravel  and  calculi.  12 

His  stools,  without  regularity  in  respect  of  time,  become  consti¬ 
pated  or  loose,  consisting  of  digested  and  undigested  matter,  or  dry, 
or  consisting  of  detached  portions  (that  is,  without  the  whole  mass 
being  co-herent). 

'  At  intervals,  again,  about  which  there  is  no  regularity,  such  a  one 
passes  stools  that  are  white,  or  pale,  or  green,  or  yellow,  or  blood-red, 
or  watery,  or  thick,  or  slimy,  or  possessing  the  scent  of  a  corpse.  13 

He  feels  cutting  pains  of  great  severity  in  the  region  about  his 
navel,  bladder,  and  groins. 


*  A  free  translation,  and  not  a  literal  rendering,  is  offered  of  this  aphorism.— T. 


1370 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


He  also  feels  severe  pain  in  the  rectum,  and  gets  diarrhoea  with 
white  flux.  14 

The  other  symptoms  that  manifest  themselves  are  horripilation, 
gonorrhoea,  looseness  of  the  bowels,  constipation  thereof,  flatulence 
and  borborygmi,  rumbling  noise  in  the  intestines,  epistasis,  and 
stupefaction  of  chest  as  also  of  the  organs  of  senses.  15 

Repeated  eructations  take  place,  of  a  bitter  and  sour  taste,  of 
wind  exceedingly  constipated  ; 

The  patient  becomes  excessively  weak  ; 

The  digestive  fire  also  becomes  weak  ; 

His  disposition  becomes  wrathful,  so  that  trifles  excite  his  anger  ; 

His  vital  seed  becomes  almost  dried  up  ; 

He  becomes  very  cheerless,  and  never  enjoys  ease,  comfort, 
or  joy.  16 

He  becomes  afflicted  also  with  cough,  asthmatic  breathing,  that 
variety  of  asthma  which  is  called  ‘Tam aka,’*  thirst,  hiccup, 
vomiting,  disgust  for  food,  indigestion,  inflammation  of  the 
Schneiderian  membrane,  and  sneezing  ; 

He  sees  darkness  all  around  him,  and  severe  headaches  also 
afflict  him.  J7 

His  voice  becomes  weak,  broken,  indistinct,  and  resembles  that 
of  a  broken  drum. 

He  becomes  afflicted  with  diseases  of  the  ear. 

His  hands,  feet,  face,  and  eyes  become  swollen. 

He  gets  fever,  with  langour  of  all  the  limbs,  and  pains  in  all  the 
joints.  18 

At  times  he  becomes  afflicted  with  pains  in  the  sides,  the  abdo¬ 
men,  the  hypogastric  or  pubic  region,  chest,  back,  and  the  lower  part 
of  the  spine. 

His  mind  seems  to  be  always  working,  and  he  becomes  incapable 
of  any  exertion.  I9 


*  When  the  wind,  remaining  in  the  upper  ducts  of  the  body,  increases  the  phlegm  and 
becomes  obstructed  by  that  phlegm,  it  produces  that  variety  of  asthnia  which  is  called 
•Tamaka.’ — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA.  1371 

In  consequence  of  anal  canal  being  obstructed  from  the  time  of 
his  very  birth,  the  ‘apana’  wind,  without  being  able  to  escape  in  a 
downward  direction,  rises  upwards  and  provokes  the  other  life- 
breaths,  viz.,  ‘samSna,’  ‘udana,’  ‘prSna,’  and  ‘vy&na,’  as  also  the  two 
other  faults,  viz.,  the  bile  and  the  phlegm.  20 

All  the  five  life-breaths,  as  also  the  bile  and  the  phlegm,  becoming 
provoked,  afflict  the  Piles  and  beget  the  ailments  mentioned  above.  21 

The  characteristics  have  now  been  explained  of  Piles  that  are 
congenital.  After  this,  we  shall  explain  the  symptoms  of  those  Piles 
that  appear  after  birth.  22 

In  consequence  of  eating  food  that  is  heavy,  or  cold,  or  that  stops 
the  secretions,  or  that  causes  a  burning  sensation,  or  that 
consists  of  inharmonious  ingredients,  or  that  is  indigestible, 

or,  of  eating  food  that  is  not  sufficient,  or  that  is  unassimilable, 

or,  of  eating  beef,  or  fish,  or  fowl,  or  pork,  or  the  flesh  of  buffaloes, 
or  of  goats,  or  mutton,  23 

or,  of  eating  meat  of  animals  that  are  lean  or  dry,  or  meat  that  is 
rotten, 

or,  of  excessive  indulgence  in  cakes,  or  frumenty,  or  milk,  or  the 
cream  of  curds,  or  modifications  of  sesame  and  treacle,  24 

or,  of  taking  the  soup  of  the  seeds  of  Phaseolus  radiatus,  or  the 
juice  of  sugarcanes,  or  paste  of  sesame  seeds,  or  the  esculent 
roots  called  DiQSCorea  globosa,  dry  pot-herbs,  sour  or  acid 
gruels  and  curries,  or  garlics,*  or  inspissated  milk,  or  whey, 
or  lotus  or  lily  stalks,  or  the  roots  of  the  water  lily,  or  the 
esculent  roots  called  ‘Goluncha,’  or  the  tubers  of  Scirpus 
Kysoor,  or  the  fruits  of  Trapa  bispinosa,  or  the  vegetable  called 
‘Taruta,’  or  the  milk  of  raw  paddy,  or  the  varieties  of  paddy 
called  ‘£uka’  and  ‘^ami’  before  they  become  old,  or  radishes 
that  are  undeveloped  ;  25 

or,  of  eating  fruits  that  are  not  easy  of  digestion,  or  pot-herbs,  or 
pickles,  greens  (z.  e.,  the  paddy  called  ‘^ringavera,’  fennel 
seeds,  See.),  or  the  fruits  of  Pongamia  glabra,  fat,  the  head 


Not  in  all  editions.— T. 


1372 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA . 


and  feet  of  animals,  or  stale,  rotten,  or  cold  rice  or  other  foodr 
or  food  that  consists  of  various  ingredients  ;  26 

.  or,  of  eating  curds  called  ‘Mandaka,’  or  excessive  drinking  of  wine 
and  other  spirits,  or  of  drinking  water  that  is  heavy  and  that 
is  brought  from  tanks,  &c.,  that  are  stagnant ;  or  of  the  non- 
admininistration  of  correctives,  or  of  the  erroneous  adminis¬ 
tration  of  enemata,  or  of  abstention  from  physical  exercises 
as  also  from  sexual  congress  ;  27 

or,  of  indulgence  in  sleep  at  daytime,  or  in  luxurious  beds  and 
seats  and  places  : 

In  consequence  of  the  above  practices,  the  digestive  fire  becomes 
very  much  weakened,  and  the  quantity  of  stools  becomes 
accumulated.  28 

In  consequence  of  the  use  of  hard  and  uneven  seats  or  indulgence 
in  uncomfortable  postures,  or  of  riding  fiery  steeds  and  camels 
of  uneasy  motion,  or  of  excessive  indulgence  in  sexual  con¬ 
gress,  or  of  improper  insertion  of  tubes  for  administration  of 
enemata,  or  of  wounds  in  the  rectum  caused  by  nails,  &c.,  or 
of  the  constant  touch  of  cold  water  ;  29 

or,  in  consequence  of  the  rubbing  of  the  rectum  by  means  of 
cloths  and  hard  pieces  of  dry  earth  and  grass  and  straw,  or  of 
excessive  straining,  or  of  the  forceful  expulsion  of  the  down-  » 
ward  wind,  the  urine,  and  the  stools,  or  of  suppressing  their 
urgings  when  pronounced  ;  3° 

or,  as  regards  women,  in  consequence  of  the  premature  expulsion 
of  the  foetus,  or  of  pressure  or  violence  upon  the  foetus  in  the 
womb,  or  of  frequent  delivery,  or  of  painful  delivery  : 

The  wind  in  the  Apana  regions,  becoming  provoked,  and  afflicting 
the  accumulated  stools  having  a  downward  tendency,  obstructs 
the  rings  in  the  lower  part  of  the  anal  canal.  In  consequence 
of  this,  Piles  are  begotten.  31 

Generally,  Piles  characterised  by  the  predominance  of  wind,  bile, 
and  phlegm,  assume  the  shape  of  mustard  seeds,  or  the  seeds  of  Cicer 
lens,  or  those  of  Pkaseolus  radiatus ,  or  those  of  the  wild  variety  of  the  ' 
same  called  f’haseolus  aconitifolia ,  or  grains  of  barley,  or  seeds  of 


£H A  RA  KA  -SAM HIT A . 


1373 


diverse  varieties  of  Phaseolus,  or  balls,  or  the  seeds  of  ‘Tintikeraka’ 
(a  plant  growing  in  deserts  and  wild  regions),  or  the  seeds  of  Costus 
speciosa,  or  the  seeds  of  Diospyros glutinosa,  or  the  fruits  of  Abrus 
precatorius,  or  the  fruits  of  that  variety  of  jujubes  called  ‘Karkandu,’ 
or  the  fruits  of  Momordica  monodelpha ,  or  the  fruits  of  Zizyphus 
jujuba ,  or  those  of  Caparis  sodada,  or  those  of  Eugenia  jambolana, 
or  the  teats  of  the  cow,  or  the  thumb,  or  the  tubers  of  Scirpus 
Kysoor ,  or  the  fruits  of  Trapa  bispinosa ,  of  the  beaks  of  cocks, 
peacocks,  and  parrots,  or  the  tongues  of  those  birds,  or  lotus  buds, 
or  the  pericarp  of  the  lotus.  32 

The  following  are  the  distinctions  between  Piles  caused  by  wind, 
those  caused  by  bile,  and  those  caused  by  phlegm  : 

Those  Piles  which  are  characterised  by  predominance  of  wind 
present  the  following  symptoms  : 

They  are  lean,  discoloured,  hard,  of  a  rough  exterior,  dry,  darkish 
in  hue,  curved,  of  burst  mouths  and  pointed  ends.  33 

They  are  uneven,  flat  or  extended,  and  endued  with  pains  of 
various  kinds,  viz.,  ‘£ula,’  throbbing,  cutting,  thrilling,  and  productive 
of  horripilation.  34 

Oily  and  hot  applications  produce  relief. 

They  are  attended  with  straining  and  flatulence  ■  or  borborigmy  ; 
Pains  manifest  themselves  in  the  pennis,  the  testicles,  the  groins,  and 
the  chest.  A  general  langour  pervades  all  the  limbs.  Palpitation  of 
the  heart  also  arises.  35 

The  downward  wind,  urine,  and  stools  are  always  constipated. 

Cutting  pains  are  felt  in  the  thigh,  the  waist,  the  back,  the  lower 
spinal  region,  the  flanks,  the  abdomen,  and  the  pelvis. 

Heat  and  burning  sensation  in  the  head  ;  sneezing,  eructations, 
catarrh  in  the  nose,  cough,  epistasis,  a  sensation  of  fatigue  and  weak¬ 
ness,  dropsical  swellings,  consumption,  swoons,  disgust  for  food, 
tastelessness  of  the  mouth,  sight  of  darkness,  itching  sensation,  pains 
in  the  nose,  otalgia,  and  hoarseness  or  obstruction  of  voice.  36 

The  skin,  the  eyes,  the  nails,  the  face,  the  urine,  and  the  stools, 
become  darkish  red  in  colour,  and  rough  in  appearance,  37 


374 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


( Here  are  two  verses.) 

The  excessive  use  of  food  that  is  astringent  in  taste,  or  pungent, 
or  bitter,  or  dry  or  cold,  or  light,  or  insufficiency  of  fare,  or  excessive 
indulgence  in  wines  that  are  of  keen  virtues,  or  in  sexual  congress,  38 

or  the  observance  of  fasts,  or  places  and  times  that  are  cold, 
physical  exercises  and  exertions,  grief,  or  exposure  to  wind  and  heat, 
are  regarded  as  causes  of  wind-born  Piles.  39 

When  the  following  symptoms  are  presented,  the  piles  should  be 
known  as  characterised  by  predominance  of  bile  : 

They  are  soft,  flabby,  delicate,  painful  to  touch,  red  or  yellow, 
or  blue  or  dark,  covered  with  sweat  and  filth,  or  endued  with  a  fcetid 
smell,  emiting  scanty  and  yellowish  blood,  or  copious  blood,  charac¬ 
terised  by  a  burning  sensation,  or  itching,  or  ‘gula’  or  cutting  pains, 
ending  in  suppuration,  and  relievable  by  the  application  of  things 
that  are  cold.  4° 

Piles  characterised  by  predominance  of  bile  manifest  the  follow¬ 
ing  symptoms  : 

Liquid  stools  of  yellow  and  green  colour  ; 

Stools  and  urine  that  are  yellow  in  colour,  of  a  very  fcetid  smell, 
and  copious  in  quantity  ; 

Thirst,  fever,  that  variety  of  asthma  called  ‘Tamaka,’  swoons,  and 
disgust  for  food  ;  and 

Yellow  colour  of  the  nails,  the  eyes,  the  skin,  the  urine,  and  the 
stools.  41 

( Here  are  two  verses ). 

The  following  should  be  regarded  as  the  exciting  cause  of  Piles 
characterised  by  predominance  of  bile  : 

Indulgence  in  food  and  drink  that  are  pungent,  or  sour,  or  saline, 
or  hot ; 

Indulgence  fn  physical  exercises,  or  exposure  to  fire  or  the  heat 
of  the  sun  ; 

Residence  in  climes  and  regions  that  are  hot,  or  indulgence  in 
wrath,  wines  and  malice  ; 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


*375 


Food  and  drink  and  medicines  that  burn  the  stomach,  or  are  of 
keen  virtues,  or  hot,  42-43 

Those  Piles  should  be  known  as  characterised  by  predominance 
of  .phlegm  which  manifest  the  following  symptoms  : 

They  are  large  in  size  ; 

They  are  well  developed  ; 

They  are  of  smooth  and  oily  surface  ; 

They  are  capable  of  being  touched  without  .pain 
They  are  white  in  colour,  or  pale,  and  slimy  ; 

They  are  paralysed,  heavy,  and  wet  in  appearance,  and  unfeeling 
to  touch  ; 

They  are  swollen,  and  the  swelling  is  constant  1 
They  are  characterised  by  excessive  itching  ; 

They  emit  secretions  that  are  copious  and  frequent,  and  that  are 
yellow,  or  white,  or  red,  in  colour,  and  slimy  ; 

The  urine  and  the  stools  are  heavy,  slimy,  and  white  ; 

Indulgence  in  food  and  drink  that  are  dry  produces  relief ; 
Excessive  straining  in  passing  stools  ;f 
Frequent  passing  of  stools  ;J 
Sensation  of  straining  in  the  groins  ; 

Cutting  pains  in  the  mouth  of  the  anal  canal ; 

Nausea  ;  spitting ;  cough,  disgust  for  food  ; 

Catarrh  in  the  nose  ; 

.  Heaviness  of  limbs  ;  vomiting  ;  difficulty  of  micturition  ; 

Drying  up  (waste)  of  the  ‘dh&tus’  or  body  ; 

Swellings  (in  different  parts  of  the  body) ; 

Chlorosis  ;  fever  of  that  variety  which  is  characterised  by  a  sensa¬ 
tion  of  cold  ; 

*  Some  texts  read  ‘Spar^asukhani’,  meaning  ‘they  yield  pleasure  if  touched’.— T. 

•j.  ‘Pravahika’  is  explained  by  the  commentators  as  ‘excessive  straining  in  passing  stools.’ 
X  ‘Atimatrotthana’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  and  others  as  ‘frequent  passing  of  stools.’ 
Probably,  it  means  that  the  patient  has  to  rise  up  and  sit  down  repeatedly  while  passing 
stools, — T. 


*74 


1376 


CH A  RAKA-SA  MH1 TA. 


Calculi ;  gravels  ; 

A  sensation  of  the  heart  (cardiac  region)  being  wrapped  round 
with  a  cover  ; 

Dulness  of  the  senses  ;  sensation  of  sweetness  in  the  mouth  ; 

Capacity  to  engender  gonorrhoea  ; 

They  take  a  long  time  to  cure  : 

Excessive  weakening  of  the  digestive  fire  ; 

Capacity  to  bring  about  loss  of  manhood  ; 

Appearance  of  diseases  characterised  by  the  presence  of  mucus  in 
the  stomach ;  and 

Whiteness  of  the  nails,  eyes,  face,  skin,  urine,  and  the  stools,  44-4& 

( Here  are  some  verses ). 

Eating  of  food  that  is  sweet,  oily,  cold,  saline,  sour,  and  heavy 
abstention  from  physical  exertion,  sleep  in  the  daytime,  indulgence 
in  soft  beds  and  seats, 

Exposure  to  the  east  wind,  residence  in  a  cold  country  or  cold 
climate,  and  abstention  from  thinking, 

These  have  been  regarded  as  the  causes  of  Piles  characterised  by 
predominance  of  phlegm.  47-4§ 

From  combinations  of  causes  and  symptoms  (of  two  distinct 
varieties),  the  physician  should  infer  that  the  Piles  are  characterised 
by  two  faults  ;  when  all  the  causes  exist  together  as  also  all  the 
symptoms  (of  the  simple  varieties),  the  Piles  must  be  regarded  as 
characterised  by  all  the  three  faults  simultaneously  excited.*  49 

The  following  are  regarded  as  the  premonitory  indications  of 
Piles,  viz.. 

Indigestion  of  the  food  with  which  the  stomach  is  filled  -r 

General  weakness  or  debility  of  the  body  ; 

#  What  is  said  here  is  this :  the  three  simple  varieties  of  Piles  are  I.  those  characterised 
by  the  excited  wind,  2.  those  by  the  excited  bile,  and  3.  those  by  the  exeited  phlegm. 
When  the  causes  and  symptoms  of  any  two  of  these  varieties  exist  together,  the  Piles  are 
regarded  as  characterised  by  two  faults,  viz.,  wind  and  bile,  or  wind  and  phlegm,  or  bile 
and  phlegm.  When  the  causes  and  symptoms  of  all  the  three  simple  varieties  exist  together, 
the  Piles  are  regarded  as  characterised  by  all  the  three  faults  excited  simultaneously. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1377 


Borborygmi  of  the  intestines  ; 

Leanness  of  the  body  (or  loss  of  flesh) ; 

Frequency  of  eructations  ; 

Langour  of  the  thighs  and  the  calves  ; 

Scantiness  of  stools  ;  apprehension  of  the  existence  of  disease,  of 
the  ‘Grahani,’  or  of  chlorosis,  or  of  abdominal  dropsy  ;*  5°-5i 
Piles,  verily,  are  never  generated  unless  all  the  three  faults  are 
simultaneously  excited. 

The  varieties  of  Piles  that  have  been  laid  down  (above)' are  due 
only  to  the  predominance  of  a  particular  fault  over  the  two  others, 
or  of  two  faults  over  the  remaining  one.f  52 

The  vital  airs,  five  in  number  (via.,  Prfina,  Apana,  Samana,  Ud&na 
and  Vyana),  the  five  varieties  of  bile,  {viz.,  Alochaka,  Ranjaka, 
Ssdhaka,  P&chaka,  and  Bhrajaka),  the  five  varieties  of  phlegm  {viz., 
Avalamvaka,  Kledaka,  Bodhaka,  TSrpaka,  and  £leshmaka),  and  the 
three  rings  in  the  anal  canal  {viz,  Pravahani,  Visarjjani,  and  Samva- 
rani),  are  all  excited  together  in  the  production  of  Piles  in  the  anal 
canal,  S3 

For  this  reason,  Piles  are  very  painful,  and  productive  of  various 
other  diseases,  and  cause  the  whole  body  to  burn  with  pain,  and  are 
very  generally  exceedingly  difficult  to  cure.  54 

The  Piles  of  that  person  are  regarded  as  incurable  who  has  swell¬ 
ings  in  his  hands,  feet,  mouth,  anus,  and  the  testicles,  and  who  has 
pains  in  his  chest  and  the  flanks.  55 

The  following  symptoms,  viz.,  pains  in  the  chest  and  the  flanks, 
swoons  or  loss  of  consciousness,  vomiting,  pains  in  the  limbs,  fever, 
thirst,  and  inflammation  (ending  in  suppuration)  of  the  anus,  kill  one 
who  is  afflicted  with  Piles.  56 


*  That  is,  the  person  looks  as  if  he  has  got  lienteric  dysentery,  or  chlorosis,  or  abdominal 
dropsy. — T. 

f  What  is  meant  is  this  :  all  the  three  faults  must  be  excited  together  in  order  to  pro¬ 
duce  piles.  When,  however,  it  is  said  that  the  piles  from  which  a  particular  person  suffers 
are  characterised  by  wind,  or  by  bile,  or  by  phlegm,  what  is  really  said  is  that  the  wind, 
or  the  bile,  or  the  phlegm  has  been  more  excited  than  the  others.  Similarly,  in  the  ease 
of  Piles  that  are  said  to  be  characterised  by  two  faults,  what  is  said  is  that  the  piles  are 
characterised  by  two  faults  more  excited  than  the  remaining  one. — T. 


15/8 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA . 


Those  Piles  that  are  congenital,  those  that  are  characterised  by 
the  excitement  of  all  the  faults,  and  those  that  grow  affecting  the 
inner  rings  (in  the  anal  canal),  should  be  regarded  as  incurable.  57 
Of  a  person  whose  digestive  fire  has  not  been  extinguished,  if 
the  period  of  his  life  has  not  run  out,  Files  become  suppressible  if 
treatment  with  its  four  principal  incidents  be  had  recourse  to. 
Otherwise,  the  physician  should  not  take  them  up  for  treatment.*  58 
Those  piles  are  said  to  be  curable  with  difficulty  which  are  charac¬ 
terised  by  a  predominance  of  two  faults,  which  grow  affecting  the 
second  (or  middle)  ring  in  the  interior  of  the  anus,  and  which  are 
more  than  a  year  old.  59 

Those  Piles  which  grow  affecting  the  external  ring,  those  which 
are  characterised  by  the  predominance  of  only  one  fault,  and  those 
which  are  of  recent  growth,  are  easily  curable.  60 

One  that  is  possessed  of  intelligence  should,  therefore,  direct  his 
endeavours  to  alleviate  them  without  loss  of  time,  for,  if  not  attended 
to,  they  close  up  the  anal  canal  and  cause  the  diseases  called  ‘Vaddha- 
guda’  and  ‘Vaddhodara.’f  6* 

Some  say  that  to  cut  them  off  by  instruments  is  beneficial  for 
Piles  ;  some  say  that  it  is  good  to  cauterize  them  by  alkaline  ashes  -r 
some  say  that  it  is  good  to  cauterize  them  by  fire.  ^ 

It  is  true,  physicians  possessed  of  intelligence  and  experience  and 
knowledge  of  diverse  medical  scriptures  treat  Piles  in  all  these  three 
ways,  but  the  removal  of  Piles  by  these  means  is  productive  of  very 
great  pain.  63 

Through  unskilfulness  of  operation  or  of  the  application  of 
alkaline  ashes,  or  of  cautery,  such  consequences  may  arise  as  the  loss 
of  virile  power,  swelling  (with  sores)  in  the  anal  canal,  the  suppression 
of  the  urgings  of  urine  and  stools,  flatulence  of  the  stomach,  severe 
■£ula’  pains,  pains  in  the  body,  hemorrhage,  the  re-appearance  of 

*  This  verse  seems  to  be  an  interpolation.  Charaka  did  not  believe  in  the  fact  of  a  per¬ 
son’s  coming  into  the  world  with  a  definite  period  of  existence  or  ‘ayus’  as  it  is  generally 
understood.  The  four  principal  incidents  of  treatment  are  I.  an  obedient  patient,  2.  an 
attentive  or  careful  nurse,  3.  a  skilful  physician,  and  4.  good  drugs.  Vide  Lesson  X  of 
Sutrasthana. — T. 

•j-  ‘Vaddhaguda’  is  that  disease  in  which'  the  anal  canal  becomes  closed ;  ‘Vaddhodara’ 
is  severe  constipation  of  the  intestines. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1379 


the  Piles  removed  by  the  three  surgical  processes  adverted  to,  the 
discharge  of  foetid  matter  from  the  roots  of  the  Piles  removed, 
prolapsus  ani,  or  even  speedy  death.  64-65 

I  shall  now  speak  of  that  treatment  which  consists  of  the  use  of 
easy  means,  which  is  productive  of  little  pain,  which  involves  no 
dangerous  consequences,  and  which  is  capable  of  extermining  the 
the  disease  by  its  roots.  66 

Physicians  conversant  with  the  subject  call  those  Piles  that  are 
characterised  by  predominance  of  (excited)  wind  and  phlegm  to  be 
dry.  They  call  those,  again,  that  are  characterised  by  hemorrhage 
and  excited  bile  to  be  discharging  and  wet.  67 

I  shall,  first,  speak  of  the  treatment  of  dry  Piles.  Those  (amogst 
these)  which  are  paralysed  (i.  e.,  possess  no  sensation),  and  which  are 
endued  with  swelling  and  severe  pains,  should  have  fomentation 
(sweda)  applied  to  them.  68 

Anointing  the  Piles  first  with  oil  cooked  with  Plumbago  Zeylanica, 
the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots,  and  the  bark  of  ZEgle  marmelos , 
fomentation  should  be  applied  with  balls  of  barley  (pounded),  or  of 
the  seeds  of  Phaseolus  radiatus  (pounded),  or  of  the  seeds  of  Dolichos 
biflorus  (pounded),  or  grainless  paddy  bound  loosely  in  a  piece  of  cloth 
or  iron  bullets  or  pieces  of  stones  similarly  bound  ;  or  with  balls  of 
cowdung  or  ass’s  dung  or  horse-dung,  or  sesame  paste,  or  of  the  husk 
of  paddy  and  other  grains,  or  of  Acorus  Calamus ,  or  of  dill  seeds,  all 
agreeably  warm  and  mixed  with  oil  or  ghee  ;*  69-70 

Or,  with  balls  of  fried  barley  pounded  into  pulv,  unctuous  with 
oils  and  ghees,  or  with  balls  made  of  radishes,  or  with  those  made  of 
(the  bark  of)  Moringa  pterygosperma  (Sobhfinjana  or  Krishnagandha) ; 
or  with  balls  made  of  Vanda  Roxburghii ;  or  with  balls  made  of 
‘Habusha’ ;  all  these  being  rendered  unctuous  with  oils  and  ghees,  and 
agreeably  warmed  ; 


*  The  fomentation  is  directed  to  be  made  with  balls  or  with  ‘pottalis’  of  the  diverse 
articles  mentioned.  Those  which  can  be  easily  pounded  are  to  be  pounded  and  made  into 
a  ball ;  while  as  regards  some  of  the  articles,  they  are  to  be  bound  loosely  in  pieces  of  cloth. 
Even  the  balls  of  the  pounded  articles  require  to  be  enclosed  or  wrapped  round  with  pieces 
of  clean  cloth.  These  are  all  directed  to  be  cooked  in  glut  or  oil.  They  require  to  be 
heated  before  they  are  applied. — T. 


38o 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Or,  with  the  pulv  (loosely  bound  in  a  piece  of  cloth)  of  bricks 
(burnt  earth)  ;  or  with  the  seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan  (of  the  Persian 
species)  similarly  bound  ;  or  with  the  leaves  of  garlics  ;  the  fomenta¬ 
tion  with  these  last  mentioned  should  be  made  after  anointing  the 
Piles  with  the  oil  of  Aplotaxis  auriculata.  The  Piles  may  also  be 
sprinkled  over  with  decoction  of  the  leaves  of  Justicia  Adhatoda,  or 
of  Ricinus  Communis ,  or  of  JEgle  marmelos  ;  71-73 

The  patient,  if  there  be  severe  pains  in  the  Piles,  should  be  first 
rubbed  with  oil  and  then  made  to  bathe  in  the  decoction  of  the  leaves 
of  radishes,  or  of  the  Capparis  trifoliata,  or  of  Premna  serratifolia ,  or 
of  Moringa  pterygosperma,  or  of  Coleus  Amboinicus. 

Or,  such  a  patient  may  be  (after  being  rubbed  with  oil)  made  to 
bathe  in  the  decoction  of  (dried)  jujubes  while  agreeably  hot ;  or  in  the 
wine  called  ‘Sauviraka’ ;  or  in  thin  gruel  of  rice  ;  or  in  the  decoction 
of  the  root-bark  of  AEgle  marmelos  ;  or  in  whey  ;  or  in  the  ‘manda’ 
of  curds  ;  or  in  sour  ‘kanjika’  ;  or  in  cow’s  urine  agreeably  hot.  74-76 

The  Piles  may  also  be  annointed  with  the  adeps  of  the  black 
cobra  or  of  the  boar,  or  of  the  camel,  or  of  the  domestic  bat  called 
‘charmachataka’,  or  of  the  cat. 

The  fumigation  of  Piles  is  also  beneficial.  It  should  be  made 
with  the  following,  viz.. 

Human  hair,  the  cast  off  sloughs  of  snakes,  the  skin  of  cats,  the 
roots  of  Calatropis  gigantea,  and  the  leaves  of  Mimosa  suma. 

Fumigation,  with  the  following  articles,  is  beneficial  to  Piles  charac¬ 
terised  by  severe  pains.*  77-78 

Coriandar  seeds,  Embelia  Ribes,  Pinus  deodara ,  and  ‘atapa’  rice, 
and  ghee ; 

Solanum  Indica ,  Pkysalis  flexuosa,  Piper  longum ,  the  leaves  of 
Ocimum  Sanctum,  and  ghee  ;  79 

The  dung  of  the  boar,  the  dung  of  the  ox,  the  pulv  of  fried  barley, 
and  ghee  ; 


*  Gangadhara-  says  that  all  these  articles  are  to  be  taken  in  equal  proportions  and 
pounded  together.— T, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


3Sr 


The  dung  of  the  elephant,  the  exudation  of  Shorea  robusta, 
■‘Silarasa,’  and  ghee  : 

All  these  are  used  in  fumigating  Piles,  such  fumigation  being 
beneficial.  80 

The  milk  of  Euphorbia  nerrifolia ,  mixed  with  the  pulv  of  Curcuma 
longa,  forms  a  good  plaster  (for  Piles). 

Another  beneficial  plaster  consists  of  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum 
and  the  pulv  of  Curcuma  longa,  pounded  together  with  the  bile  of 
the  cow. 

The  seeds  of  Sirisa,  ( Mimosa  Sirissa ),  Kushtha  (A plotaxis  auricu- 
lata ),  Pippalya  ( the  fruits  of  Piper  longum ),  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  treacle, 
the  milk  of  Arka  ( Calatropis  gigantea ),  the  milk  of  Sudha  ( Euphorbia 
neriifolia),  and  the  three  myrobalans,  form  another  plaster  that  is 
beneficial-in  Piles.  81-82 

The  fruits  of  Pippalya  ( Piper  longum ),  Chitraka  (Plumbago  Zey- 
lanica),  Syama  (Ichnocarpus  frutescens),  the  seed  called  Kinva  (which 
is  used  in  producing  fermentation),  the  seeds  of  Madana  (Randia 
dumetorum),  the  dung  of  fowls,  the  pulv  of  HaridrS  ( Curcuma  louga ), 
constitute  another  plaster.  83 

Danti  (Baliospermum  motanum)  SySma  ( Convolvulus  Turpe - 
thum )*  Amritasangar(sulphate  of  copper),  the  dung  of  the  pigeon,  and 
treacle,— these  (five)  form  a  good  plaster  for  Piles. 

Elephant’s  bones,  Nirtiba  ( Melia  Azadirachta),  and  the  seeds  of 
Bhallataka  ( Semecarpus  Anacardium),  form  another  plaster.  84 

Alam  (yellow  orpiment),  mixed  with  the  fat  of  the  camel,  or  with 
the  fat  of  the  porpoise,  forms  a  plaster  that  alleviates  swelling  as  also 
severe  pains  in  Piles  if  applied  when  agreeably  hot.f  85 

The  leaves  of  Arka  ( Calatropia  gigantea ),  the  branches  of  Sudha 
( Euphorbia  neriifolia),  the  leaves  of  bitter  gourds,  and  Karanja  (Pon- 

*  Gangadhara  and  others  take  ‘Syama’  here  as  indicating  Trivrit  or  Convolvulus  Turpe - 
thum.  Ordinarily,  ‘Syama’  means  Ichnocarpus  frutescens. — T. 

f  Gangadhara  reads  ‘alangkoshnah’,  ‘alang’  meaning  yellow  orpiment  of  a  certain  kind, 
‘koshnah’  implying  ‘agreably  hot’.  The  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  ‘alarkena’ 
which  is  not  correct. — T. 


1382 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA. 


gamia  glabra),  pounded  with  goat’s  urine,  form  one  of  the  foremost 
plasters  for  piles.*  86 

The  combinations  mentioned  above  for  ointments  and  plasters, 
are  regarded  as  alleviatives  of  the  loss  of  touch  (or  paralysis),  swell¬ 
ings,  itching,  and  pains  of  Piles.  87 

Treated  with  the  ointments  and  plasters  mentioned  above,  Piles 
discharge  the  vitiated  blood  accumulated  within  them.  In  conse¬ 
quence  of  this,  the  patient  feels  ease.  88 

If  vitiated  blood  be  accumulated  in  Piles,  and  if  treatment  with 
dry,  hot,  oily,  and  cooling  drugs  does  not  alleviate  them,  the 
physician  should  '  then  let  the  blood  out  (by  proper  means).  89 

If  the  Piles  do  not  discharge  blood,  they  should  be  made  to  do  so 
repeatedly  by  means  of  leeches,  or  the  lancet,  or  needles.  90 

If  there  is  swelling  in  the  anus,  or  excessive  pains  in  the  Piles, 
and  if  the  patient’s  digestive  fire  be  weakened,  then  the  following 
drink  should  be  administered  to  him  : 

The  three  acrids  {viz.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum,  and 
black  pepper),  the  roots  of  Piper  longum,  P&tha  ( Cissampelos  hernan- 
difolia),  assafcetida,  Chitraka  (Plumbago  Zeylanica),  ‘Sauvarchala’ 
salt,  Push kara  (Aplotaxis  -auriculata  is  used  as  a  substitute^,  Ajaji 
■(the  seeds  of  Nigella  sativa),  Vilwapeshika  (dried  fruits  of  AEgle 
marmelos),  ‘Vjt’  salt,  the  seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan,  Habusha  (black 
stalks  like  those  of  black  pepper),  Vidanga  (Embelia  Ribes),  ‘Sain- 
dhava’  salt.  VachS  (Acorus  Calamus),  and  the  fruits  of  Tintiri 
(Tamarindus  Indica), — these  should  be  reduced  to  pulv  and  mixed 
with  ‘manda,’  or  wine,  or  hot  water.  This  drink  cures  Piles,  diseases 
of  the  ‘Grahani,’  ‘£ula’  pains,  and  epistasls.  9 '-93 

Or,  that  ‘pachana  which  has  been  laid  down  in  the  lesson  on 
bloody  diarrhoea,  may  be  administered  to  the  patient  afflicted  with 
bloody  Piles. 

Or,  chebulic  myrobalans,  with  treacle,  should  be  given  to  the 
patient  before  he  takes  his  (morning  meals).  94 

+  Gangadhara  reads  ‘arkapatram’.  The  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  ‘arkam 
jpay  ah’. — T. 


■CJJARAKA -SAME IT  A. 


1383 


Or,  he  should  be  made  to  drink  the  pulv  of  Convolvulus  Turpe- 
thum ,  mixed  with  the  decoction  of  the-three  myrobalans. 

If  by  the  above  means  the  faults  which  have  affected  the  anus  are 
corrected,  the  Piles  are  then  cured.  95 

Or,  chebulic  myrobalans,  soaked  in  cow’s  urine,  are  given  with 
treacle. 

Or,  chebulic  myrobalans  mixed  with  whey,  or  all  the  three  myro- 
halans  mixed  with  the  same,  are  given  to  the  patient.  96 
Or,  the  tubers  of  Cyperus  pertenuis  (reduced  to  pulv)  and  the  roots 
of  Plumbago  Zeylanica  (reduced  to  pulv)  may  be  administered 
with  ‘£idhu’  wine. 

Or,  Piper  Chaba ,  the  seeds  of  Nigella  saliva,  and  Plumbago  Zeyla¬ 
nica,  may  be  administered,  mixed  with  ‘£idhu.’  97 
Or,  he  should  drink  ‘Hapusha,’  Patha  ( Cisampelos  hernandifdlid), 
and  ‘Sauvarchala’  salt,  mixed  with  wine. 

Or,  (Dadhitha)  the  fruit  of  Feronia  elephttntum  and  the  fruit  of 
JEgle  marmelos ,  mixed  with  whey, 

Or,  Piper  Chaba  and  Plumbago  Zeylanica,  mixed  with  whey,  98 
Or,  the  fruit  of  Semecarpus  Anacardium,  mixed  with  whey,  may 
be  administered,  as  a  cooling  drink. 

Or,  the  fruit  of  AEgle  marmelos  and  the  tubers  of  Cyperus  per  tennis, 
mixed  with  whey, 

Or,  the  seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan,  mixed  with  whey, 

Or,  Plumbago  Zeylanica ,  mixed  with  whey,  99 
Or,  Plumbago  Zeylanica,  ‘Hapusha,’  and  assafcetida,  mixed  with 
whey,  may  be  administered. 

Or,  the  (pulv  of  the)  five  ‘Kolas’  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum,  the 
roots  of  the  same,  Piper ’Chaba,  the  roots  of  Plumbago  Zeyla¬ 
nica,  and  dry  ginger),  mixed  with  whey,  may  be  administered 
lo  the  patient.  100 

TAKRARlSHTA. 

‘Hapusha,’  the  seeds  of  Nigella  sativa,  coriander  seeds,  (Ajaji) 
cumin  seeds,  (Karabi)  the  seeds  of  Nigella  sativa  of  the  smaller  species, 
1.75 


1384 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Curcuma  Zerumbet,  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum,  the  roots  of  the  same, 
Plumbago  Zeylanica,  Pothos  officinalis,  101 

the  seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan,  and  Ajamods  ( Pimpinella  involucrata ) ; 

Equal  measures  are  taken  of  these  twelve  and  reduced  to  pulv, 
and  mixed  with  whey.* 

The  mixture,  which  becomes  slightly  sour  and  bitter,  should  be 
kept  in  an  earthen  jar  that  has  soaked  a  sufficient  quantity  of  ghee.  102 

When  its  taste  becomes  sour  and  bitter  in  a  pronounced  measure, 
it  comes  to  be  called  by  the  name  of  ‘Takrarishta.’  It  becomes 
agreeable  to  the  mouth.  It  should  be  taken  thrice  during  meals,  that 
is,  in  the  beginning,  the  middle,  and  the  end,  when  the  patient  feels 
thirsty.  103 

This  ‘arishta’  kindles  the  digestive  fire,  adds  relish  to  food,  im¬ 
proves  the  complexion,  restores  both  phlegm  and  wind  to  their 
normal  course,  alleviates  the  swelling  of  the  anus,  the  itching,  and  the 
pains  (of  the  Piles),  and  increases  the  patient’s  strength,  j-  r°4 

Pound  the  bark  of  the  roots  of  Plumbago  Zeylanica  into  a  paste 
and  lave  the  Interior  surface  of  an  earthen  jar  with  it.  Whey  or 
curds,  generated  within  that  jar,  should  be  drunk.  Such  whey,  or 
curds  are  alleviative  of  Piles.  I05 

As  regards  those  Piles  which  are  characterised  by  predominance 
of  wind,  as  also  those  which  are  characterised  by  predominance  of 
phlegm,  there  is  no  more  efficacious  medicine  than  whey.  It  should 
be  administered  either  in  an  oily  or  a  dry  state,  according  to  the  fault 
that  is  predominant.!  IoS 


*  Gangadhara  says  that  the  measure  of  whey  is  16  times  that  of  the  united  measure  of 
the  twelve. — T. 

+  The  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read,  in  the  first  line,  ‘Varnyam’.  Ganga- 
dhara’s  reading  ‘Valyam’  is  incorrect,  for  the  verse  ends  with  the  adjective  ‘Valavarddha- 
nam.’— T. 

$  The  commentators  say  that  in  Piles  characterised  by  predominance  of  wind  or  of  bile, 
whey  should  be  administered  in  an  oily  state,  that  is,  without  the  cheese  being  extracted  from 
it.  In  Piles  characterised  by  predominance  of  phlegm,  it  should  be  administered  in  a  dry 
state,  that  is,  extracting  the  cheese  from  it. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


138s 

The  physician  conversant  with  the  measure  in  which  the  faults 
have  been  excited,  as  also  with  the  consideration  affecting  the  season 
in  which  treatment  is  taken  up  or  the  age  of  the  patient,  should 
administer  it  for  a  week,  or  for  ten  days,  or  for  a-  fortnight,  or  for'  a 
month.  107 

Unto  a  patient  whose  digestive  fire  has  been  exceedingly  weak¬ 
ened,  whey  should  be  given  repeatedly  in  copious  measure.  In  the 
evening  he  may  be  given  the  pulv  of  fried  paddy,  made  into  a  linctus, 
with  whey.  108 

When  the  whey  taken  (in  the  morning)  has  been  digested,  whey 
should  again  be  administered,  cooked  with  some  ‘peya’  and  mixed 
with  ‘Saindhava’  salt.  After  this,  rice  boiled  in  whey  and  mixed  with 
ghee>  should  be  given,  and  the  patient  should  drink  whey  (instead  of 
water)  after  finishing  his  meals.  I09 

Or,  the  patient  may  take  soup  (of  any  of  the  pulses),  or  meat-juice, 
cooked  with  whey. 

Or,  rice  boiled  in  whey  may  be  given  to  him,  mixed  with  soup 
(of  any  of  the  pulses)  and  meat-juice,  no 

The  physician  conversant  with  the  requirements  of  season  and  age 
should  not  suddenly  stop  the  administration  of  whey. 

After  administering  it  for  a  month,  the  measure  of  whey  should  be 
gradually  diminished.  This  course  is  beneficial.  111 

The  diminution  (of  the  measure  of  whey)  should  be  in  the  same 
scale  in  which  it  has  been  increased.  The  measure,  however,  of  the 
whey  that  is  taken  with  the  rice  should  not  be  diminished. 

For  the  accession  and  preservation  of  strength,*  for  the  stability 
of  the  digestive  fire,  for  increase  of  strength  and  improvement  of  the 
complexion,  this  course  (in  respect  of  the  diminution  of  the  measure 
of  whey)  -is  laid  down.*  112 


*  Gangadhara  explains  ‘Qaktyagamanarakshartham’  as  ‘for  the  accession  and  preserva¬ 
tion  of  strength.’  ‘Valopachaya’  in  the  second  line,  means  ‘for  the  increase  of  strength.’ 
Some  editions  read  ‘Kramenoparamo  hitah’  for  ‘ICramenopajamo  matah’.  The  sense,  in 
wither  case,  is  the  same.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1386 

The  physician'  conversant  with  faults  and  the  strength  or  weak¬ 
ness  of  the  (patient’s)  digestive  fire,  administers  three  varieties  of  whey, 
vis*,  x,  dry,  2.  that  from;  which  ghee  has  been  extracted  partially,  and 
3.  that  from  which  ghee  has  not  been  extracted  at  all. 

Piles  removed  (or  cured):  by  means  of  whey,  do  not  re-appear.  W3- W 

Whey,  if  it  falls  on  the  earth,,  burns  grass  and'  grassy-  creepers. 
What  need  be  said,  therefore  of  its  power  to  consume  the  dry  Piles  of 
a  person  whose  digestive  fire  has  been  kindled?  IT5 

The  food-juice  which  enters  into  the  ducts  that  have  been  cor¬ 
rected  (or  purified)  by  whey,  generates  growth,  strength,  complexion,, 
and  cheerfulness.*  116 

Hundreds  of  ailments  caused  by-  (excited)  wind  and  phlegm  are 
cured  by  means  .of  whey  (judiciously  administered).  In  diseases, 
of  the  phlegm  and  wind  there  is  no  remedy  that  is  superior  (in 
efficacy)  to  whey.  ir7 

The  fruits  of  Piper  longum ,  the  roots  of  the  same,  Plumbago  Zey- 
lanica,  Potkos  officinalis,  (Sringavera)  dry  ginger,  (Ajaji)  cumin  seeds,, 
(Karavi)  the  seeds  of  Nigella  sativa  of  the  smaller  variety,  coriander 
seeds,  (Tumvuru)  smaller  variety  of  coriander  seeds,  118 

The  fruits  (dried)  of  AEgle  marmelos,  (Karkataka)  Rhus  succedanea,. 
and  (Paths)  Cissampelos  hernandifolia  : 

These  are  pounded  and  cooked  with  the  ‘peya’  of  rice.  When  the 
cooking  is  complete,  the  expressed  juice  of  some  fruits  (such  as  pome¬ 
granates,  &c,,)  is  thrown  into  the  liquid.  It  should  then  be  fried  in 
oil  and  ghee,  and  administered  to  the  patient. 

This  drink  cures  Pfles.119 

With  the  drugs  mentioned  above,  the  physician  may  cook  what  is 
called  a  ‘Khada-juice  or,  he  may  cook  them  in  water  only ;  or,  he 
may  cook  them  in  ghee.  All  these  three  preparations  cure  (or  remove) 
Piles.  120 

Gruel  cooked  with  the  paste  of  Carcuma  Zenimbet  and  of  the 
seeds  of  (Palaga)  Butea frondosa,  or  with  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum, 

*  ‘Rasa’  is  explained  as  the  juice  into  which  food  is  first  converted.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


or  with  (Nagara)  dry  ginger,  rendered  sour  by  the  addition  of  whey, 
and  mixed  with  the  pulv  of  black  pepper,  should  be  given,  121 

Or,  i.  the  decoction  of  dry  radishes,  or  2.  the  decoction  of  the  seeds 
of  Dolichos  biflora,  or  3.  the  decoction  of  the  wood-apple,  the  (dried) 
fruits  of  AEgle  marmelos,  the  seeds  of  Dolichos  biflorus,  and  the  seeds 
of  (Mukushtaka)  Phaseolus  lobatus ,  or  4.  the  meat-juice  of  the  goat 
mixed  with  each  of  these  decoctions,  should  be  given  ;  or  5.  the  meat- 
juice  of  quails  (Perdix  chinensis ),  mixed  with  the  expressed  juice  of 
pomegranates  or  other  sour  fruits,  as  also  with  whey,  and  such  inspis- 
sants  as  dry  up  the  fluids  of  the  body.*  122-123 

For  one  afflicted  with  Piles  the  following  varieties  of  rice  constitute 
beneficial  diet,  viz.,  ‘Rakta-^ali,’  ‘Mahagali,’  ‘Kalama,’  ‘Janga-la,’  ‘Sita./ 
‘£arada,’  and  Shashtika.’f  I24 

Thus  has  been  explained  above  the  method  of  treatment  for  those 
(afflicted  with  Piles)  who  pass  liquid  stools. 

As  regards  those  whose  stools  are  hard  or  solid,  I  shall  explains 
below  the  treatment  that  should  be  followed.  I25 

To  them  should  be  given  the  wine  called  ‘Prasanna,’  mixed  with 
ghee,  the  flour  of  fried  barley,  and  salt,  having,  at  first,  given  them 
small  masses  of  solid,  treacle,  mixed,  with  (NSgara)  dry  ginger.  126 

The  patient  may  also  be  given,  treacle,  with  (Nagara)  dry  ginger, 
and  (Patha)  Cissampelos  hernandifolia,  rendered  sour  by  adding  the 
expressed  juice  of  such  fruits  as  pomegranates  and  others. 

Or,  treacle,  mixed  with  ghee  and  the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots, 
may  be  administered.  127 

The  seeds  of  (Yam&ni)  Ptyckotis  A  flow  an,  (Nagara)  dry  ginger, 
(Patha)  Cissampelos  hernandifolia,  mixed  with  the  expressed  juice  of 
pomegranates,  and  treacle,  and  whey,  and  salt,  should  be  administered 
to  the  patient  for  restoring  the  wind  to  its  normal  course  and  clearing 
the  intestines  of  stools.  128 


*  ‘Yushalretairvimisrit5m’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  having  reference  to  all  the 
juices  beginning  from  <QatipalaQasiddham,  in  121. — T. 

j*  All  these  varieties  of  rice  are  well-known  in  Bengal. — T. 


f388 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


(Dusparjaka — otherwise  call  Duralabha)  Hedysarum  Alhagi,  the 
fruits  of  AEgle  marmelos,  (Yamani)  the  seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan,  and 
(Nagara)  dry  ginger,  each  combined  with  (Paths)  Cissampelos  hernan- 
difolia,  alleviates  the  pains  of  Piles.*  I29 

The  drugs  mentioned  above  {vis.,  Hedysarum  Alhagi  and  the 
three  others  named  in  the  first  line  of  verse  129),  fried  in  (Yamaka) 
oil  and  ghee,  or  the  leaves  of  (Karanja)  Pongamia  Glabra,  mixed  with 
the  pulv  of  fried  barley,  and  fried  in  (Yamaka)  oil  and  ghee,  should  be 
given  to  the  patient,  as  both  these  combinations  restore  the  wind  and 
the  stools  to  their  normal  course.  J3° 

Or,  he  should  be  given  ‘Madira’  mixed  with  salt,  or  ‘£idhu!  mixed 
therewith,  or  ‘Sauviraka’  mixed  therewith, 

Or  treacle  and  dry  ginger  before  meals.f  131 

PHALAMLA  GHRITA. 

Piper  longum,  (Nagara)  dry  ginger,  (Kshara)  the  ashes  of  green 
barley  shoots,  cumin  seeds,  and  (Ajaji)  the  seeds  of  Nigella  sativa, 
and  coriander  seeds. 

The  paste  of  these,  mixed  with  (PhSnita)  half-boiled  treacle,  and 
rendered  sour  by  adding  the  expressed  juice  of  such  fruits  as  pome¬ 
granates  and  others,  is  to  be  boiled  in  ghee. 

This  ghee  is  called  ‘Phalamla  Ghrita.’j  132 

PIPPALADYA  GHRITA. 

Or,  the  patient  may  drink  the  ghee  boiled  with  the  fruits  of  Piper 
longum,  the  roots  of  the  same,  Plumbago  Zeylanica,  Potkos  officinalis, 
(£ringavera)  dry  ginger,  and  the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots.  *33 


*  Gangadhara  takes  the  sense  of  this  verse  to  be  that  all  the  four  drugs  named  in  the 
first  line,  combined  with  Patha,  as  also  each  of  the  four  combined  with  it,  remove  or  re¬ 
moves  the  pains  of  piles.  The  language,  however,  of  the  verse  can  scarcely  support  this 
explanation.  I  take  the  meaning  to  be  that  each,  combined  with  Patha,  removes  the 
pains. — T. 

•j-  ‘Madira’,  ‘Qidhu’,  and  ‘Sauviraka’  are  different  varieties  of  wine.  In  the  second 
line,  Gangadhara  reads  ‘Sagudamabhayam  vatha’,  meaning  ‘chebulic  myrobalans  with 
treacle’.— T. 

J  The  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  the  first  line  differently.  According  to 
them  the  drugs  are  Piper  longum,  dry  ginger,  the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots,  (Karavi) 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


389 


Or,  the  patient  may  be  given  ghee  boiled  with  Piper  Chaba  and 
Plumbago  Zeylanica,  and  mixed  with  treacle,  and  the  ashes  of  green 
barley  shoots  ; 

Or,  ghee  boiled  with  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum,  and  mixed  with 
treacle,  the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots,  and  dry  ginger  ;*  J34 

Or,  ghee  boiled  with  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum ,  the  roots  of  the 
same,  curds,  dry  ginger,  and  coriander  seeds.f 

All  these  ghees  are  curatives  of  constipated  wind  and  stools.  *35 
CHABYADYA  GHITA. 

Piper  Chaba ,  the  three  acrids  (viz.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of  Piper 
longum ,  and  black  pepper),  Cissampelos  hernandifolia,  (KshSra)  the 
ashes  of  green  barley  shoots,  (Kustumbhuru)  coriander  seeds,  the 
seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan ,  the  roots  of  Piper  longum ,  the  two  salts, 
viz.,  ‘Vit’  and  ‘Saindhava,’  Plumbago  Zeylanica ,  the  fruits  of  ZEgle 
marmelos ,  and  chebulic  myrobalans  : 

These,  reduced  to  paste,  should  be  boiled  with  ghee,  mixed  with 
well-prepared  curds  of  four  times  the  measure  of  the  ghee. 

This  ghee  should  be  administered  for  restoring  the  stools  and  the 
wind  to  their  normal  course,  *36-137 

White  flux,  prolapsus  ani,  difficulty  of  micturition,  copious  discharge 
of  liquid  stools  without  one’s  being  conscious  of  it,  and  severe  pains 
in  the  anus  and  the  pubic  region,  are  all  removed  by  this  ghee.  *38 

NAGARADYA  GHRITA. 

(Nsgaram)  dry  ginger,  the  roots  of  Piper  longum,  Plumbago  Zey¬ 
lanica,  (Hastipippali)  Potkos  officinalis,  (£wadangshtra),  Tribulus 
lanuginosus,  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum,  (Dhanya)  coriander  seeds,  the 
fruits  of  ZEgle  marmelos,  (Paths)  Cissampelos  hernandifolia,  and 
(YamanikS)  the  seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan  ;  *39 


a  kind  of  fennel  seed,  coriander  seeds,  and  cumin  seeds.  I  have  taken  Gangadhara’s 
reading.— T. 

$  GangSdhara  omits  ‘Nagaram’.  He  reads  ‘GudaksharasamanistSm.’— T. 

11  The  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  ‘Dadima’  for  ‘Nigara’.— T, 


1390 


CHARA  KA-SAMH1TA. 


The  paste  of  these  is  boiled  in  ghee  and  the  expressed  juice  of 
(Changed)  Oxalis  corniculata.  Curds  should  be  added  of  four  times 
the  measure  of  the  ghee. 

The  ghee  thus  prepared  is  alleviatlve  of  phlegm  and  wind.  14° 

This  ghee  cures  piles,  the  ailments  of  the  ‘Grahani,’  difficulty  of 
micturition,  white  flux,  prolapsus  ani,  severe  pains  in  the  anus,  and 
•epistasis.  *4* 

PIPPALADYA  GHRITA. 

The  fruits  of  Piper  longum,  (Nagara)  dry  ginger,  (PStha)  Cissam- 
.pelos  hernandifolia,  and  (£wadangstra)  Tribulus  lanuginosus  : 

Three  ‘palas’  of  each  of  these  are  taken,  and  their  decoction  is 
•obtained  by  boiling  them  together.  J42 

Straining  the  decoction  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth,  two  ‘palas’ 
of  the  paste  of  each  of  the  following  are  thrown  into  it,  viz.,  (Kandira) 
•a  well-known  pot-herb  of  that  name  (otherwise  called  ‘£amatha’),  the 
roots  of  Piper  longum ,  (Vyosha)  the  three  acrids  {viz.,  dry  ginger, 
the  fruits  of  Piper  longum ,  and  black  pepper),  Piper  Chaba ,  and 
Plumbago  Zeylariica.  143 

Forty  ‘palas’  of  ghee  are  then  to  be  added,  as  also  the  expressed 
juice,  of  the  same  measure,  of  (Changeri),  Oxalis  corniculata.  Curds 
-are  also  to  be  added  of  six  times  the  measure  of  ghee.  144 

All  these  are  boiled  on  a  mild  fire.  After  the  boiling  is  complete, 
the  ghee  is  kept  in  a  proper  vessel  (generally  in  an  earthen  jar). 

The  ghee  thus  prepared  should  be  given  to  the  patient  with  his 
meals  and  drinks.  Even  this  is  the  method  of  administering  it.  *45 

This  ghee  cures  the  ailments  of  the  ‘Grahani,’  ..piles,  abdominal 
tumours,  diseases  of  the  chest,  dropsical  swellings,  enlargement  of 
the  spleen,  abdominal  dropsy,  epistasis,  difficulty  of  micturition, 
'fever, 

Cough,  hiccup,  disgust  Tor  food,  asthma,  and  pains  in  the  sides. 
It  increases  strength,  promotes  nourishment,  improves  the  com¬ 
plexion,  and  kindles  the  digestive  fire,  in  a  great  measure.  *47 


Cff ARARATS  AMHITA. 


"Chebulic  myrobalans,  fried  in  ghee,  and  mixed  with  treacle  and 
the  pulv  of  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum,  or  with  the  pulv  of  Trivrit 
Convolvulus  Turpethuni)  and  that  of  Danti  ( Baliospermum  monta- 
■num),  should  be  given  to  the  patient,  for  restoring  his  faults  and 
stools  to  their  normal  course.  H8 

When,  in  consequence  of  the  stools,  the  wind,  the.  phlegm,  and 
the  bile  being  restored  to  their  normal  course,  the  anal  canal  be¬ 
comes  purged  of  its  faults,  the  Piles  are  cured  and  the  digestive 
fire  becomes  enkindled.  H9 

When  the  stools  and  the  wind  become  constipated,  the  meat-juice, 
mixed  with  the  expressed  juice  of  pomegranates  and  other  sour  fruits^ 
and  well-dressed  with  oil  and  ghee,  of  the  peacock,  the  francoline 
partridge,  quails  oT  the  species  called  Perdix  chinensis ,  fowls,  and 
Quails  of  the  species  called  Perdix  otivacce,  should  be  [given.  *5° 

In  constipation  of  the  stools  and  the  wind,  leaves  of  Trivrit  ( Con¬ 
volvulus  Turpethuni),  Danti  (Baliospermum  montanum),  Palaca  (Butea 
frondosa),  Changed  (Oxalis  corniculata ),  and  Chitraka  (Plumbago  Z ey- 
lanica),  fried  in  (Yamaka)  oil  and  ghee ,  and  mixed  with  curds, 
Should  be  given  to  the  patient.  I5t 

The  leaves  of  Upodikg  ( Basella  Rubra),  Tanduliya  (Ajnaranthus 
, polygamus ),  Virg  or  ‘Khirakgkoli’  (a  bulbous  plant  of  the  onion 
tribe  growing  in  the  H-imalyas),  Vastuka  (Chenopodium  album),  Suvar- 
ehala  (Gratiola  Monnierid),  LonikS  (Portulaca  oderacea),  Yava  ’( Hor¬ 
de  uni  hexastichuni),  Avalguja  ( Vernonia  anthelmintica),  Kakamachi 
( Solanum  nigrum ),  Ruhg  (Panicum  dactylou  of  the  blue  variety), 
Mahapatra  (Eugenia  jambolana  of  the  large  variety),  Amblikg  (Ta- 
marindus  Indica),  Jivanti  (Ccelogyne  ovalis),  £atl  (Curcuma  Zerumbet), 
■and  Grinjanaka  (Allium  sativum ),  boiled  in  curds  and  the  expressed 
juice  of  pomegranates,  and  fried  in  (Yamaka)  both  oil  and  ghee,  and 
mixed  with  the  pulv  of  Dhgnya  (coriander  seeds)  and  Nagara  (dry 
ginger),  should  be  given  to  the  patient.*  1 52-1 54 

Iguana,  the  species  of  porcupine  called  ‘^wavit’,  the  species  of 
jackal  called  ‘Lopaka’,  cat,  camel,  cow,  tortoise,  and  porcupine  : 


*  The  leaves  of  each  of  the  plants  mentioned  in  verses  152-54  are  directed  to  be  given, 
boiled  in  curds  and  the  expressed  juice  of  pomegranates,  and  fried  in  oil  and  ghee,  and 
mixed  with  the  pulv  of  coriander  seeds  and  dry  ginger. — T. 

176 


4392 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA. 


Meat-juice  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  these  animals,  cooked  in 
the  above  manner  (i.  e.,  boiled  in  curds  and  the  expressed  juice  of 
pomegranates,  fried  in  oil  and  ghee,  and  mixed  with  the  pulvs  of 
-coriander  seeds  and  dry  ginger),  may  be  given,*  *55 

with  boiled  rice  of  the  ‘Rakta-fSli’  variety,  for  alleviating  the 
sexdted  wind. 

When  it  is  ascertained  that  the  Piles  are  characterised  by  predom¬ 
inance  of  wind  and  are  dry,  and  when  the  patient’s  digestive  fire  has 
been  weakened,  >56 

the  physician  should  administer  to  him  ‘MadirS’  distilled  from 
Sugar,  as  also  ‘£idhu’,  whey,  ‘Tushodaka,’  various  spirits,  the  cream 
of  curds,  boiled  water  (rendered  cool),  water  cooled  by  exposure  to 
night-dew,  or  the  decoction  of  Kantakfiri  (Solatium  Xantkocarpuin), 
or  the  decoction  of  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  and  Dhanyaka  (coriander 
seeds),  as  after-drinks  in  consequence  of  the  virtue  they  possess  of 
restoring;  stools  and  the  wind  to  their  normal  course.  1 57- 158 

Those  patients  (having  Piles)  who  are  afflicted  with  flatulence,  or 
whose  bodies  have  become  exceedingly  dry,  or  whose  wind  no  longer 
moves  In  its  normal  course,  or  who  are  afflicted  with  ‘£ula’  pains,  find 
the  administration  of  oily  enemata  to  be  beneficial.  >59 

The  fruits  of  Piper  longuvt,  Madana  (the  fruit  of  Randia  dumelo - 
rmri),\  the  fruits  of  ARgle  marmolos,  £atahvfi  (dill  seeds),  Madhuka 
(liquorice),  Vacha  (Acorus  Calamus ),  Kushtha  (Aplotaxis  auriculata ), 
£ati  (Curcuma  Zerumbet ),  Pushkara  (the  root  so-called  is  brought 
from  Central  India,  Aplotaxis  auriculata  being  sometimess  substituted 
for  it),  Plumbago  Zeylanica ,  and  Pinus  deodara  :  160 

These  are  reduced  to  paste.  Oil,  mixed  with  milk  of  twice  its 
measure,  boiled  with  this  paste,  constitutes  one  of  the  best  enemata 
for  such  piles  as  are  characterised  by  constipated  wind. 


t  Meat-juice,  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  each  of  the  animats  named,  should  be  ad¬ 
ministered,  cooking  it  in  the  manner  directed  and  mixing  it  with  the  pulvs  named.  The 
reading  which  Gang5dhara  adopts  is  slightly  different.— T. 

+  GangSdhara  reads  ‘Madhukam’,  meaning  liquorice.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


*393 


This  enemata  conquers  the  following  diseases,  vie.,  prolapsus  am, 
severe  pains  in  the  anus,  difficulty  of  micturition,  white  flux,  weak¬ 
ness  of  the  waist,  the  thighs,  and  the  back-bone,  confined  wind  ir>  the 
pubic  region,  discharge  of  sticky  matter  (from  the  anus);  swelling  (in 
the  anus),  constipation  of  wind  and  stools,  and  the  stoppage  of  wind 
and  stools.  162-163 

With  the  paste,  mixed  with  oil  and  agreeably  hot,  of  the  drugs 
ending  with  Pinus  deodara,  which  enter  into  the  composition  of 
oily  enemata,  such  Piles  as  are  paralysed  and  swollen,  should  be. 
plastered.*  164 

Laved  with  this  plaster,  the  Piles  soon  discharge  phlegmonous 
and  slimy  matter  mixed  with  blood.  Such  matter  being  discharged, 
itching,  the  absence  of  sensation  (paralysis),,  and.  swelling  with  pains, 
disappear.-]-  165 

Or,  dry  enemata  may  be  administered,  consisting  of  the  decoction 
of  the  group  of  the  ten  roots,  with  (cow’s)  milk,  cow’s  urine,  oil  and 
ghee,  and  ‘Saindbava’  salt,  and  the  paste  of  the  drugs  beginning  with 
the  fruits  of  Randia  dumetorum.%  166 

ABHAYARISHTA. 

Half  a  ‘prastha’  (equal  to  8  palas)  of  chebulic  myrobalans,  one 
‘prastha’  (equal  to  16  palas)  of  the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Rntblica, 
10  palas  of  (Kapittha)  wood-apple,  half  a  pala  of  Indravaruni 
( Cucumis  Colocynthis),  i67 

and  2  palas  of  each  of  these,  vie.,  Vidanga  (Rmbelia  Rzbes)\.  the: 
fruits  of  Pipes  longum,  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racemosa\  black  pepper,, 
and  ‘Elabuluka’  (the  red  powder,  obtainable  in  Indian  markets,  of  that: 
name, — the  seed  of  some  plant). 


*  ‘Drugs  ending  with  Pinus  deodara r  i.  e-j.^Pippali,  Madanam,  Vilwam,  &c.’  (vide 
verse  160  above.)  In  the  second  line,  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  ‘stavdha- 
gulSni’.  This  is  scarcely  correct.  The  reading  I  adopt  is  ‘stavdhagunSni’,  meaning  ‘para¬ 
lysed  and  swollen’. — T, 

f  All  these  symptoms  may  not  be  present  together.— T. 

J  When  the  preparation  is  complete,  the  oily  matter  is  pressed  out.  It'  then  becomes  n 
•Niruha’  (dry  enemata)  and  not  ‘Annvasana’  (oily  enemata.)— T, 


CHAKAKA-SAMHITA. 


1394- 

Ail  these  should  be  boiled  in  water  the  measure  of  which  is 
4  ‘dronas’  (equal  to  256  seers). 168 

When  the  contents  have  been  boiled  down  to  one  ‘d'rona’  (equal 
to  64.  seers),  the  liquid  portion  should  be  strained  through  a  piece 
of  clean  cloth.  When  cooled,  200  palas  (equal  to  25  seers)  of  treacle 
should  be  thrown  into  it. 

Thus  mixed  with  treacle,  the  liquid  should  be  kept,,  for  a  fort¬ 
night,  in  an  earthen  vessel  that  has  sucked  a  sufficient  measure  of 
ghee.  i69 

After  the  expiration  of  a  fortnight,  the  liquid  becomes  drinkable,, 
the  measure  being  dependent  on  the  strength  of  the  patient. 

In  consequence  of  the  drinking  of  this  ‘arishta’  everyday,  the 
disappearance  of  the  Piles  is  brought  about.  *7° 

This  ‘arishta’  of  chebulic  myrobalans  is  well-tested;  It  cures  also 
the  following  ailments,  viz.,  lienteric  dysentery,  chlorosis,  diseases  of 
the  chest,  enlargement  of  the  spleen,  abdominal,  tumours,  abdominal 
dropsy  ; 

also  leprosy,  swellings,  and  disgust  for  food.  It  increases  the 
strength,  improves  the  complexion,  and  enkindles  the  digestive  fire. 
It  removes  anaemia,  and  leucoderma.  It  cures  also  intestinal  worms, 
cystic  tumours,  tumours  of  other  kinds,  brown  spots  on  the  face  and 
other  parts  of  the  body,  phthisis,  and  fever.  171-m 
DANTYARISHTA. 

The  roots  of  Danti  ( Baliospermum  montanmn),  those  of  Chitraka 
{Plumbago  Zeylanicd),.  the  two  groups  of  five  roots  (viz.,  ‘Swalpa’  con¬ 
sisting  of  Desmodium  Gangeticum,  Doodia  lagopodioides.  Solatium 
Indica,  Solatium  Xanthocarpum,  and  Tributus  lamiginosus ,  and 
‘Vrihat’— consisting  of  Aigle  marmelos,  Bignonia  Indica,  Gtnelina 
arborea,  Bignonia  suave-olens,  and  Pretnna  serratifolia ) ; 

One  pala  of  each  of  the  above  is  to  be  taken  ;  these  are  pounded 
together,  and  boiled  in  one  ‘drona’  (equal  to  64  seers)  of  water,  l73 

Into  the  boiling  water  should  be  thrown  3  palas  of  the  three 
myrobalans,  the  fruits  being  divested  of  their  seeds  and  reduced  to 
paste. 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


'395 


When  the  water  is  boiled  down  to  one-fourth  of  its  measure  (that 
is,  1 6  seers),  it  should  be  strained  through  a  piece  of  cloth,  and  when 
cooled,  twelve  and  a  half-seers  of  treacle  should  be  thrown  into  it. 
It  should  then  be  kept,  for  a  fortnight,  in  an  earthen  vessel  which  has 
sucked  a  sufficient  measure  of  ghee .  (The  mouth  of  the  vessel  should 
be  closed  up  properly).. 

One  drinking  this  ‘arishta’  every  day,  in  proper  measure,  becomes 
freed  from  Piles.  *74-75 

This  ‘arishta’  of  Danti  cures  the  diseases  of  the  ‘Grahani,’  and 
■chlorosis.  It  restores  the  wind  and  jthe  stools  to  their  normal  course. 
It  kindles  the  digestive  fire,  and  removes  disgust  for  food1.  It  should 
be  known  that  even  these  are  its  virtues.  176 

PHATARISHTAM. 

One  ‘prastha’  of  chebulic  myrobalans,  one  ‘prastha’  of  emblfc 
myrobalans,  two  palas  of  Vig&la  ( Cucumis  Colocynthis ),  the  same 
measure  of  Dadittha  (wood  apple),  the  same  measure  of  the  roots  of 
Patha  ( Cissampelos  hernandifolia),  and  the  same  measure  of  the  roots 
of  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica),  are  pounded  together  and  boiled 
in  two  ‘dronas’  (equal  to  128  seers)  of  water. 

When  the  water  has  been  boiled  down  to.  a  fourth  of  its  measure 
(Jr  e.,  32  seers),  it  should  be  strained  through  a. piece  of  clean  cloth; 
the  physician  should  then  throw  into  it  one  ‘tula’  (equal  to-  a  hundred 
palas  or  twelve  and  a  half  seers)  of  treacle.  It  should  then  be  kept 
in  an  earthen  jar  which  has  sucked  a  sufficient  measure  of  ghee. 

After  a  fortnight,  it  becomes  drinkable  (in  proper  measure)  by 
one  who  has  ailments  of  the  ‘Grahani’  as  also  Piles.  *77-i79 

This  ‘arishta/  called  ‘PhalSrishta,’  cures  diseases  of  the  chest, 
chlorosis,  enlargement  of  the  spleen,  anaemia,  intermittent  fever, 
constipation  of  stools,  of  urine,  and  of  the  wind,  weakness  of  the 
digestive  fire,  cough,  abdominal  tumours,  and  flatulence  of  the 
stomach. 

This  ‘arishta’  enkindles  the  digestive  fire.  Even  so  hath  it  been 
said  by  the  dark-coloured  son  of  Atri’s  race.  180-181 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1396 

CARKARARISHTA  or  another  phalarishta. 

One  ‘prastha’  (equal  to  two  seers)  of  Dur&labhS  (. Hedysarum 
Alkagi),  the  same  measure  of  Chitraka  (. Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  the 
same  measure  of  Vrisha  (Justicia  Adhatoda ),*  and  2  palas  of  each 
of  these,  viz .,  Pathya  (chebulic  myrobalans),  Amlaka  (embllc  myro- 
balans),  Patha  ( Cissampelos  hernandifolia ),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  and' 
Danti  ( Baliospermum  montanum )  : 

These  should  be  boiled  in  one  ‘drona’  (equal  to  64  seers)  of  water. 

When  the  water  has  been  boiled  down  to  a  fourth  of  its  measure 
(*,  e.,  16  seers),  it  should  be  strained  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth. 
When  cooled,  100  palas  (equal  to  twelve  and  a  half  seers)  of  sugar 
should  be  thrown  into  it. 

It  should  then  be  kept,  for  a  fortnight,  in  an  earthen  jar  which 
has  sucked  a  sufficient  quantity  of  ghee,  and  the  interior  surface  of 
which  has  been  laved  with  the  paste  of  Piper  longum,  Chavya  {Piper 
Chafa),  Priayangu  {Algaia  Roxburghiana),  honey,  and  ghee.  182-184 

A  proper  dose  of  this  ‘arishta’,  called  ‘^Srkararishta’,  should  be 
drunk,  in  proper  time,  the  measure  of  the  dose  being  dependent  on 
the  strength  of  the  patient. 

By  this  ‘arishta’  are  cured  Piles,  ailments  of  the  ‘Grahani’,  flatu¬ 
lence  of  the  stomach,  disgust  for  food,  constipation  of  the  stools,  of 
the  urine,  of  the  wind,  and  of  eructations,  weakness  of  the  digestive 
fire,  diseases  of  the  chest,  and  chlorosis. f  185-186 

KANAKARISHTA. 

Of  new  Amalakas  (fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Einblica),  made  seedless, 
take  one  ‘tula’  (twelve  and  a  half  seers). 

Of  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum )  take  a  ‘kudava’  (half  a  seer)  ; 
of  each  of  the  following,  viz.,  Vidanga  {Embelia  Ribes),  Maricha 
(black  pepper),  Yavasa  (otherwise  called  Durfilabha,  i.  e.,  Hedysarum 
Alkagi),  the  roots  of  Piper  longum,  Kramuka  (areca  nuts),  Chavya 


*  GangSdhara  reads  ‘VSsaka’  which  also  means  Justicia  Adhatoda.—  T. 
t  Gangadhara  galls  this  ‘arishta’  by  the  name  of  ‘<Jarkararishta\  The  Calcutta  and  the 
Bombay  editions  call  it  ‘Second  PhalSrishta’.  The  former  name  is  more  correct. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


1397 


( Piper  Chaba),  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  ManjishthS  (Rubia 
Munjista),  Naluka  (a  fragrant  substance  used  for  scenting  oils  and 
■ghees  and  spirits,  &c.},  and  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racemosd),  take  one 


Of  each  of  the  following,  Kushtha  (Apia  taxis  auriculata ), 
Daruharidra  ( Berberis  Asiatica ),  SurahvS  (otherwise  called  Devad5ru, 
t.  e.y  Pinus  deodara),  the  two  £arivas  ( Asclepias  pseudosarsa  and 
Ichnocarpus  frutescens ),  Indrayava  (the  seeds  of  Holarrhena  atiti- 
dysenterica),  and  Bhadramusta  (the  tubers  of  Cypepus  pertennis),  take 
half  a  pala  (equal  to  4  tolas). 

Of  new  flowers  of  Nagakegara  {Mesuaf erred)  take  four  palas. 

Boiling  all  these  in  two  dronas  (128  seers)  of  water  take  down  the 
vessel  when  a  fourth  part  of  the  water  remains. 

The  liquid  is  then  strained  out.  When  it  becomes  cool,  mix  the 
following  with  it,  viz.,  an  equal  measure  of  the  decoction  of  raisins, 
properly  cooled,  that  is,  32  seers,  pulverised  sugar  of  the  measure  of 
2  tulas  (equal  to  25  seers),  and  new  flower-juice  (honey)  measuring 
half  a  prastha  (equal  to  6  seers). 

One  karshika  (two  tolas)  of  the  pulv  of  each  of  the  following,  viz., 
Tvach  (the  bark  of  Cinnamommn  Zeylanicum),  Ela  (cardamoms),  Plava 
(otherwise  called  Kaivartamustaka,  i.  e.,  the  tubers  of  Cyperus  per •- 
tennis),  Patra  (the  leaves  of  Cinnamomum  Tamald),  Amvu  (otherwise 
called  Bala,  i.  e.,  Pavonia  odorata ),  Sevya  (the  roots  of  Andropogon 
muricatus),  Kramuka  (areca  nuts),  and  Kegara  (the  flowers  of  Mesua 
ferrea). 

Ali  these  should  be  kept  for  a  fortnight  in  a  pure  earthen  vessel 
that  has  sucked  a  sufficient  quantity  of  ghee  and  the  interior  surface 
of  which  has  been  laved  with  ghee. 

The  vessel  should  also  have  been  fumigated  by  the  smoke  of 
oil-seeds,  sugar,  and  Aguru  ( Aquilaria  Agallocha ). 

After  a  fortnight,  this  ‘arishta,’  known  by  the  name  of  ‘Kaiiaka/ 
becomes  drinkable.  It  is  agreeable  to  the  taste  and  sweet. 

A  fortnight’s  use  makes  food  palatable  (i.  e.,  adds  relish  t© 
food). 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA . 


1398 

This  ‘arishta’  cares  piles,  diseases  of  tile  ‘Graham’,  epistasis,  abdo¬ 
minal  dropsy,  fever,  diseases  of  the  chest,  chlorosis,  dropsical  swell¬ 
ings,  abdominal  tumours,  suppression  of  stools,  cough,  all  vio¬ 
lent  diseases  born  of  excited  phlegm,  as  also  wrinkles  and  other 
signs  of  decay  and  baldness  of  the  head  that  are  due  to  excited 
faults.*  187-197 

One  should,  after  passing  stools,  Wash  the  parts  witty  decoctions 
of  GhosSpatra  (the  leaves  of  Luffa  amarci)  and  other  curatives  of 
Piles  ;  or  with  lukewarm  water. 

Thus  ends  the  treatment,  whose  success  has  been  well-tested,  of 
Piles  that  are  called  dry,  *98 

Listen  after  this  to  what  the  treatment,  well-tested,  is  of  Piles  from 
which  discharges  occur. 

There  are  two  supervening  features  of  this  variety  of  Piles,  viz* 
.phlegm  and  wind.  *99 

In  blood-discharging  Piles,  the  stools  become  dark  in  colour,  hard, 
and  dry.  The  downward  wind  is  stopped.  The  blood  discharged 
by  this  class  of  Piles  is  thin,  of  a  red  hue,  and  frothy.  200 

When  there  :is  pain  in  the  waste,  the  thighs,  and  the  anus,  and 
when  the  measure  of  weakness  is  excessive,  the  Piles  should  be 
known  as  characterised  by  excited  wind,  if  they  have  been  induced 
by  dryness  as  the  cause.  201 

In  blood-discharging  Piles,  if  the  stools  become  loose,  white  or 
yellow,  oily,  heavy,  and  cold,  and  if  the  blood  discharged  be  thick, 
thready,  pale  in  colour,  and  slimy,  and  if  the  anus  be  slimy  and 
paralysed,  and  if  they  have  been  induced  by  indulgence  in  food  and 
drink  that  are  heavy  and  oily,  then  such  Piles  should  be  known  by 
-the  wise  as  characterised  by  phlegm.  202-203 

Things  oily  and  cold  are  beneficial  in  blood-discharging  Piles 
characterised  by  wind.  Things  dry  and  cold  are  beneficial  in  blood¬ 
discharging  Piles  characterised  by  phlegm. 


*  ‘That  are  due  to  excited  faults’,  that  is,  wrinkles,  &c.,  that  are  premature  or  not 
■born  of  age. — T. 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland,  V.  S.  A.: — You  have  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important 'as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco-,  California: —  . As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent . 

there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  arid  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  Ei  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A. : — You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  One  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis ,  Ohio-,  U.  S.  A.  The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  arid  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  arid  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B,  Gowel,  Cambridge : — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable;  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be.  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York  Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia-. — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to.  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  Opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C,  Wood,  Esq. ,  Philadelphia : — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will- appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine-,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr;  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  o]  Cashmere : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  arid  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-Western 
University-,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition  I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the!  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence-,  U.  S.  A.  : _ Be 

assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important; 

Abbot  H;  Buck,  Esq.,  /p,  East 38th  Street,  New  York  /—Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Traise,  Dramstadt The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H;  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brothers’  Druggist l  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere,  174,  Boulevatse,  Saint  Germain  : — Eeg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  : — As  1  go  over  each  fasciculus  of 
Charaka  I  arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day 
would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat 
their  patients  according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the 
undertakers,  and  fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to 
the  completion  of  the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street,  Calcutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya,— I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
[about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after.— 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia:— I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing .'—The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector Your  patriotic, 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  .  . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  A.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  I  have  read  Charalca-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maximsdn  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gya  It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  Wales  ' The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the'treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is 
a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji,— The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  wel). 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


PART  XLV. 


47357 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


(TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH). 


PARESHNATH  SARMA, 


KAVIRAJ  AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  Original)  WITH  COMMENT¬ 
ARIES  J  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 

journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  the  Hindu 

SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C.,  &C. 


200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved. ) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters.) 

Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says,— .  I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention. 

. Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

in  it. 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office — . Your 

excellent  translation . a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  6f  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

. . Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York,  V.  S  A.  I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to. -be;  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gotkenburgh,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S,  A,— I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing,  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris  Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris : — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  'to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  Well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsbnreh,  Germany  .‘—English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Affred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  L  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction ,  Bengal:- 1  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life, 
cannot  be  other  than  Valuable. 


CHA  RARA-SAMHITA, 


*399 


Hence,  keeping  an  eye  upon  this,  the  physician  should  begin  'his 
treatment  of  these  two  varieties  of  blood-discharging  Piles.  204 

If  the  physician  marks  a  predominance  of  bile  and  phlegm,. he 
should  administer  correctives  (such  as  purgatives,  emetics,  &c.), 
or,  disregarding  the  discharge  of  blood,  he  should  cause  the  patient 
to  observe  fasts.  2°5„ 

If  the  physician,  unendowed  with  wisdom,  seelcs  at  the  outset 
to  check  the  fault-vitiated  blood,  he  causes  many  diseases  to 
set  in.  206 

The  ailments  thus  generated  are  blood-bile,  fever,  thirst,  loss  of 
digestion,  disgust  for  food,  anaemia,  dropsical  swellings,  cutting  pains 
In  the  anus  and  the  groins  ;  2°7 


Itching,  abscesses,  urticaria  evariida,  small  boils,  leucoderma,  and 
the  disease  known  as  chlorosis  ;  suppression  of  the  (downward)  wind, 
of  the  urine,  and  of  the  stools,  head-ache  ;  208 

/.£ 

The  sensation  of  the  body  being  covered  with  a  wet  blanket,' 
heaviness  of  the  body,  and  other  diseases  having  vitiated  blood  fojd: 
their  cause. 

Hence,  the  stoppage  of  blood  is  regarded  as  beneficial  only  after 
the  vitiated  blood  has  been  fully  discharged.  2°9 


'A 


The  physician  conversant  with  the  originating  causes  of  disease, 
symptoms,  and  .the  characteristics  of  season  and  age,  and  acquainted 
also  with  the  strength  (or  weakness)  of  the  patient  and  the  colour 
of  (healthy  and  unhealthy)  blood,  should  delay  in  stopping  the  dis¬ 
charge  of  blood  till  he  sees  signs  of  actual  danger  to  life.  210 

For  kindling  the  digestive  fire,  for  stopping  the  discharge  of  blood, 
for  digestion  of  the  faults,  the  physician,  when  the  time  comes,  should 
treat  the  patient  with  bitters.  211 

Of  one  whose  faults  have  been  attenuated,  or  of  one  in  whom  the 
wind  alone  is  predominant,  the  blood  that  is  discharged  (from  the 
Piles)  should  be  stopped  by  administration  of  oils  in  the  form  of 
•drinks,  ointments  for  rubbing  the  body  with,  and  enemata.  212 

The  discharge,  in  the  season  of  sweat,  of  that  blood  which  is 
characterised  by  predominance  of  bile  alone  and  which  is  unasso- 


177 


1400 


CHARARA-SAMHITA. 


dated  with  excited  wind  and  phlegm,  should  certainly  be  stopped 
without  any  delay.  213 

.The  expressed’ juice  of  the  bark  of  Kutaja  (Holarrhena  untidy - 
senterica),  mixed  with  the  pulv  of  ginger,  and  a  little  ghee ,  operates 
as  a  styptic.  The  bark  (pulverised)  of  Dadima  (Punka  Granatum ), 
mixed  with  the  pulv  of  ginger,  as  also  the  decoption  of  (red)  sandal 
wood,  mixed  with  the  same  pulv,  has  the  same  virtue.  214 

The  decoction  of  (red)  sandal  wood,  Kiratatiktaka  (Agathotes 
Cherayta),  DhanyayavSsa  (otherwise  called  Duralabha,  i.  e.,  Hedy- 
sarum  Alhagi),  mixed  with  the  pulv  of  ginger,  is  an  alleviative  of 
blood-discharging  Piles.  The  decoction  of  Darbi  ( Berberis  Asiatica ), 
the  bark  of  Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum ,  Ushira  (the  roots  of  Andro- 
pogon  Muricatum ),  and  Nimba  ( Melia  Azadirachta ),  possesses  the 
same  virtue.  215 

Ativisha  (Aconitum  heterophyllum ),  the  bark  of  Kutaja  ( Holar¬ 
rhena  antidy senterica ),  Phala  (the  seeds  of  Holarrhe?ia  antidy sen¬ 
terica),  and  Rasanjana  (galena,  or,  as  some  physicians  take  it,  the 
extract  of  Berberis  Asiatica),  mixed  with  honey,  and  dissolved  in 
water  in  which  rice  has  been  washed,  is  another  combination  that 
stops  the  discharge  of  blood.  The  physician  may  also  give  it  to  the 
patient  that  is  thirsty.*  216 

KUTAJADI-RASAKRIYA. 

A  hundred  ‘palas’  (equal  to  twelve  and  a  half  seers)  of  the  raw 
bark  of  Kutaja  ( Holarrhena  antidysenterica )  are  boiled  in  rain-water 
(of  the  measure  of  64  seers). 

When  half  the  measure  of  water  remains  in  the  vessel,  it  should 
be  strained  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth. 

Three  ‘palas’  of  each  of  the  following  should  be  thrown  into  the 
strained  liquid,  viz.,  Mocharasa  (the  exudation  of  Bombax  Malabo - 
ricum),  SamangS  (Mimosa  pudica),  and  Phalini  (otherwise  called 
Priyangu,  z)  e.,  Aglaia  Roxburghiana) ;  also  an  equal  measure  (z.  e., 


*  The  pulv  is  taken  of  the  drugs  named  first.  Honey  and  rice-water  being  added,  a 
cooling  drink  is  made  of  them. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Ufif 

nine  palais)  of  the  pulv  of  Vatsakavija  (the  seeds  of  Holarrhena 
antidysenterica ). 

Boiling  all  these  again,  till  the  contents  assume  some  measure  of 
consistency,  that  is,  begin  to  stick  to  the  stirring  ladle,  the  vessel 
should  be  taken  down. 

The  medicine  thus  prepared  should  be  taken  with  either  the  milk- 
of  the  goat,  or  with  ‘manda’  of  rice,  the  measure  depending,  on  the- 
strength  of  the  patient’s  digestive  fire. 

Administered  in  proper  measure  and  at  the  proper  time,  this; 
medicine  conquers  the  discharge  of  blood. 

When  the  medicine  taken  has  been  digested,  the  patient  should 
eat  (boiled)  ‘£ali’  rice  with  goat’s  milk.  21-7-220 

This  medicine  speedily  cures  Piles  that  discharge  blood,  as  also 
diarrhoea  characterised  by  bloody  stools,  and  all  diseases  eharac-; 
terised  by  bloody  stools,  and  all  diseases  characterised  by  discharge 
of  blood. 

Treatment  by  this  ‘Rasa’  conquers  even  violent  blood-bile  of  both 
upward  and  downward  discharge.-)-221 

Nilotpala  (the  flowers  of  Nymphcea  stellata),  Samanga  ( Mimosa 
pudica),  Mocharasa  (exudation  of  Bombax  Malabaricum ),  Chandana 
(red  sandal  wood),  Tila  (sesame  seeds),  and  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  race- 
mosa),  should  be  drunk  with  goat’s  milk.  After  this,  the  patient 
should  eat  (boiled)  ‘£sli’  rice  with  milk  of  the  same  description.  222 

The  expressed  juice  of  Vastuka  ( Chenopodium  album),.  mixecS 
with  goat’s  milk,  conquers  the  discharge  of  blood..  The  meat-juice- 
of  birds  and  animals  also  of  the  wildernessy  without  admixture  of 
any  sour  juice  or  with  a  very  partial  admixture  of  it,  produces  the 
same  effect.  223 

Paths  ( Cissampelos  hernandifolia),  Vatsakavija  (the  seeds  of 
Holarrhena  antidysenterica),  Rasanjana  (galena,  or,  as  some  take  it, 
the  extract  of  Berberis  Asiatica),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  YamSni  (the 
seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan),  and  Vilwa  (AEgle  marmelos),  reduced  to 
pulv  and  dissolved  in  water,  should  be  taken  by  persons  afflicted 
with  Piles  accompanied  by  cutting  pains.  224 


r402r 


CI1ARAKA-SA  til  HIT  A. 


DSrbi  ( Berber  is  Asiatica),  Kiratatikta  [Agathotes  Cherayta ),  Must'a' 
(tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  and  Dusparga  (otherwise  called  Dura- 
Iabha,  i.  e.,  Hedysarum  Alhagi),.  reduced  to.  pulv  and  dissolved  in- 
water,  conquer  the  discharge  of  blood. 

If  the  discharge  of  blood  be  copious,  accompanied  by  severe 
pain,  then  ghee  boiled  with  the  four  drugs  mentioned  above  should 
be  administered.  225 

Ghee  boiled  with  the  paste  of  Kutaja  ( Holarrhena  antidysenterica ) 
and  Phala  (the  seeds  of  the  same), 

Or,  with  the  flowers  of  Kegara  ( Mesua  ferrea ),  Nilotpala  (the 
flowers  of  Nympheea  stellata ),  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racemosa ),  and 
DhStaki  (  Woodfordia  floribundd), 

should  be  administered  by  the  physician  in  blood)'  Piles  when 
these  are  accompanied  by  severe  pains.  226 

Ghee  mixed  with  the  expressed  juice  of  pomegranate  frui  ts  and 
Yavaguka  (ashes  of  green  barley  shoots),  speedily  conquers  the  dis¬ 
charge  of  blood  (in  Piles)  accompanied  by  severe  pains.  Also 

Ghee  boiled  with  Nidigdhika  ( Solanum  Xanthocarpum )  and 
Dugdhika  {Oxystelma  esculentum,  syn.  Asclepias  rosed),  possesses  the 
same  virtue.  227 

The  ‘peya’  of  fried  paddy,  boiled  with  Chukrika  ( Rumex  vesi- 
carius ),  Kegara  (the  flowers  of  Mesua  ferrea ),  and  Utpala  (the  flowers 
of  Nympheea  stellata), 

Or,  with  Bala  (Sida  cordifolia)  and  Prishniparm  (. Doodia  logopo- 
dioides),  speedily  oonquers  the  discharge  of  blood.  228 

Take  the  decoction  of  Hrivera  {Pavonia  odorata),  Vilwa  (dried 
fruits  of  AEgle  marmelos ),  and  Nagara  (dry  ginger).;,  cook  it  with 
cheese.  Mix  the  product  with  Vrikshamla  (hog  plum)  and  Dadi- 
mamta  (the  juice  of  sour  pomegranates),  or  with  Amlikamla  (tama¬ 
rind),  or  with  Kolamla  (sour  jujubes).  Or,  boil  it  with  Grinjanaka 
(garlics)  and  wine,  and  fry  it  in  Yamaka  [ghee  and  oil). 

The  patient  should  drink  ‘peya’  (of  red  ‘£ali’  rice,  &c.},  mixed  with 
the  above.  This  drink  is  an  alleviative  of  diarrhoea  characterised  by 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


T4°S 


bloody  stools,  ‘£ula’  pains  (in  the  abdomen  or  stomach),  dysentery 
(white  flux),  and  dropsical  swellings.  *29-230 

If  the  discharge  of  blood  be  copious,  ‘Khara’*  should  be  given  of 
1.  KSsmaryya  (fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica),  2.  of  Karvudara 
{Bauhinia  acuminata  of  the  red  variety)  and  PhalSmla  (tamarind) ; 
3.  of  Grinjanaka  (garlics)  and  £almali  ( Bombax  Malabaricum ) ;  4.  of 
Kshirini  (otherwise  called  Dugdhika,  i.  e.,  Asclepias  rosea) ;  5.  of 
Chukrika  ( Rumex  vesicarius) ;  6.  of  the  buds  of  Nyagrodha  ( Ficus 
Bengalensis) ;  and  of  the  flowers  of  Kovidara  ( Bauhinia  variegata  of 
the  species). 

The  ‘Khara’  should,  in  each  case,  be  boiled  with  the  cream  of 
curds.  231-232 

The  blades  of  PalSndu  (the  onion  plant),  boiled  in  whey,  or 
Upodika  (the  potherb  called  Basella  rubra )  mixed  with  sour  jujubes, 
or  the  soup  of  Masura  (the  seeds  of  Vicia  lens),  should  be  given; 
to  the  patient  when  there  is  discharge  of  blood.  233 

Food  consisting  of  the  (boiled)  grains  of  ‘£ali,’  ‘£yamska,’  and 
‘Kodrava’  (different  varieties  of  paddy)  should  be  taken  by  the  patient, 
with  (half)  boiled  milk,  or  with  the  soups  of  Masura  ( Vicia  lens), 
Mudga  ( Phaseolus  Mungo),  Adhakr  ( Cajanus  Indicus ),  and  Makushtaka 
( Phaseolus  aconitifolius ),  or  with  sour  juices,  j-234 

If  there  is  copious  discharge  of  blood  from  the  Piles  of  one  in 
whose  body  the  wind  is  predominantly  excited,  one  should  then  take 
the  boiled  grains  of  ‘CaliJ  &c.,  paddy,  with  the  meat-juice  of  the  flesh 
of  fowl,  peacocks,  and  francoline  partridges ;  or  of  the  two-humped 
camel,  or  of  that  variety  of  jackals  which  is  known  by  the  name  of 
‘Lopaka’ ;  mixed  in  each  case  with  sweet  and  sour  juices.  236 

Onions  mixed  with  the  meat-juices,  the  ‘Kharas’,  the  pot-herbs,, 
and  gruels  (Peyas),  or  onions  alone  (2.  e.,  without  any  of  these  accom¬ 
paniments),  conquer  copious  discharges  of  blood  from  Piles,  as  also 
the  (excited)  wind.  237 


*  ‘Khara’  is  butter-milk  boiled  with  acid  vegetables  and  spices. — T. 
t  Gangadhara  reads  ‘Satilamudgadhakimasuranam’  as  the  last  foot  of  the  first  verse. 
The  reading  of  the  Calcutta  edition,  viz.,  ‘masuramudgadhakimukushtanam’  is  evidently 
better.  ‘Sritena  payasa’  is  taken  by  Gangadhara  as  meaning  ‘half-bo\\eA  milk. 


1404 


CHAR  AKA -SA  MHITA. 


The  trunk  of  a  young  goat  (that  is,  the  meat  of  the  body  divested 
of  the  head  and  the  legs),  with  the  blood  not  let  out,  cooked  with 
many  onions,  should  be  given  to  the  patient  when  his  stools  and 
blood  become  scanty,  mixed  respectively  with  sweet  and  sour 
juices.*  238 

Blood-discharging  Piles  disappear  through  eating  cheese  and 
sesame  seeds,  or  the  flowers  of  Mesua  ferrea  and  cheese  and  sugar, 
or  the  cream  of  curds  and  waterless  (undiluted)  whey.f  239 

Ghee  raised  from  cheese,  the  flesh  of  the  goat,  rice  obtained  from 
‘Shashthika’  as  also  ‘£ali’  paddy,  new  ‘manda’  of  wine,  and  new  wine,, 
conquer  discharges  of  blood  from  Piles.J  24° 

Generally,  when  the  discharges  of  blood  become  copious,  the  Piles 
are  to  be  regarded  as  characterised  by  predominance  of  wind.  Even 
if  the  phlegm  and  the  bile  be  vitiated,  still,  if  the  discharge  of  blood 
be  copious,  the  Piles  should  be  held  as  characterised  by  predomi¬ 
nantly  excited  wind.  241 

When  the  physician  sees  that  blood-bile  'is  predominant  in  the 
patient  afflicted  with  Piles,  and  that  the  symptoms  of  excited  phlegm 
and  wind  are  not  pronounced,  those  cooling  operations  which  have 
already  been  spoken  of,  as  also  those  which  we  shall  presently  speak 
of,  should  be  applied.  242 

In  Piles  characterised  by  predominance  of  blood-bile,  the  decoc¬ 
tions  of  the  following  drugs  should  be  used  for  sprinkling  over  the 
Piles,  viz.,  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Panchavalka  (i.  e.,  the  five  barks,  vut.T 
those  of  Ficus  Bengalensis ,  Ficus  religiosa,  Ficus  infectoria,  Calamus 
rotang,  and  Mimosa  sirissa),  the  bark  of  Vadara  ( Zizyphus  jujuba)t 
Udumvara  ( Ficus  glomerata),  Dhava  ( Conocarpus  latifolia),  Patola 


*  Gangadhara  explains  that  the  meat  is  mixed  with  sweet  juices  when  the  stools  become 
scanty,  and  with  sour  juices  when  the  blood  becomes  scanty.  The  word  ‘Vatyasat’  here 
is,  according  to  him,  used  in  the  sense  of  ‘respectively’.  Generally,  however,  it  implies 
contrariety  or  a  reversal  of  the  usual  order.  If  the  word  is  taken  in  this  sense,  the  meaning 
would  be  ‘sweets  are  given  in  loss  of  blood,  and  sours  in  scantiness  of  stools’. — T. 
f  ‘Ke^ara’  may  also  be  taken  as  implying  the  filaments  of  the  lotus. — T. 
t  Each  of  these  possesses  the  virtue  of  stopping  bloody  discharges.— T. 


CHA  RA  KA -SAM Hi  T  A. 


1405 

\Trichosanthes  dioica),  Vrisha  ( Jusiicia  Adhatodd),  Kakubha  (. Pentap - 
tera  Arjuna ),  Yavasa  ( Hedysarum  Alhagi },  and  Nimba  ( Melia  Aza~ 
dirachta).  243 

When  the  discharge  of  blood  is  copious,  and  a  burning  sensation 
is  felt  in.  the  Piles,  and  the  presence  is  detected  of  filthy  secretions, 
the  patient  should  be  made  to  bathe  (steeping  his  body  therein)  in 
the  decoction  of  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Mrinala  (lotus-stalks),  Padmaka 
(flowers  of  the  lotus),  Chandana  (red  sandal  wood),  Kuga  ( Saccharum 
spontaneum).  244 

Or,  rubbing  his  body  first  with  cold  oil,  he  should  be  made  to 
bathe  in  the  decoction  of  Madhuka  (iquorice)  and  Vetasa  ( Calamus 
rotang),  mixed  with  the  expressed  juice  of  the  sugarcane,  or  in  cold 
water.*  245 

For  stopping  the  discharge  of  blood,  the  following  styptic  should 
be  applied,  viz.,  water,  rendered  cool  by  exposure  to  the  night-dew, 
gently  poured,  after  ghee  with  sugar  has  been  applied  to  the  region 
of  the  genital  organ,  the  anus,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  spine.f  246 

Covering  the  Piles  repeatedly  with  new  (meaning  soft)  leaves  of 
Kadali  ( Musa  sapientum),  drenched  with  cold  water  ;  or  with  similar 
leaves  (similarly  drenched)  of  Pushkara  ( Nymphcea  stellata ),  or  with 
the  petals  (similarly  drenched)  of  the  flowers  of  Padma  and  Utpala 
(varieties  of  Nympheea  stellata ).  247 

The  following  also  quickly  check  the  discharge  of  blood,  viz., 
plasters  of  ghee  boiled  with  the  expressed  juice  of  Durva  ( Panicum 
Dactylori),  or  the  application  of  ghee  that  has  been  washed  a  hundred 
times,  or  of  gheie  that  has  been  washed  a  thousand  times  ;  or  the  cool 
breeze  produced  by  fanning.  248 

If  there  is  burning  in  the  Piles  and  filthy  secretions,  such  Piles 
are  cured  by  application  of  the  following,  plasters,  viz.,  1.  Samanga 
( Mimosa  pudica )  and  Madhuka  (liquorice)  ;  2.  Tila  (sesame  seeds)  and 
Madhuka  (liquorice) ;  3.  Rasanjana  (galena)  and  ghee  ;  4.  Sarjarasa 
(exudation  of  Skorea  robusta ),  and  ghee ;  5.  Nimba  {Melia  Azadi- 
rackta)  and  ghee  ;  6.  Madhu  (honey)  and  ghee  ;  7.  the  bark  of  Darbi 


*  ‘(Jicirena  tailena’,  i.  e.,  ‘with  oil  rendered  cool  by  certain  drugs’. — T. 

•}■  ‘Prastambhani’,  as  the  Calcutta  Edition  reads,  or  ‘Samstambhani’  as  GangSdhara 
reads,  means  a  styptic. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1406 

(j Berberis  Asiatica )  and  ghee ;  and  8.  Utpala  (flowers  of  Nymphcea 
stellata )  and  ghee ,  To  each  of  these  should  be  added  the  paste  of  red 
sandal  wood. 

The  same  plasters  operate  as  curatives  In  prolapsus  ani ,*  249-250 

Unto  him  whose  discharge  of  blood  has  been  stopped  by  these 
methods  of  treatment  or  by  the  application  of  cooling  agents,  the 
physician  endued  with  Intelligence  should,  at  the  proper  time,  admi¬ 
nister  ‘tarpana’  by  means  of  meat-juice  that  Is  oily  and  warm.f  251 

With  ghee  boiled  with  ‘Avapidaka’  (*.  e.,  the  decoction  and  the 
paste  of  the  bark  of  Ficus  Bengalensis,  &c.),  or  rubbing  with  ghee  and 
oil  slightly  hot,  or  sprinkling  with  milk,  ghee,  and  oil  that  are  slightly 
hot,  the  physician  should,  without  losing  time,  treat  the  patient  (for 
stopping  the  discharge  of  blood.).  -252 

In  Piles  characterised  by  predominance  of  wind  (i.  e.,  by  copious 
discharge  of  blood),  the  physician  should,  without  losing  time,  apply 
enemata  made  of  ‘Ghritamanda’  (‘manda’  of  ghee)  agreeably  hot :  or, 
be  should  apply  the  well-tested  enemata  known  by  the  name  of 
Tichcchavasti’  in  proper  time.  253 

4PICHCCHAVASTI. 

The  roots  of  Yavasa  (otherwise  called  DurSlabba,  i.  e.,  Hedysarum 
Alhagi ),  of  Kuga  {Poq  cynosuroides ),  and  of  Kfiga  ( Saccharum  sponta- 
neuih),  the  flowers  of  £almali  ( Bombax  Malabaricum ),  the  buds  of 
Nyagrodha  ( Ficus  Bengalensis'),  of  Udumvara  {Ficus  glomerata),  and 
of  Agwattha  {Ficus  religiosa ),  the  measure  of  each  of  the  above  being 
2  palas,  and  2  prasthas  of  water  (equal  to  4  seeers,  double ‘  the  measure 
being  actually  taken. 

With  the  above,  one  prastha  of  milk  ‘is  cooked.  (Two  prasthas, 
equal  to  4  seers,  are  actually  taken). 

When  the  above  ‘KashSya’  (decoction)  has  been  boiled  down  to 
'the  measure  of  the  milk  (that  is,  4  seers'1,  it  is  strained  through  -a 
a  piece  of  clean  cloth,  and  the  .paste  of  the  following  is  mixed  with 
the  liquid,  viz.,  the  exudation  of  £almali  {Bombax  Malabaricum ), 


*  ‘Eratisaraniy5h’ is  exactly  ‘curatives’. — X. 

if  ‘Tarpana’  is  treatment  by  the  application  of  oily  and  cooling  agents.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMfflTA. 


war 


SamangS  (Mimosa  pudicd),  Chandana  (red  sandal  wood),  Utpala 
(flowers  of  Nymphcea  steflata),  the  seeds  of  Vatsaka  ( Hdlarrhena  anti- 
dysenterim),  Priyangjj  (Aglaia  Roxburghiana),  and  Padmakejara 
(filaments  of ’the  lotus). 

With  the  product  should  be  mixed  ghee,  'honey,  and  sugar. 

Even  this  preparation  is  called  ‘Siddha  PichcchSvasti.’ 

This  cares  dysentery  (white  flux),  -Prolapsus  ano,  discharge  of 
blood,  and  fever. 

Prapaundafika  (root-stock  of  Nymphcea  lotus),  Madhuka  (liquorice), 
;and  all  the  ingredients  named  in  making  ‘PichcchSvasti,’  should  be 
pounded  together  into  a  paste.  With  twice  the  measure  of  milk,  this 
paste  should  be  bailed.  The  result  will  be  an  oily  -enemata  .(of. great 
•efficacy).  258 

HRIVERADI-GHRITAM, 

Hrivera  (Pavonia  odor  at  a),  Utpala  (Nymphcea  stellcltd),  Lodhra 
(Symplocos  racemosa),  SamangS,  (Mimosa  pudicd),  ,Ghavya  (Piper 
•cCliaba),  Chandana  (red  sandail  wood),  Patha  (Cissampelos  kernandi- 
;falia ),  Ativisha  (Aconitum  heterophyllum ),  Vikva  (yRglp  marmelos), 
Dhataki  (Woodfordia  floribunda),  Devadaru  (Pinus  deodqra),  Dfirbi- 
tvach  (the  bairk  of  Berberis  Asiatica ),  N,Sgara  (dry  ginger),  Mangsi 
(Nardostachys  Jatama?isi),  Musta'  (the  tubers  of  :Cyperus  rotundas), 
the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots,  and  Chitraka  (Plumbago  Zeylanica ). 

AU  these  should  be  pounded  together  into  a  paste.  This  paste, 
the  expressed  juice  of  Changed  (Oxalisxorniculata),ym&  :ghee,  should 
•'be  boiled  together. 

The  ghm thus  prepared  is  a  highly  beneficial  medicine.  It  alle- 
-viates  all  the -three  faults.  It  should  be  administered  -in  Piles,  diarr 
:rhoea,  lienteric  dysentery,  the  disease  -called  .chlorosis, -fever,  disgust 
‘.for  food,  difficulty  of  micturition, prolapsus  ano,  abdominal  flatulence, 
-dysentery  (white  flux),  in  discharges -of  slimy -matter  and  the  presence 
■of  ‘£ula’  pains  in  Piles.  259-262 

SXJNJSHANNAKA-CHANGERI  ©HRITA. 

Arkapushpi  (fennel -seeds),  Ball  (Sida  cordifolia),  T>lxbi.(Berberis 
Asiatica ),  Prisniparni  (Doodia  lagopodioides),  Trikantaka  (otherwise 
called  Gokshura,  i.  e.,  Tribttlus  lanuginosus ),  the  seeds  of  Nyagrodha 
176 


1408 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SA  M HIT  A. 


[ Ficus  Bedgalensis ),  of  Udurnvara  ( Ficus  glomerata ),  and  of  Aawattha 
[Ficus  religiosd),  the  measure  of  each  being  2  palas.  The  decoction  of 
these  is  taken.  To  it  is  added  the  paste  of  the  following,  vis., 

Jivanti  [Ccelogyne  ovalis),  Katurohini  [Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ),  Pippali 
(fruits  of  Piper  longtim),  Pippalimula  (the  roots  of  Piper  longuni), 
Nagara  (dry  ginger),*  Suradaru  ( Pinus  deodara),  Kalinga  (the  seeds 
of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica ),  the  flowers  of  £almali  ( Bombax  Mala- 
earicuvi),  Vira  (otherwise  called  Kshirakakoli,  i.  e.,  a  bulb  of  the  onion 
tribe),  Chandana  (red  sandal  wood),  Utpala  (flowers  of  Nymphcea 
stellatd),  Katphala  (fruits  of  Myrica  sapida ),  Chitraka  [Plumbago 
Zeylanica),  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundas),  Priyangu  [Aglaia 
Roxburghiana'),  Ativisha  [Acojiilum  heterophyllunp,  Sthirfi  (otherwise 
called  Sslaparni,  i.  e.,  Hedysarum  Gangeticurn),  the  filaments  of 
Padma  (lotus)  and  of  Utpala  [Nymphcea  stellata),  Samanga  [Mimosa 
pudica),  NidigdhikS  [Solanum  Xanthocarpuin),  Vilwa  [ZEgle  mar- 
melos),  Mocharasa  (exudation  of  Bombax  Malabaricuni),  and  Paths 
[Cissampelos  hernandifolia). 

Of  each  of  these  take  one  Karsha  (equal  to  z  tolas). 

Boiling  the  above  in  4  prasthas  (equal  to  8  seers,  r6  seers  being 
actually  taken),  of  water  down  to  one  prastha,  take  down  the  vessel. 

One  prastha  of  the  decoction  should  here  be  known  to  be  equal  to 
two  and  thirty  palas  [i.  e.,  4  seers).f 

Add  two  prasthas  of  the  expressed  juice  of  each  of  these,  viz., 
Sunishinnaka  [Marsilea  quadrifolia).  and  Changeri  [Oxalis  corniculata ). 

With  all  these,  taken  in  the  measures  directed,  one  prastha  of  ghee 
should  be  boiled.  (In  practice,  two  prasthas  are  taken). 

This  ghee,  which  improves  the  strength,  complexion,  and  digestive 
fire,  should  be  duly  administered  in  the  following  diseases,  viz..  Piles, 
diarrhoea,  discharge  of  blood  characterised  by  the  three  faults  excited 
together,  dysentery  (white  flux),  prolapsus  ano,  in  diverse  varieties  of 
sticky  and  slimy  dischargss,  in  copious  evacuations  of  liquid  stools, 


*  Gangadhara  reads  ‘maricha’,  meaning  black  pepper. — T. 

f  The  direction  in  the  text  is  that  the  drugs  named  should  be  boiled  in  4  prasthas  or 
8  seers  of  water.  In  practice,  8  prasthas  or  16  seers  of  water  are  taken.  This  should  be- 
boiled  down  to  ‘one  prastha’  says  the  text.  This  one  prastha,  the  text  adds,  is  equal  to- 
3a  tolas,  i.  c.,  4  seers.  In  other  words,  16  seers  of  water  are  boiled  down  to  a  fourth  of  the 
measure,.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Hog 

to  swellings  and  ‘£ula’  pains  in  the  anus,  in  suppression  of  urine,  in 
attacks  of  rheumatism  characterised  by  loss  of  touch,  in  loss  of  appe¬ 
tite,  and  in  disgust  for  food. 

This  ghee  may  be  taken  with  diverse  kinds  of  food  and  drink,  or  . 
by  itself  when  one  has  no  ailment.  263-271 

( Here  are  some  verses). 

The  physician  who,  always  keeping  an  eye  on  the  strength  (or 
otherwise)  of  the  digestive  fire,  administers  sweets  and  sours  as  also 
cooling  and  hot  remedies,  speedily  conquers  ailments  born  of  Piles, 
viz.,  Piles,  diarrhoea,  and  lienteric  dysentery, — three  diseases  which  are 
very  generally  the  causes  of  one  another.  272-273 

If  the  strength  of  the  digestive  fire  diminishes,  these  diseases  gain 
in  intensity.  If,  on- the  other  hand,  the  strength  of  the  digestive  fire 
increases,  the  intensity  of  these  diseases  diminishes.  Hence,  in  these 
three  diseases  the  strength  of  the  digestive  fire  should  especially  be 
kept  up.  274 

By  means  of  fried  potherbs,  by  gruels  of  different  kinds,  by  soups 
(of  different  pulses),  by  meat-juices,  by  ‘Kharas,’  and  by  applications, 
in  diverse  ways,  of  milk  and  whey,  the  physician  should  conquer  the 
ailments  of  the  anus.  275 

All  those  varieties  of  food  and  drink  which  restore  to  the  wind  its 
normal  course,  and  which  are  calculated  to  increase  the  strength  of 
the  digestive  fire,  should  be  taken  every  day  by  persons  afflicted 
with  Piles.  276 

All  those  things  that  are  the  reverse  of  the  above,  and  all  those 
which  have  been  mentioned  in  the  Division  called  NidSna  (as  deserv¬ 
ing  of  being  avoided),  should  never  be  indulged  in  by  one  who  is 
afflicted  with  Piles.  277 

{Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary.] 

The  two  originating  causes  of  Piles,  the  distinctive  ‘Nidfinas’  of 
each,  the  seat,  the  forms,  and  the  symptoms  of  the  disease,  -the  con¬ 
siderations  of  curability  and  incurability,  the  combinations  in  respect 
of  ointments,  fomentation,  fumigations,  baths,  plasters,  letting  out  of 


I4ICT 


CHAR  AKA -S AM HIT A.. 


blood',  kindling  the  digestive  fire;,  and  digestion'  of  the  faults,  the? 
best  rules  id  respect  of  food  and  drink,  the  methods  for  restoring  then 
wind  and  the-  stools  to  their  normal  course,  the  corribinations  for  alle¬ 
viation,  the-  divers  sorts  of  ghee,  the  different  kinds  of  enemata,  the 
different  combinations-  in  respect  of  whey,  the-  principal  ‘arishtas’’ 
(spirits)  with-  sugar,  the  means  by  which  dry  Piles  may  be  alleviated,, 
the  symptous  of  Piles  that  discharge  bloodi  the’ desirable  medicines- 
for  Piles  with  two- supervening  characteristics  (wkj.wind  and  phlegm),, 
decoctions  for  the  stoppage  of  blood,,  the  pastes  of  diverse  ingre¬ 
dients,  the  best  rules:  in-  respect  of  the  oils  add  ghees  to  be  drUnk,  as- 
also  of  food  and  drink,  the  methods  of  sprinkling,,  of  washing,  and  of 
plasters,  the  curatives  that  should  be  applied  after  stopping  copious- 
discharges  of  blood', — all  these  ways  of  treating.  Piles  have  been  laid 
down  in  this  Lessen..  l-1 

Thus  ends  Lesson  XIV,  called  Treatment  of  Piles,  in  the  Divi¬ 
sion  called'  Chikitsitam  of  the  Treatise  of  Agnive^a  as  revised  by 
Charakai 


LESSON  XV. 

TREATMENT  OF  DISEASES  OF  THE  GRAHANI. 

We  shall  rtow  expound  the  treatment  of  the  diseases  of  the 
Grahani.  Thus  said  the  illustrious  one  of  Atri’s  race.  1 

The  period  of  life,  complexion,  strength,  health,  exertion,  growth, 
lustre,  ojas,  energy,  animal  and  other  kinds  of  heat,  and  the  life- 
breaths,  have  all  been  said  to  have  the  digestive  fire  for  their  cause,  * 

When  this  fire  becomes  extinguished,  a  person  dies.  When  it 
burns  within  the  body,  one  lives  long  without  ailments  of  any  kind. 
When  it  becomes  vitiated,  one  becomes  afflicted  with  disease.  For 
these  reasons,  this  fire  is  said  to  be  the  root  (of  all).  $ 

That  food  nourishes  the  body,  the  ‘dhatus,’  the  ‘ojas,’  the  strength, 
the  complexion,  &c.,  is  due  to  fire  as  the  operating  cause,  since 
from  food  that  is  not  digested,  ‘Rasa’  and  the  other  ingredients  never 
arise.  4 

It  is  the  life-breath  called'  Prana  that  seizes  food  (and  drink).  Tt 
then  sends  that  food  (and  drink)  to  the  stomach.  When  there,  the 
solidity  of  what  is  thus  taken  is.  dissolved  by  liquid  juices.  It  is  then 
softened  by  oily  matters.  5; 

Then,  in  time,  the  fire,  blown  upon  by  the  life-breath  called! 
,Samana’  blazes  forth  and  digests  the  food  that  has  been  taken, 
equally  and  properly.  The  result  of  this  is  the  Continuation  of  the 
period  of  life.  6 

The  (digestive)  fire,  remaining  below,  cooks  (digests)  the  food 
In  the  stomach,  converting  it  into  ‘Rasa’  and  refuse,  even  as  (exter¬ 
nal)  fire  and  water  cook  grains  of  rice  in  a  vessel,  for  purposes  of 
food.*  1 

When  digestion  begins  of  the  food,  consisting  of  the  six  tastes, 
which  is  just  swallowed,  from  the  condition  called  sweet,  springs,  at 


*  The  example  cited  is  well-adapted.  External  fire  and  'water  cook  rice  grains  in  a 
vessel  for  purposes  of  food.  Even  so  the  digestive  fire,  with  the  aid  of  the  liquid  phlegm, 
cooks  or  digests  the  food  in  the  stomach.  The  stomach  is  always  spoken  of  as  a  vessel.— T. 


14X2 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


the  outset,  that  which  is  called  'phlegm’  and  which  has  the  form  of 
froth.*  8 

A  little  while  after,  the  food,  when  it  becomes  only  half-digested 
in'  course  of  digestion,  a  condition  of  sourness  arises.  The  food,  in 
this  state,  passes  out  of  what  is  called  the  ‘AmSgaya’  into  what  is 
called  the  ‘Pakkagaya.’  Then  springs  from  it  a  liquid  substance 
called  ‘Bile.’  9 

When  food  passes  into  the  ‘Pakkagaya,’  it  begins  to  be  dried  up 
by  the  fire.  Cooked  by  the  fire,  it  is  converted  into  a  sodden  mass. 
From  its  condition  of  pungency  arises  the  wind. 

Agreeable  food,  endued  with  agreeable  scent  and  the  rest,  when 
eaten  (and  digested),  gratifies  (enlivens)  scent  and  the  rest,  ‘Prana’ 
and  the  other  life-breaths,  and  the  organs  of  sense  also  in  the  body, 
separately.!  11 

Since  the  five  heats,  viz.,  that  appertaining  to  earth,  that  to  water, 
that  to  fire,  that  to  air,  and  that  to  ether,  digest  earth  and  the  other 
properties,  respectively,  numbering  five,  of  the  food  eaten,  12 

Therefore,  the  material  properties  in  the  body  (that  is,  those  that 
relate  to  the  five  material  substances  already  named)  are  nourished, 
respectively,  by  their  correlative  elements. 

The  earthy  properties  (in  food)  nourish  the  earthy  elements  in  the 
body.  The  rest  nourish  the  rest,  in  detail.  *3 

They  who  sustain  the  body,  viz.,  the  ‘dhatus’  (i.  e.,  ‘Rasa’  or  juice, 
blood,  flesh,  adeps,  marrow,  bones,  and  vital  seed),  are  cooked  by 
their  seven  respective  fires. 


*  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  there  are,  in  all,  six  tastes.  These  six  are  principal 
classes  within  which  all  the  tastes  may  be  included.  Every  kind  of  food  may  not  have  all 
the  six  tastes.  But  food,  in  general,  is  described  as  possessing  the  six  tastes.  When  digest¬ 
ion  begins  with  the  help  of  the  fire  in  the  stomach,  a  frothy  substance  arises  that  is  called 
phlegm.  This,  according  to  the  Rishi,  is  due  to  the  action  of  the  taste  that  is  sweet.— T. 

-j-  ‘Upakrita’  is  taken  by  Gangadhara  as  ‘bhuktam’  or  eaten.  ‘Yuktam’  is  understood 
after  ‘Gandhadibhih’.  ‘Prithak’  qualifies  ‘Prinati’.  ‘Prana’  and  the  rest,  meaning  all  the 
five  life-breaths,  as  also  ‘indriyani’,  that  is,  the  organs  of  sense,  of  course  exist  in  the  body. 
What  is  meant  by  ‘Gandhadini’,  i.  e.,  ‘scent  and  the  rest’,  as  existing  in  the  body,  is  not  so 
clear.  It  is  explained  lower  down  in  the  text.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


H  H 


.  This  process  of  cooking  which  they  undergo  is  of  two  kinds  in 
consequence  of  the  ‘Kitta’  (refuse)  and  the  ‘Prasada’  (pure  substance) 
Which  results  from  it.* * * §  14 

From  ‘Rasa’  (juice)  arises  blood  ;  from  blood  is  flesh  ;  from  flesh 
is  adeps  ;  from  adeps  is  bone  ;  from  bone  is  marrow  ;  from  marrow 
is  vital  seed  :  from  the  vital  seed  arises  the  fcetus.  rS 

As  regards  women,  from  ‘Rasa’  are  both  milk  and  blood  ;  from 
blood  are  ducts  large  and  small ;  from  flesh  is  fat  or  adeps  and  six 
varieties  of  skin  ;  and  from  adeps  is  the  origin  of  the  tendons  and 
muscles.f  *6 

The  above  are  the  transformations  of  ‘Prasada.’  That  which  Is 
called  the  ‘Kitta’  (refuse)  of  the  food  taken,  consists  of  stools  and 
urine  ;  the  ‘Kitta’  of  ‘Rasa  is  phlegm  ;  that  of  blood  is  bile  ;  that  of 
flesh  are  the  filths  of  the  body,  including  the  secretions  (from  the 
nose,  the  ears,  &c.) ;  while  sweet  forms  the  ‘Kitta’  of  adeps,  I7 

The  ‘Kitta’  of  bones  is  hair  (of  the  head  and  the  body)  ;  that  of 
marrow  is  the  oily -substance  in  the  body  ;  that  of  the  skin  is  the 
secretions  flowing  from  the  eyes. 

From  digestion  (of  the  food  eaten)  thus  arise,  it  is  said,  both 
‘Prasfida’  and  ‘Kitta’  of  the  ‘Dhatus.’J  18 

‘Prasada’  and  ‘Kitta,’  In  consequence  of  being  the  supports  of  each 
other,  sustain  each  other  in  the  body. 

Those  articles  (of  food  and  drink)  which  are  classed  as  ‘Vrishya’ 
and  the  rest,  (if  taken),  speedily  increase  strength.§  19 


*  This  sudden  mention  of  seven  fires  after  having  numbered  them  as  Jive,  requires  ex' 
planation.  The  fact  fs,  as  there  are  seven  ‘dh5tusr,  and  as  those  seven  derive  nourishment 
from  the  food  eaten,  there  must  be  seven  fires  to  cook  the  food  into  seven  substances,  food 
itself  containing  seven  elements  corresponding  with  or  capable  of  nourishing  the  seven 
‘dhatus’. — T. 

f  The  growth  of  the  ‘dhatus’,  as  explained  in  15,  is  true  in  the  case  of  both  males  and 
females.  In  the  case  of  the  latter,  something  especial  happens  ;  that  is  stated  in  16.  Thus 
from  blood,  besides  jlesh,  are  the  ducts  •,  &c.,  &c. — T. 

+  From  digestion  of  the  food  eaten  are  the  ‘Dhatus,’  vis.,  juice,  blood,  &c.  The 
‘Dhatus’  have  both  ‘Prasada’  (which  aids  them  in  their  growth)  and  ‘Kitta.’  The  ‘Kitta’ 
or  refuse  of  each  of  the  ‘Dhatus’  has  been  mentioned  in  detail. — T. 

§  Those  drugs  and  articles  of  food  which  promote  nutrition  are  called  ‘Vrishyas.’  They 
include  ‘Jivaniya,’  ‘Vringhaniya’,  and.  the  other  groups. — T. 


*4M 


charaka-samhjta. 


Some  are  of  opinion  that  the  transformation  (of  one  'dhStu'  into 
another)  takes  place  in  six  days  and  nights.  Of  food  and  the  ‘dbitus’ 
this  transformation  goes  on  eternally  like  (the  motion  of)  a  wheel.#  20 
Unto  the  preceptor  who  said  so,  the  disciple  (Agnivega)  said,— 
How  does  blood  arise  from  ‘Rasa’  (juice  into  which  food  is  con¬ 
verted)  that  Is  dissimilar  (to  blood)  ?  21 

Then,  again,  of  ‘Rasa’  there  is  no  colour.  How  is  it  that  it  as¬ 
sumes  redness  (when  it  Is  transformed  into  blood)  ? 

From  the  blood,  again,  of  human  beings,  which  is  a  liquid  sub¬ 
stance,  how  does  flesh,  which  is  solid,  arise  ?  22 

How,  again,  from  flesh  which  Is  solid  and  which  arises  from  a 
liquid  substance,  does  fat  arise  (which  Is  also  white)  ?f 

How  is  It  that  from  flesh  and  fat,  which  are  soft,  bones  arise  which 
■are  so  hard  ?  23 

How  also  in  bones  that  are  hard  does  marrow  originate  which  Is 
•oily  and  soft  ? 

:If  the  vital  seed  springs  from  the  transformation  of  marrow,  24 

it  should  be  remembered  that  this  is  inconsistent  with  what  the 
•wise  say,  vis.,  that  the  vital  seed  has  the  whole  body  for  Its  seat. 

Then,  again,  the  vital  seed  of  embodied  persons  Is  (said  to  be) 
■within  the  marrow  (which  itself  is  within  the  bones)  :  25 

No -holes  are  visible  in  bones.  How  then  does  the  vita!  seed 
<Moome  out? 

Thus  addressed  by  the  disciple,  the  preceptor -replied,  26 

Through  that  which  is  called  the  ‘Tejas’ (energy)  of  the  juicy 
'matter  (arising  from  food)  of  all  human  heings,  and  the  redness  of  the 
Ibile-heat,  ‘Rasa1  becomes  transformed  into  red  blood,J  £7 


*  The  reference  to  the  motion  of  a  wheel  implies'that  the  process  goes  on  eternally, 
sso  that  transformation  of  one  ‘dhStu’  into  another  does  not  extinguish  the  transformed 
■*dh5tu,J  for  there  is  a  constant  snpply.— ' T. 

IT  I  adopt  the  reading  of  Gangadhara.  The  patt  within  parentheses  is  taken  from -t  he 
'  Calcutta  edition.  — T. 

hf  This  professes  to  be  the  answer  to  the  first  question  Of  Agniveja.  There  is  some  error 
Ha1  the  language,  although  the  reading  of  all  the  editions  is  exactly  the  same.  In  fact,  the 


CHARAKA-SA  MBIT  A. 


*4*$ 


By  the  energy  of  air  and  water,  mingling  with  heat,  the  blood, 
■attaining  to  solidity,  is  transformed  into  flesh. 

The  flesh,  again,  becomes  cooked  ‘by  its  own  heat.  28 

Becoming  oily  and  distinct  through  its  own  energy  and  the  .virtue 
■of  water,  the  flesh  is  transformed  into  fat. 

The  solidification  of  earth,  fire,  air,  and  the  rest,  brought  about 
'by  the  heat  of  fat,  causes  its  hardness.  From  this  are  born  the  bones 
•df  human  beings. 

The  wind  causes  perforations  (hollows)  lin  the  bones.  29-30 

The  hollows  of  the  bones  are  filled  up  with  fat. 

It  is  this  oily  matter  {viz.,  fat)  from  which  marrow  is  begot. v. 

From  the  oily  matter  proceeding  from  the  marrow  is  born  the 
wital  seed.  31 

From  the  condition  ©f  there  being  air  and  ether  and  the  rest, 
(perforations  take  place  in  the  bones.  Through  those  perforations 
the  vital  seed  is  emitted,  like  water  through  a  new  earthen  rjar.  32 

Impelled  by  joy  (transports  of  delight)  and  obtaining  an  impetus 
from  lustful  desire  born  in  the  mind,  the  vital  seed,  collected  (together, 
and  borne  through  the  seed-bearing  ducts,  escapes  from  the  body.  33 

Melting  like  gkee  through  the  heat  caused  by  exertion  (of  sexual 
■congress),  and  falling  from  its  own  place,  it  becomes  collected  in  the 
region  about  the  testicles.  Whence  it  escapes  .like  water  from  a 
■higher  to  a  lower  .place,  34 

The  ‘dhatu’  called  ‘Rasa’  (that  is,  the  juicy  matter  into  which  food 
iis  first  converted)  is  continuously  diffused  through  every  part  of  the 
■body  simultaneously,  by  the  life-breath  called  ‘Vyana’  whose  function 
■it  is  to  diffuse.  35 

If  in  .consequence  df  the  "fault  of  ether  (z.  e.,  the  hollo ws  of  the 
■ducts),  ‘Rasa,’  while  it  is  being  diffused  (by  the  life-breath  called 


■verse;  is  ungrammatical.  The  sense  of  ■  the  first  line  is  not  completed  in  the  second.  The 
explanation  which  Gangadhara  gives  is  utterly  unintelligible.  The  Bengali  translators  also 
■skip  the  difficulty.  The  version  I  give  is  a  tentative  one. — T. 


j  79 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1416 

‘Vyana’),  becomes  immovable  (i.  <?.,  adherent),  it  causes  diverse 
diseases,  like  clouds  (when  they  mass  together  in  the  welkin  owing 
to  some  obstruction)  causing  downpours  below.  36 

Even  this  is  what  happens  in  respect  of  faults  when  they  become 
immovable  (or  adherent)  in  a  particular  place  ;  that  is,,  they  become 
excited  and  cause  diverse  diseases. 

Thus  has  been  laid  down  the  functions  of  the  several  kinds  of 
heat  which  cook  the  ‘dhatus’  appertaining  to  earth  and  the  other 
primal  elements,  as  also  the  food  that  is  eaten.*  37 

That  heat  which  cooks  (digests)  the  food  eaten  is  the  prince  of  all 
heats  whose  function  is  cooking.  Indeed,  all  the  other  heats  have 
the  food-cooking  heat  for  their  root.  Their  increase  or  decrease 
depends  on  its  increase  or  decrease.  38 

Hence  one  should  heedfully  maintain  (keep  up)  that  heat  with  the 
fuel  of  well-combined  and  beneficial  food  and  drink  ;  since  upon 
that  heat  being  kept  up,  the  period  of  life  and  strength  are  kept 
up.  39 

That  person  who,  through  temptation,  stuffs  his  stomach  with 
food,  disregarding  the  ordinances  in  that  respect,  gets  all  those 
diseases  which  are  born  of  the  vitiation  of  the  ‘Grahani.’  Those 
diseases  are  spoken  of  below.  4° 

From  abstention  from  all  food,  from  eating  food  that  is  indigest¬ 
ible,  from  eating  to  excess,  from  eating  food  consisting  of  inhar¬ 
monious  ingredients,  from  eating  food  that  is  not  assimilable,  or  is 
heavy,  or  cold,  or  excessively  dry  (unoily),  or  vitiated,  from  errors  in 
the  administration  of  purgatives,  emetics,  and  oils,  from  affliction  (t.  e., 
weakness,  emaciation,  &c.,)  by  diseases,  from  absence  of  harmony  in 
respect  of  place  (habitat),  time  (age),  and  season,  from  suppression  of 
the  urgings  (of  nature),  the  (digestive)  fire  is  vitiated.  The  vitiated 
fire  cannot  digest  food  that  is  even  light.  The  food,  again,  that  is 
not  digested,  causes  acidity  and  even  becomes  poison.  4i-43 

The  following  are  the  symptoms  of  indigestion  (of  the  food  taken): 
flatulence  of  the  stomach,  langour  of  the  body,  headache,  swoons, 


*  GangSdhara  explains  the  compound  as  ‘bhautikSnSm  dh5tun5m  annanancha  paktSra 
ye  agnayab,’  i,  e.,  those  heats  which  are  cookers  of  ‘bhautika  dhStus’  and  of  ‘anna.’ — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


*4i  7 


vertigo,  pains  in  the  back  and  the  waist,  yawns,  lassitude  of  the 
limbs,  thirst,  fever,  vomiting,  dysentery  (white  flux),  disgust  for  food, 
and  absence  of  transformation  into  healthy  stools. 

The  food  in  the  stomach  that  is  not  digested  is  a  terrible' 
poison.  44-45 

Combining  with  excited  bile,  this  undigested  food,  which  becomes 
poison,  produces  burning  of  the  skin,  thirst,  diseases  of  the  mouth, 
sour  bile,  and  other  ailments  born  of  (excited  bile).  46 

Combining  with  (excited)  phlegm,  it  produces  phthisis*  inflam¬ 
mation  of  the  Schneiderian  membrane,  gonorrhcea,  and  other  dieases 
born  of  (excited  phlegm). 

Combining  with  the  (excited)  wind,  it  producs  diverse  diseases 
that  are  born  of  the  (excited)  wind.  47 

When  it  goes  into  the  urine,  that  poison  causes  diseases  of  the 
urine..  When  it  goes  into  the  stools,-  it.  causes  diseases  of  the 
abdomen.  When  combined  with  ‘Rasa'  and  the  rest,  it  produces 
diverse  diseases  born  of  ‘Rasa’  and  the  rest.  48 

When  the  digestive  fire  becomes  unequal  (as  regards  its  force  or 
energy),  it  unequally  cooks  the  food  taken  and  produces  inequality 
between  the  ‘dhatus.’* 

If,  when  its  force  or  energy  is  great,  it  does  not  get  sufficient  fuel 
(in  the  shape  of  food  and  drink),  it  consumes  the  ‘dhatus/  49 

The  fire,  which  is  normal,  of  a  person  who  eats  judiciously, 
equally  cooking  the  food  that  is  eaten,  causes  harmony  of  the 
‘dhatus.’* 

The  fire  that  is  weak  simply  scorches  the  food  taken.  Such  food 
(instead  of  contributing  to  the  growth  or  harmony  of  the  ‘dhatus’) 
issues  out  of  the  body  in  an  upward  or  a  downward  course.  5° 

The  scorched  food,  mature  or  immature,  that  finds  a  downward 
outlet,  is  called  ‘Grahani-disease.’ 


*  That  is,  destroys  that  harmony  between  the  ‘dh5tus’  upon  which  rests  health. 
‘DhStus’  include  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm,— T. 


CHAR  A  K ASA  MBIT  A. 


?4'i8 

Whatever  food  a  person  afflicted  with  ‘Grahani-disease’  takes- 
becomes  very  generally  scorched  (without  being  digested).  5i 

The  scorched  food  is  ejected  by  the  person  in  a  liquid^  form'  either 
frequently  or  at  intervals.  Afflicted'  with  thirst,  disgust  for  food, 
tastelessness  of  the  mouth,  copious  salivation,  and  that  variety  of 
asthma  which  is  called  ‘Tamaka,’  the' person  gets  swelling  in  the 
hands  and  the  feet,  with  pains  in  the  bones  and  the  joints,  vomiting,, 
fever,  and  eructations  with  the  smell  of  blood  and  characterised  by  a 
bitter  and  acrid  taste  52-53 

The  premonitory  symptoms  of  ‘Grahani-disease’  are, — 

Thirst,  sloth,  loss  of  stength;  scorching  (without  digestion)  of  the' 
food  that  is  eaten,  or  digestion  after  a  long  time  and  heaviness  of  the 
body.  54 

The'  duct  called  ‘Grahani’  is  the  seat  of  the  digestive  fire,  and 
because-  ft  takes  the  food  that  is  eaten,  therefore  is  it  called  ‘Grahani.’ 
(taker). 

It  is'  placed  above  the  (region  of  the)  navel.  According  to  the 
strength  (or  weakness)  of  the  (digestive)  fire,  it  becomes  extended  or 
contracted.  55 

It  holds  the  food  in  its  undigested  state.  After'  digestion',  it  lets- 
out  the  digested  food  through  its*  lower  opening. 

When  the  digestive  fire  is  weak,  the  ‘Grahani’  becomes  vitiated, 
ft  then  discharges  only  undigested  food  (called  Ama):  55 

From  (excited)  wind*,  (excited)  bile-,  and  (excited)  phlegm,,  as  also’ 
from  the  three  excited*  together,  springs  disease  of  the  ‘Grahani.’ 

Listen  now  to  the  causes,  the  symptoms,  and  the  treatment  of 
that  disease,  expounded,  under  separate  heads,  57 

From  food  that  is  astringent  in  taste,  or  pungent,  or  bitter,  or  that 
fs  excessively  dry  (unoily),  or  cold  or  that  is  scanty  (inadequate),, 
or  that  is  taken  at  improper  time,*  from  total  abstention  from  food, 
from  walking  long  distances,  from  suppression  of  the  urgings  of 


*  ‘PramritS.’  is,  it  seems,  the  correct  reading,  and  not  ‘Pramita’  Which  would-  imply  a1 
repetition.  'Pramrita Qana’  would  imply  ‘atitalcjUabhojanani.’ — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


r45!9' 


nature,  from'  sexual  congress,  the  wind,  becoming,  excited^  wraps  up' 
the  digestive  fire  and  causes  different  ailments;. 

The  food  (taken  by  one  exposed  to  such  influences)  is  digested 
with  difficulty.  This  results  in.  acidity  and  pungency.  58-59 

'  Dryness  of  the  throat  and  of  the  mouth,  hunger  and  thirst,  sight 
of  darkness  (i.  ft,  weakness  of  vision),,  noise  in  the  ears,  constant  pains, 
in  the  flanks,  the'  thighs,  the  groins,  and  the  neck,  loose  motions  and 
vomiting  with  pains  like  to  those  caused  by  needles,  pains  in  the 
chest,  emaciation,,  weakness,  tastelessness  of  the  mouth,  cutting  pains, 
in  the  anus,  and  a  longing  for  food  and  drink  of  all  tastes,  eheerless- 
ness  of  the  mind, — these  are  the  symptoms  of  ‘Grahani-disease’  caused 
by  excited  wind. 

In  this  disease,  when  the  food  taken  is  being  digested)  or  after 
it  has  been  digested,  there  is-  flatulence  of  the  stomach.  As  soon  as 
something  is  eaten,  the  patient  feels  ease; 

The  patient  thinks  that  he  has.  got  wind-born  abdominal  tumour,, 
or  disease  of  the  chest,  or  enlargement  of  the  spleen.  60-62 

Afflicted  with  asthma  and  cough  through  excitement  of  the  wind, 
the  person  repeatedly,  and  with  great  pain,  evacuates  stools  that  are 
sometimes  watery,  sometimes  dry,  sometimes  scanty,,  sometimes  con¬ 
sisting  of  undigested  matter,  and  frothy,  the  down  ward  wind  making 
loud  noise  at  the  time.  63 

The  bile  becomes  excited  in  consequence  of  food  that  Is  pungent, 
or  that  is  difficult  of  digestion,  or  that  causes  a  burning  sensation  in 
the  stomach,  or  that  consists  of  alkaline  ashes,  and  the  like.  It  then 
covers  the  digestive  fire  and  extinguishes  It,  like  hot  water  extin¬ 
guishing  a  blazing  fire.*  64 

The  person  whose  digestive  fire  has  been  extinguished  by  bile 
assumes  a  yellow  complexion  and  evacuates  liquid  stools  that  consist 
of  undigested  matter  and  are  of  blue  and  yellow  colour. 


*  Hot  water,  poured  over  a  fire,  extinguishes  it  instead  of  adding  to  its  intensity  by  its 
own  heat.  Even  so  the  bile,  which  is  known  to  be  hot,  coming  over  the  digestive  fire, 
quenches  it,  owing  to  its  being  a  liquid,  without  adding  to  its  intensity. — T. 


1420 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


He  is,  again,  afflicted  by  eructations  that  are  Of  a  foetid  smell 
and  characterised  by  acidity,  as  also  by  burning  of  the  chest  and 
the  throat,  by  disgust  for  food,  and  by  thirst.  6S 

Through  food  that  is  heavy,  or  excessively  oily,  or  cold,  or  the 
like,  and  through  indulgence  in  sleep  immediately  after  one  has 
taken  one’s  meals,  the  phlegm,  becoming  excited,  extinguishes  that 
fire.  66 

The  food  eaten  by  such  a  person  is  digested  with  great  difficulty. 
Hiccup,  vomiting,  disgust  for  food,  a  sensation  of  the  mouth  being 
overlaid  by  a  coating  of  phleghmonous  matter,  a  taste  of  sweetness, 
cough,  spitting,  and  inflammation  of  the  Schneiderian  membrane,  are 
the  symptoms  that  manifest  themselves.  67 

The  (interior  of  the)  chest  is  felt  to.  be  laved  with  some  thick 
liquid  substance. 

The  stomach  is  felt  to  be  paralysed  and  heavy. 

The  eructations  are  of  a  foetid  smell  and  sweet  taste. 

The  heart  is  cheerless,  and  no  pleasure  is  felt  in  the  companion¬ 
ship  of  or  congress  with  women.  68 

The  stools  evacuated  are  broken,  and  heavy,  and  consist  largely 
of  undigested  matter  and  mucus. 

The  patient,  even  if  not  emaciated,  feels  weakness  and  latigour. 

Even  this  is  what  happens  in  ‘Grahani-disease’  born  of  excited 
phlegm.  69 

In  the  Division  called  ‘Vimana’  and  the  Lesson  called  ‘Roganika,’ 
four  kinds  of  digestive  fire  have  been  mentioned.  Excepting  that  fire 
which  is  called  ‘Sama,’  the  three  others,  (vis.,  ‘Vishama,’  ‘Tikshna/ 
and  ‘Manda),’  are,  the  Rishis  say,  called  ‘Grahani-faults.’  7° 

When  the  causes  and  the  symptoms  set  forth  separately  of 
‘Grahani-disease’  characterised  by  (excited)  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm, 
are  seen  in  a  state  of  combi'nation,  the  disease  should  be  regarded  as 
characterised  by  all  the  three  faults  excited  simultaneously. 

I  shall  now  lay  down  the  medicines  (prescribable  in  this  disease).  7i 

One,  whose  ‘Grahani’  has  become  the  seat  of  excited  faults,  who 
has  been  stupified  by  scorched  (half-digested)  food  in  his  stomach, 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


1421 


and  who  manifests  flatulence,  excessive  salivation,  sensation  of  un¬ 
easiness,  burning  sensation  (in  the  stomach),  disgust  for  food,  and 
heaviness  of  the  body,  which  are  indications  of  indigestion  of  the 
food  taken,  should  be  made  to  vomit  by  means  of  water  agreeably 
hot,  or  by  the  decoction  of  the  seeds  of  Madana  (Randia  dumetoruni) 
mixed  with  the  paste  of  Pippali  (fruits  of  Piper  longuni)  and  Sarshapa 
(mustard  seeds).  72-73 

If  undigested  food  adheres  to  the  ‘Pakkagaya’  (that  part  of  the 
stomach  where  digestion  takes  place),  it  should  be  expelled  by  such 
drugs  as  are  called  ‘Dipana.’* 

When  the  ‘ama  Rasa’  (2.  <?.,  the  undigested  juice  of  the  food  taken) 
spreads  over  the  whole  body,  fasting  and  the  administration  of 
‘Pachana’  (2.  *.,  drugs  which  assist  in  digesting  undigested  food,  with¬ 
out  increasing  the  appetite)  are  prescribable.  74 

When  the  ‘Amfigaya’  (that  part  of  the  stomach  into  which  the 
food  eaten  goes  first)  has  been  properly  corrected,  unto  the  patient 
should  then  be  given  ‘peyft’  obtained  from  boiling  the  five  ‘Kolas,’ 
light  diet,  and  also  drugs  that  are  called  ‘Dipanas.’f  75 

Ascertaining  that  the  ‘ama’  of  the  person  suffering  from  wind- 
born  ‘Grahani-disease’  has  been  digested,  the  physician  should  cause 
him  to  drink,  in  little  measures,  ghee  mixed  with  ‘Dipana’  drugs.  76 

When  the  (digestive)  fire  (by  this  means)  has  been  kindled  in 
some  measure,  and  when  the  patient’s  stools  and  urine  and  wind  have 
become  adherent  (i.  e.,  there  is  no  longer  looseness  of  the  bowels),  he 
should  for  two  or  three  days  be  treated  with  oils  and  ‘sweda’  (fomen¬ 
tation  for  causing  perspiration)  and  should  also  be  rubbed  with 
medicated  ointments  ;  after  this,  dry  enemata  should  be  administered 
unto  him  (for  moving  his  bowels),  77 

When  the  wind  has  been  allayed  (by  dry  enemata),  and  the 
patient’s  fault  has  has  been  dislodged  from  the  place  where  it  was 


*  Drugs  that  increase  the  appetite  without  aiding  digestion  of  undigested  food,  are 
called  ‘Dipana’  or  ‘Dipaniya.’ — T. 

f  The  five  ‘Kolas’  are  Piper  longum,  the  roots  of  the  same,  Piper  Chaba,  Plumbago 
Zeylanica,  and  dry  ginger. — T. 


1422 


CHAR  A  KA -SAM HI  T A. 


adherent,  he  should  be  purged  with  castor-oil  mixed  with  alkaline 
ashes,  or  with  ghee,  or  with  sesame  oil,  each  mixed  therewith.  78 

When  it  has  been  ascertained  that  thus  purged  the  patient’s 
stomach  has  become  completely  dry,  the  physician  should  administer 
tianto  him  oily  enemata  by  using  a  proper  measure  of  oil  that  has  been 
boiled  with  ‘Dipaniya’  drugs,  and  drugs  that  are  of  sour  taste,  and 
those  that  are  alleviative  of  the  wind.  79 

One  who  has  been  treated  with  dry  enemata,  who  has  been 
purged,  who  has  been  sufficiently  treated  with  oily  enemata,  and 
unto  whom  light  food  has  been  given,  should  be  made  to  drink 
ghee .  8o 


DAQAMULYADYA  GHRITAJM. 

The  two  groups  of  five  roots  (.viz.,  the  group  of  the  smaller  five 
and  that  of  the  larger  five),  Sarala  {Pinus  longif  olid) ,  Devadfiru  ( Pinus 
deodard),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  Pippali  (fruits  of  Piper  longuvi),  Pip- 
palimula  (the  roots  of  Piper  longum),  Chitraka  (. Plumbago  Zeylanica ) 
Hastipippali  ( Pothos  officinalis ),  the  seeds  of  £ana  (Indian  hemp), 
Yava  (barley),  Kola  (jujubes),  Kulattha  {JDolichos  biflorus),  and 
'Sushavi  (otherwise  called  Krishnajiraka,  the  seeds  of  Nigella  sativa). 

These  are  cooked  with  ‘aranala’  (Kfinji),  or  curds,  or  ‘Sauvirakal’ 
wine.*  81-82 

When  "the  liquid  has  been  boiled  down  to  a  fourth  of  its  measure, 
lan  ‘fidhaka’  (8  seers)  of  ghee  should  be  boiled  with  it.  (In  practice, 
a  6  seers  of  ghee  are  taken). 

When  the  cooking  is  over,  the  ghee  should  be  strained  through  a 
■piece  of  cloth,  and  ‘Sarjjikshara’  (carbonate  of  soda)  and  ‘Yava- 
'ksh&ra’  (ashes  of  green  barley  Shoots)  are  added  to  it  in  proper 
^measure.  83 

Into  the  ghee  should  then  be  thrown  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  ‘Audbhida1 
salt,  ‘Samudra’  -salt,  ‘Vit’  salt,  ‘Raumaka’  salt,  ‘Sauvardhala’  salt,  and 
‘‘Pakya’  salt,  the  measure  of  each  being  2  palas.  84 

These  are  reduced  to  pulv  and  then  thrown  into  the  ghee. 


measure  ef  each  should  be  four  dronas,  a  drona  being  equal  to  64  seers. — T. 


*  The 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


H23 

Taking  a  ‘prasrita’  (2  palas)  from  the  ghee,  the  physician  endued 
with  wisdom  should  cause  the  patient  to  drink  it  every  day.  This  ghee 
strengthens  the  digestive  fire,  improves  the  complexion,  alleviates  the 
wind,  and  digests  the  food  taken.  s5 

TRYUSHANADYA  GHRITA. 

The  paste  of  ‘Tryushana’  (the  three  acrids,  viz.,  dry  ginger,  Piper 
longum  and  black  pepper)  and  ‘Triphals’  (the  three  myrobalans,  viz., 
Chebulic,  Emblic,  and  Belleric),  measuring  x  pala,*  and  1  pala  of  raw 
sugar,  and  8  palas  of  ghee  (with  32  palas  of  water)  are  boiled.  A 
proper  measure  of  this  ghee  should  be  drunk  by  one  whose  digestive 
fire  has  been  weakened.  86 

PANCHAMULADYA  GHRITA  AND  CHURNA. 

The  group  of  five  roots,  AbhayS  (Chebulic  myrobalans),  Ajaji  (the 
seeds  of  Nigella  Sativa),  Pippalimula  (the  roots  of  Piper  longum), 
‘Saindhava’  salt,  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes ),  Tryushana  (the  three 
acrids),  (^athi  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet)  Rasna  (Vanda  Roxburghii ),  and 
the  two  Ksharas  (viz.,  Sarjjikshara,  i.  e.,  carbonate  of  soda,  and 
Yavakshara,  i.  e.,  the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots) : 

With  the  paste  of  these  (of  measure  equal  to  a  fourth  of  that  of 
the  ghee),  should  ghee  be  cooked,  adding  ‘£ukta’  (the  sour  juice  of 
pomegranates  and  the  rest),  the  expressed  juice  of  Matulunga  ( Citrus 
acida ),  and  the  expressed  juice  of  raw  ginger,  (the  measure  of  each  of 
these  three  being  equal  to  that  of  the  ghee). 

Add  the  decoction  of  dried  radishes,  Kola  (jujubes),  Amvu  (other¬ 
wise  called  Bfila,  i.  e.,  Pavonia  odorata),  Chukrika  (otherwise  called 
Changeri,  i.  e.,  Oxalis  corniculata ),  and  Dadima  (Punica  granatum,  its 
bark  being  taken).  The  measure  of  the  decoction  is  equal  to  that  of 
•the  ghee. 

Add  Takra  (whey),  Mastu  (the  cream  of  curds),  SurSmanda  (the 
yeast  of  wine),  Sauviraka  (a  variety  of  wine),  Tushodaka  (a  variety 
of  KSnji),  as  also  Kanjika,  the  measure  of  each  being  equal  to  that  of 
the  ghee. 


*  The  six  are  taken  together  and  reduced  to  paste.  Of  this  paste,  1  pala  is  taken. — T. 
I.80 


T42-4 


CBARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Boil  all  these  together.  The  ghee ,  thus  prepared,  is  a  strong 
kindler  of  the  digestive  fire.*  s7-g9 

‘£ula’  pains,  abdominal  tumours,  abdominal  dropsy,  asthma, 
cough,  (excited)  wind,  and  (excited)  phlegm, — these  are  cured  by 
this  ghee. 

This  ghee ,  may  also  be  administered  after  boiling  it  with  the  ex¬ 
pressed  juice  of  Vijapuraka  (a  variety  of  Citrus  medica,  called  ‘Tabs’ 
in  Bengali).  9° 

Oil  also,  boiled  with  the  paste  and  the  expressed  juice,  &c.,  of  the 
drugs  mentioned  above,  or  boiled  with  the  same  and  the  expressed 
juice  of  Vijapuraka  ( Citrus  acida  of  the  variety  called  Taba),  may  be 
used  for  rubbing  the  patient’s  body  with. 

Or,  the  pulv  of  the  drugs  mentioned  above  may  be  drunk  mixed 
with  water  agreeably  h®t.f  9* 

When  overwhelmed  by  wind  and  phlegm,  or  by  phlegm  with  the 
wind  excited  in  predominance,  or  when  there  is  ‘Sma’  (undigested 
food)  in  the  stomach,  the  pulv  spoken  of  above  should  be  adminis¬ 
tered  for  the  digestion  of  those  faults  and  of  the  ‘Sma,’  inasmuch  as 
this  pulv  is  a  strong  kindler  of  the  digestive  fire.  9® 

Stools  consisting  of  ‘Sma,’  being  heavy,  sink  in  water.  Those  that 
are  mature  float,  if  they  be  neither  very  watery,  nor  very  consistent, 
nor  cold,  uor  vitiated  by  phlegm.  93 

Examining  first  the  patient  afflicted  for  ascertaining  whether  his 
stools  are  or  are  not  characterised  by  -.‘ama,’  he  should  be  duly  treated 
with  ‘Pachana’  (drugs  that  aid  digestion  without  increasing  the 
appetite)  or  with  other  drugs.  94 

CHITRAKADYA  GUDIKA. 

Chitraka  .  {Plumbago  Zeylanica. ),  Pippalimula  (roots  of  Peper 
iongum ),  the  two  Ksharas  {viz.,  Sarjjikshara  or  carbonate  of  soda,  and 


*  The  measures  stated  here  have  been  taken  from  Gangadhara.— T. 
t  Only  those  drugs  that  may  be  reduced  to  pulv  should  be  taken,  and  not  those  whose 
expressed  juices  have  been  directed  to  be  added,— T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


*425 

Yavakshara  or  the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots)  the  five  salts,  Vyosha 
(the  three  acrids,  viz.,  dry  ginger,  Piper  longum  and  black  pepper), 
Hingu  (assafoetida),  AjamodS  (the  seeds  of  Pimpinella  involucrata \ 
and  Chavya  ( Piper  Ckaba),  should  all  be  reduced  to  pulv.  Adding 
the  expressed  juice  of  Mfitulunga  ( Citrus  medico),  and  of  pome¬ 
granates,  boluses  should  be  made.  These  boluses  digest  the  ‘ama’ 
and  speedily  kindle  the  digestive  fire.  95-96 

Nagara  (dry  ginger),  AtivishS  ( Aconintum  heterophyllum ),  and 
Musta.  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundas) :  the  decoction  of  these  is  digest¬ 
ive  of  ‘Sma.’ 

The  pulv  of  these  three  possesses  similar  virtues. 

The  pulv  of  PathyS  (Chebulic  myrobalans),  and  the  pulv  of  Nagara 
(dry  ginger),  each  taken  with  hot  water,  produce  similar  results..  97 

Devadaru  ( Pinus  deodara),  Vacha  ( Acorus  Calamus),  Musta  (tubers 
of  Cyerus  rotnndus),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  AtivishS  ( Aconitum  hetero¬ 
phyllum),  and  Abhaya  (Chebulic  myrobalans)  : 

These  soaked  in  ‘Varum’  wine  till  the  infusion  becomes  a  spiritu¬ 
ous  liquor,  should  be  drunk. 

Or,  the  above  liquor,  mixed  with  tepid  water  and  salt  (‘Saindhava’ 
salt),  should  be  drunk.  (Both  these  drinks  are  digestive  of  ama).  98 

Vilwa  {/Egle  marmelos, — the  kernel  of  the  fruits  being  taken), 
Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica, — the  roots  being  taken),  and  Nagara 
(dry  ginger) :  these  three,  reduced  to  paste,  and  mixed  with  the 
decoction  of  Dadima  ( Punica  granatum, — the  bark  being  taken),  and 
‘Vit’  salt,  should  be  taken  if  the  stools  contain  ‘Sma’  and  are 
accompanied  (when  passed)  by  £ula  pains.  99 

Kalinga  (otherwise  called  Indrayava,  i.  e.,  the  seeds  of  Holarrhena 
,1 antidysenterica ),  Hingu  (assafoetida),  AtivishS,  {Aconitum  heterophyl- 
lum),  Vacha  {Acorus  Calamus),  ‘Sauvarchala’  (salt  of  that  name),  and 
Abhaya  (Chebulic  myrobalans)  : 

The  pulv  of  these,  mixed  with  tepid  water,  should  be  drunk  when 
the  wind,  combined  with  ‘ama,’  or  with  phlegm,  causes  ‘9ula’  pains- 
in  the  abdomen.  100 


1426 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA . 


PathyS  (Chebulic  myrobalans),  ‘Sauvarchala’  (salt  of  that  name), 
and  Ajaji  (seeds  of  Nigella  sativa),  reduced  to  pulv  and  mixed  with 
the  pulv  of  black  pepper,  dissolved  in  water  agreeably  hot,  should 
be  drunk,  when  there  are  vomiting  and  piles  and  ‘£ula’  pains  in  the 
joints.  101 

Pippalimula  (the  roots  of  Piper  longum ),  Abhaya  (Chebulic  myro¬ 
balans),  Vacha  ( Acorus  Calamus),  Katurohini  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurrod), 
Paths  ( Cissampelos  hernandifolia ),  Vatsaka-vija  (the  seeds  of  Holar- 
rhena  antidysentericd),  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica , — the  roots 
being  taken),  and  Vigwabhesaja  (dry  ginger) : 

The  decoction  of  these,  or  their  pulv  dissolved  in  water  agreeably 
hot,  should  be  drunk,  when  the  ‘Grahani’  is  overwhelmed  by  bile 
and  phlegm. 

This  drink  is  alleviative  of  ‘£ula’  pains,  and  is  hignly  bene¬ 
ficial.  102-103 

If  there  is  ‘ama’  (with  excited  bile  and  phlegm),  the  patient  should 
then  drink  the  decoction  of  Ativisha  ( Aconitum  heterophyllum )  and 
Vyosha  (the  three  acrids,  viz.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum, 
and  black  pepper),  mixed  with  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  the  ashes  of  green 
barley  shoots,  and  Hingu  (assafcetida) ; 

Or  reducing  the  two  (viz.,  Ativisha  and  Vyosha)  into  pulv,  drink 
it  with  water  agreeably  hot.  I04 

Pippali  (fruits  of  Piper  longum),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  Patha  {Cis¬ 
sampelos  hernandifolia ),  £arivS  ( Echites  frutescens),  the  two  Vrihatis 
(viz.,  Solanum  Indica  and  Solanuni  Xanthocarpum ),  Chitraka  (Plum¬ 
bago  Zeylanica, — the  roots  being  taken),  Kutaja-vija  (the  seeds  of 
Holarrhena  antidysentericd),  and  the  five  salts. 

The  pulv  of  these,  mixed  with  YavakshSra  (ashes  of  green  barley 
shoots)  and  curds  and  hot  water  and  wines  may  also  be  drunk  for 
enkindling  the  digestive  fire. 

This  is  a  highly  efficacious  remedy  for  alleviating  the  wind  ac¬ 
cumulated  in  the  abdomen  and  intestines. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1427 


MARICHADYA  CHURNA. 

Maricha  (black  pepper),  Kunchika  (otherwise  called  Krishnajiraka, 
i.  e.,  the  seeds  of  Nigella  sativa),  Amvashtha  (otherwise  called  Patha, 
i.  e.,  Cissampelos  hernandifolia ),  and  Vrikshamla  (tamarind  fruits) : 

Take  a  ‘Kuclava’  (equal  to  half  a  seer)  of  each  of  these.  Take  also 
10  palas  of  Amlavetasa  ( Rumex  vesicarius ),  and  1  pala  of  each  of 
the  following,  viz.,  ‘Sauvarchala’  (salt  of  that  name),  ‘Vit’  (salt  of  that 
name),  ‘Pakya’  (salt  of  that  name),  YavakshSra  (ashes  of  green  barley 
shoots),  Saindhava  (rock-salt),  £athi  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet ),  Pushkara- 
mula  (this  root  not  being  available,  that  of  Aplotaxis  auriculata  is 
used  as  a  substitute),  Hingu  (assafoetida),  Hingusiratika  (the  subacid 
leaves  of  Balanites  Roxburghii). 

Reduce  all  these  to  a  fin.e  pulv,  and  administer  it  (with  water 
agreeably  hot). 

This  medicine  is  beneficial  when  the  ‘Graham’  is  overwhelmed  by 
excited  wind,  as  also  in  disgust  for  food.  107-109 

THE  FIVE  GRUELS. 

One  ‘prastha’  (equal  to  2  seers)  of  the  four  ‘Amlas’  (viz.,  Amla¬ 
vetasa,’  i.  e.,  Rumex  vesicarius'),  ‘Vrikshamla,’  i.  e.,  tamarind,  Kola,’  i.  e., 
jujubes,  and  ‘Dadima,’  i.  e.,  pomegranates),  and  three  ‘palas  of ‘Tryu- 
shana’  (viz.,  the  three  acrids),  four  palas  of  the  salts  (four  salts  are 
taken,  viz.,  ‘Sauvarchala,’  ‘Saindhava,’  ‘Vit,’  and  ‘Audbhida’)  and  eight 
palas  of  sugar : 

Reducing  all  these  to  pulv  administer  it  by  mixing  it  with  pot- 
hersb,  soups,  boiled  rice,  and  curries. 

This  pulv  is  alleviative  of  cough,  indigestion,  disgust  for  food, 
asthma,  diseases  of  the  chest,  chlorosis,  and  ‘£ula’  pains,  no-111 

Chavya  (Piper  Chaba),  Tvach  (the  bark  of  Cinnamomum  Zeylani- 
cum ),  Pippalimula  (the  roots  of  Piper  longum J,  Dh&taki  (  Woodfordia 
floribunda ),  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids),  Chitraka  (the  roots  of  Plum¬ 
bago  Zeylanica ),  Kapittha  (the  fruits  of  Feronia  elephanta ),  Amvashtha 
(otherwise  called  Patha  i.  e.,  Cissampelos  hernandifolia ),  Hastipippali 
(Pothos  officinalis ),  £almala  (Bombax  Malabaricum,  its  exudation, 
called  ‘Mocharasa’  being  taken),  £ilodbheda  (otherwise  called 


1428 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


£alincha,  i.  e.,  Achyranthes  triandra),  and  Ajsji  (the  seeds  of  Nigelta 
sativa) : 

These  should  be  pounded  together,  the  measure  of  each  being 
equal  to  that  of  a  ‘Vadara’  (jujube).  Fry  the  paste,  in  ghee,  and 
make  a  gruel  of  the  same  by  adding  1.  curds,  2.  the  juice  of  Kapittha 
(fruits  of  Feronia  elephanta ),  3.  that  of  Chukri  ( Rumex  vesicarius ), 
4.  that  of  Vrikshamla  (fruits  of  tamarind),  and  5.  that  of  Daclima 
(pomegranate  fruits). 

The  five  gruels,  thus  prepared,  are  alieviative  of  all  kinds  of 
diarrhoea,  disease  of  the  ‘Grahani,’  piles,  and  enlargement  of  the 
spleen.  112-114 


TAKRARISHTA. 

The  soup  of  Munga  (seeds  of  Pkaseolus  Mungo )  and  the  other 
pulses,  mixed  with  the  decoction  or  the  paste  of  the  five  Kolas  (long 
pepper,  its  roots,  Piper  Chaba ,  Plumbago  Zeylanica ,  and  dry  ginger), 
or  with  the  decoction  or  paste  of  (dry)  radishes,  the  pulv  of  black 
pepper  being  added  to  each,  should  be  given  to  one  afflicted  with 
disease  of  ‘Grahani.’ 

Or,  the  meat-juice  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  wild  animals  (such 
as  deer,  &c.,),  rendered  oily  by  adding  ghee,  and  sour  by  adding  whey 
and  the  juice  of  pomegranates,  may  also  be  given  ; 

Or,  meat-juice  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  carnivorous  animals, 
may  also  be  given  : 

These  are  well-proved  as  food  (for  such  patients).  These  varieties 
of  food  kindle  the  digestive  fire. 

For  drink,  whey,  ‘SranSla’  (Kanji),  wine,  and  ‘arishtas’  (vinous 
spirits),  should  be  given.  ”5-116 

Of  persons  afflicted  with  ‘Graham-disease,’  whey  is  a  kindler  of 
the  digestive  fire,  and  also  an  inspissant,  in  consequence  of  its  light¬ 
ness.  In  consequence  also  of  its  conversion  into  sweet  taste  when 
it  undergoes  digestion,  whey  is  a  beneficial  diet.  It  does  not  excite 
the  bile.  ”7 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1429 

Whey  is  beneficial  in  (excited)  phlegm  also,  in  consequence  of 
its  astringent  taste,  its  heating  virtue,  its  capacity  of  loosening 
paralysed  joints,  as  also  in  consequence  of  its  dryness.* 

In  wind  also  it  is  beneficial  in  consequence  of  its  sweetness  of 
taste,  its  sourness,  and  its  consistency  (absence  of  liquid  character). 
Whey  that  is  new  (not  older  than  12  hours)  does  not  cause  a  burning 
sensation,  n8 

For  these  reasons,  those  applications  of  whey  which  are  ordained 
in  abdominal  diseases  and  piles,  should,  by  all  means,  be  administered 
in  ‘Grahani-disease.’  11 9 

Yamani  (seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan),  Amlaka  (fruits  of  Pliyl- 
ianthus  Emblicci),  Pathyfi  (Chebulic  myrobalans),  and  Maricha  (black 
pepper) : 

Three  palas  of  each  of  these  should  be  taken  ;  also  one  pala  of 
each  of  the  five  salts.  All  thse  should  be  ponuded  together  into  a 
pulv.  (This  pulv  is  thrown  into  16  seers  of  whey). 

When  the  whey,  after  a  time,  begins  to  ferment,  it  is  transformed 
into  an  ‘arishta’  (vinous  spirit). 

One  afflicted  with  ‘Grahani-disease’  should  drink  this  ‘arishta.’ 

This  ‘arishta’  kindles  the  digestive  fire.  It  is  also  alleviative  of 
dropsical  swellings,  abdominal  tumours,  piles,  worms  in  the  intestines, 
gonorrhoea,  and  diseases  of  abdomen.  120-121 

Even  this  is  how  ‘Takrarishta’  is  prepared. 

Ascertaining  that  the  bile  is  stationed  in  its  own  place  {i.  e.,  the 
‘Grahani’),  that  there  is  presence  of  nausea,  and  that  it  has  extingu¬ 
ished  the  digestive  fire,  the  physician  should  expel  it  by  administer¬ 
ing  purgatives  or  emetics.  123 

With  food  that  does  not  cause  a  burning  sensation  in  the  stomach 
and  that  is  light  (or  easy  of  digestion),  mixed  with  bitters,  with 
meat-juice  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  wild  animals  (such  as 
deer  and  the  rest), 


jVikaji’  is  explained  by  GangS  dhara  as  ‘Sandhibandham  Nimokshayati.’— T. 


1430 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


With  soups,  rendered  sour  by  adding  the  proper  ingredients,  of 
Mudga  (seeds  of  Phaseolus  Mungo)  and  the  other  pulses, 

With  food  mixed  with  the  expressed  juice,  that  is  sour,  of  pome¬ 
granates,  fried  in  ghee,  and  mixed  with  such  ingredients  as 
are  capable  of  kindling  the  digestive  fire  and  as  are  inspis- 
sants,  and 

With  such  pulses  as  are  obtained  from  drugs  that  are  alleviative 
of  the  wind,  and  as  have  been  fried  in  ghee, 

the  physician  should  kindle  the  digestive  fire  of  the  patient.  123-124 

CHANDANADYA  GHRITA. 

Chandana  ( Pterocarpus  santalinus ),  Padmaka  (otherwise  called 
Padmakashtha,  i.  e.,  the  fragrant  wood  of  that  name),  Ugira  (the  roots 
of  Andropogon  muricatum),  Patha  ( Cissampelos  kernandifolia),  Murva 
(Sansviera  Zeylanica),  Kutannata  (otherwise  called  ‘Kaivarta-mus- 
taka,’  i.  e.,  a  variety  of  Cyperus  rotundus  growing  in  water),  Shad- 
granthi  (otherwise  called  Vacha,  i.  e.,  Acorus  Calamus),  £ariva  ( Echites 
frutescens),  AshphotS  (otherwise  called  Haparmali,  i.  e.,  Echites 
dichotoma )  Saptaparna  ( Echites  scholaris ),  Atarushaka  (otherwise 
called  Vasaka,  i.  e.,  Justicia  Adhatoda),PsXQ\.e.  (Trichosanthes  dioica ), 
Udumvara  (Ficus  glomerata),  Agwattha  (Ficus  religiosa),  Vata  (Ficus 
Indica),  Plaksha  (Ficus  inflectoria ),  Kapitana  (otherwise  called  Amra 
taka,  i.  e.,  Spondias  mangifera  or  the  hog-plum),  Katurohinl  ( Picror- 
rhiza  Kurroa ),  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus ),  and  Nimba 
( Melia  Azadirachta )  : 

Take  two  palas  of  each  of  these.  Boil  these  in  a  ‘drona’  (equal  to 
32  seers,  64  seers  being  actually  taken)  of  water  down  to  16  seers. 

Add  a  ‘prastha’  (equal  to  2  seers,  4  seers  being  actually  taken) 
of  ghee. 

Add  the  paste  of  Kiratatikta  (Agathotes  Cherayta ),  Indrayava 
(Holarrhena  antidysenterica ),  VirS  (otherwise  called  (^alparni,  i.  e., 
Hedysarum  Gangeticum ),  Magadhika  (otherwise  called  Pippali,  i.  e., 
the  fruits  of  Piper  longum ),  and  Utpala  ( Nymphcea  stellata).  The 
measure  of  the  paste  of  each  of  these  is  an  ‘aksha’  (equal  to  2  tolas). 

The  ghee  thus  prepared  should  be  drunk  in  ‘Graham-disease.’ 

The  other  ghee  also  which  is  called  bitter  ghee  And  which  has  been 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland ,  U.  S.  A.: — You  have  undertaketa 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  ahd 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco ,  California: —  .  ....As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent . 

there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.: — You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Ohio,  U.  S.  A.  : — The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts'from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge: — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn ,  New  York  :— Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  A  met  ican  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia-.— Th&xxVi  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq.,— Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  oj  Cashmere: — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-Western 
University ,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition  I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E,  SayCr,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A, Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  Undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  rp,  East  38th  Street,  New  York  .-—Wish  you  a  success  iri 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

MOns.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Traise,  Dramstadt The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brothers’  Druggist:- I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrahgere,  174,  Boulevatse,  Saint  Germain  : — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  : — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  of 
Charaka  I  arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day 
would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat 
their  patients  according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the 
undertakers,  and  fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to 
the  completion  of  the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to.  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street ,  Calcutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  ICabiratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
[about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after. — 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia:— I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing .-—The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector : — Your  patriotic, 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  A.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

'  g.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gya  It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North.  Wales  The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  :-Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the’treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education!  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is 
a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji,— The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters.) 

Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — .  I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention. 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office — . Your 

excellent  translation . .  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  -  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

. Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  .be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden':— I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A. — I 
mu  ?t  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing,  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  to  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris : — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany: — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  Science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsbursh,  Germany  : — English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal  :—l  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life, 
cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


I43t 

spoken  of  in  the  Lesson  on  ‘Kushtha’  (Leucoderma),  may  also  be 
taken*  125-128 

NAGARADYA  CHURNA. 

Nagara  (dry  ginger),  AtivishU  ( Aconitum  heterophylluin ),  Musta 
(tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  Dh&taki  ( Woodfordia  floribunda \  Rasan- 
jana  (galena),  Vatsaka-tvach  (the  bark  of  Holarrhena  an  tidy  sen  t erica) , 
Phala  (seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica),  Vilwa  (fruits  of  AEglc 
ittarmelos),  Pfitha  (Cissatitpelos  kernandifolia ),  and  Tiktarohini  ( Picrorr - 
hiza  Kurrroa ) :  '  • 

Take  equal  measures  of  each  of  the  above  and  reduce  them  to 
pulv.  Mixing  this'  pulv  with  honey  and  water  in  which  ‘atapa’  rice 
has  been  washed,  the  patient  should  drink  it  if  afflicted  with  any  of 
these  diseases,  viz.,  ‘Grahani-disease’  due  to  excited  bile,  or  that 
variety  of  this  disease  in  which  blood  is  passed  with  the  stools,  piles, 
£ula’  pains  in  the  anus,  dysentery  (white  flux). 

All  these  diseases  are  conquered  by  this  pulv.  Verily,  this  pulv 
of  Nagara  and  the  rest  (mentioned  above)  is  highly  praised  by  the 
descendant  of  the  dark-complexioned  Atri  (2.  e.,  Punarvasu,  the 
preceptor  of  Agniveca  and  others).  129-131 

BHUNIMBADYA  CHURNA. 

Bhunimba  (otherwise  called  CheraytS,  i.  e.,  Agathotes  Cherayta), 
Katuka  {Picrorr hiza  Kurroa),  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids),  Mustaka 
(tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus'),  and  Indrayava  (seeds  of  Holarrhena 
antidysenterica ) :  equal  measures  are  taken  of  each  of  these.  Of 
Chitraka  {Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  the  measure  taken  is  double  that  of 
each  of  the  above. 

Of  Vatsaka-tvach  (bark  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica )  the  mea¬ 
sure  taken  is  sixteen  times  that  of  each  of  the  drugs  mentioned  first. 

All  these  are  reduced  to  pulv.  This  pulv  should  be  taken,  mixed 
with  raw  sugar  and  cold  water. 

It  cures  ‘Grahani-disease,’  and  abdominal  tumours.  It  cures 
also  anaemia,  fever,  chlorosis,  gonorrhoea,  disgust  for  food,  and 
diarrhoea.  132-133 
181 


1432 


CHARARA-SAMHITA. 


CHERAYTADYA  CHURNA. 

VachS  (Acorus  Calamus ),  Ativisha  ( Aconitum  heterophylluni). 
Paths  ( Cissampelos  liernandifolia ),  Saptaparna  ( Echites  schplaris ), 
RasSnjana  (galena),  (^yonaka  ( Bigtiomia  Indica),  Udichya  (otherwise 
called  Bala,  i.  e.,  Pavonia  odorata ),  Katvanga  (otherwise  called 
£yonaka.  i.  e.,  Bignomia  Indica ),*  Vatsaka-tvach  (the  bark  of  {Holarr- 
Jiena  antidysenterica ),  Duralabha  ( Hedysarum  Alhagi ,  r34 

Darbi  ( Berberis  Asiatica ),  Parppataka  (otherwise  called  Kshetra- 
parppati,  i.  e.,  Oldenlandia  biflora ),  Pstha  ( Cissampelos  hernandifolia ),f 
YamSni  ((the  seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Sigru 
( Moringa  pierygospermd),  Patola-patra  (leaves  of  Trichosanth.es  dioica ), 
SiddhSrtha  (mustard  seeds  of  the  white  variety),  Yuthika  (Jasminum 
auriculata),  Jati-pallava  (the  leaves  of  Jasminum  grandiflorum), 
Jamvu  ( Eugenia  Jambolana,  the  kernel  of  the  fruits  is  taken),  Amra 
{Mangifera  Indica,  the  kernel  of  the  fruits  is  taken),  Vilwa  (ASgle 
marmelos,  the  kernel  of  the  fruits  is  taken),  Nimba-gaka  (the  leaves 
of  Melia  Azadirachta ),  and  Nimba-phala  (the  fruits  of  Melia 
Azadirachta ) : 

These,  reduced  to  powder,  should  be  mixed  with  the  pulv  of 
Bhunimba  ( Agathotes  Cherayta ). 

The  physician  who  desires  the  alleviation  of  ‘Grahani-disease,’ 
should  administer  this  pulv.  135-136 

KIRATADYA  CHURNA. 

Kiratatikta  ( Agathotes  Cherayta),  ShadgranthS  (otherwise  called 
VachS,  i.  e.,  Acorus  Calamus),  Trayamana  ( Ficus  heterophyllci),  Katu- 
trika  (the  three  acrids),  Chandana  ( Pterocarpus  santalinus),  Padmaka 
(a  fragrant  wood  of  that  name),  Ugira  (the  roots  of  Andropogon 
Muricatus),  DSrbi  ( Berberis  Asiatica),  Tvach  (the  bark  of  Cinna- 
momum  cardamomum),  Katurohini  {Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ),  137 

Kutajatvach  (the  bark  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica),  Kutaja-phala 
(the  seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica ),  Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus 


*  ‘Cyonaka’  being  twice  mentioned,  2  parts  of  it  are  to  be  taken.— T. 
t  The  Calcuttr  edition  reads  ‘Murva,’  i.  e.,  Sanseviera  Zeylanica.—T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


I4J3' 


rotundus ),  Yamani  (the  seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowari),  Devadaru  ( Pinus 
deodara ),  Patola-patra  .(the  leaves  of  Trichosanthes  dioica ),  Nimba- 
patra  (the  leaves  of  Melia  Azadirachta),  Ela  ( Elettaria  cardamomwn ), 
‘Saurashtra’  (earth  obtained  from  Surat  and  the  neighbouring  region), 
Ativisha  ( Aconitum  heterophyllu m),  Tvach  (bark  of  Cinnamomnm 
cardamomum),  138 

Madhuka  (liquorice),  Sigru-vija  (the  seeds  of  Moringa  pterygos- 
perma ),  Murva  ( Sanseviera  Zeylanica ),  and  Parppataka  (. Oldenlandicc 
biflora ) : 

These  should  be  reduced  to  pulv.  Adding  honey,  a  linctus  may 
be  made  for  the  patient  to  lick  ;  or,  mixing  the  pulv  with  wines  or 
with  water,  he  may  drink  it.  *39 

This  medicine  cures  diseases  of  the  chest,  chlorosis,  ‘Grahani- 
disease,’  abdominal  tumours,  ‘£ula’  pains,  disgust  for  food,  fever, 
anaemia,  simultaneous  excitement  of  all  the  three  faults,  and  diseases- 
of  the  mouth  also.  r40 

(Thus  has  been  laid  down  the  treatment  of  ‘Graham-disease’  caused 
by  excited  bile). 


MADHVASAVA. 

When  the  ‘Graham’  has  been  vitiated  by  (excited)  phlegm,  the 
patient  should  first  be  made  to  vomit  by  proper  emetics.  His  digest¬ 
ive  fire  should  then  be  kindled  by  administering  to  him.  acrids,,  sours,, 
salts,  alkaline  ashes,  and  bitters.  M* 

Palaga  (. Butea  frondosa),  Chitraka  {Plumbago  Zeylanica),  Chavya 
{Piper  Chaba \  M&tulunga  {Citrus  medico),  Haritaki  (Chebulic  myra- 
balans),  Pippali  (fruits'  of  Piper  longutn ),  Pippalimula  (roots  of  the- 
same),  Pstha  {Cissampelos  hernandifolia ),  Dhanyaka  (coriander  seeds), 
and  Nfigara  (dry  ginger)  :  14.2 

A  ‘kSrshika’  (equal  to  2  tolas)  of  each  of  these  is  to  be  taken. 
These  should  be  boiled  in  a  ‘prastha’  (equal  to  2  seers,  4  seers  being 
actually  taken)  of  water  till  a  fourth  of  the  liquid  remains  in  the ' 
vessel. 

This  decoction  should  be  administered  as  a  drink. 


1434 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


‘Yavagu’  may  also  be  given,  cooked  in  this  decoction.*  143 

The  patient  should  be  given  light  food  (consisting  of  boiled 
‘Shashtika’  rice),  with  the  soup  of  such  pulses  as  Mudga  ( Phaseolus 
Mungo )  and  the  rest  in  which  has  been  boiled  dry  radishes,  or  with 
the  soup  of  Kulattha  ( Dolickos  bifloriis),  adding  to  each  acrids  and 
sours  and  alkaline  ashes.f  144 

After  such  food  the  patient  should  drink  sour  whey,  or  the 
‘arishta’  of  Madhuka  (flowers  of  Bassia  latifolia ),  or  ‘Nigada’  (a  variety 
of  wine).  145 

MADHUKA  ASAVA. 

A  ‘drona’  (equal  to  32  seers)  of  the  flowers  of  Madhuka  ( Bassia 
latifolia ),  half  a  ‘drona’  (equal  to  16  seers)  of  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes), 
Chitraka  (the  roots  of  Plumbago  Zeylanica )  of  the  measure  of  8  seers, 
Bhallataka  (the  seeds  of  Semecarpus  Anacardiutn)  of  the  measure  of 
an  ‘adhaka’  (equal  to  8  seers),  and  3  palas  of  Manjishtha  ( Rubia 
Munjista) : 

All  •  these  should  be  boiled  in  water  of  the  measure  of  3  ‘dronas’ 
(equal  to  96  seers  ;  in  practice,  however,  double  that  quantity,  viz., 
192  seers,  is  taken). 

Three-fourths  of  the  liquid  should  be  allowed  to  evaporate.  The 
vessel  should  be  taken  down  when  only  one-fourth  remains. 

When  the  liquid  becomes  cold,  half  an  ‘adhaka’  of  honey  should 
be  added.  (In  practice  a  full  ‘adhaka,’  i.  e.,  8  seers,  is  used).  It 
should  then  be  kept  for  a  month  in  a  jar  the  interior  surface  of  which 
has  been  plastered  with  the  paste  of  Ela  (the  seeds  of  Elettaria 
cardamomum ),  Mrinala  (the  stalk  of  Nymphcea  lotus),  Aguru  (Aquila- 
ria  Agallocha),  and  Chandana  ( Pterocarpus  Santalinus ). 


*  The  text  dirrcts  that  ‘ICarshikani’  should  be  taken  of  the  drugs  mentioned  in  142. 
‘KarshikSni’  is  in  the  plural.  Hence,  it  is  apparent  that  a  ‘Karshika  should  be  taken  of 
each  of  them.  Gangadhara  explains  that  the  united  measure  of  the  drugs  should  be  a 
‘Karshika.’  This  is  not  supported  by  his  reading. — T. 

f  To  each  of  the  soups  are  added  acrids  and  the  rest.  In  preparing  also  the  soup  of 
Mudga,  dry  radishes  arc  boiled  with  it,  or  their  paste  is  added  to  it. — T. 


CHA  RAKA-  SA  MHITA . 


1435 


The  ‘asava’  (vinous  spirit)  that  will  result  should  be  administered. 
This  ‘asava’  kindles  the  power  of  the  ‘Grahani.’  It  is  a  ‘Vring- 
hana’ (nourisher  of  the  body).  It  conquers  the  (excited)  wind. 

It  cures  also  dropsical  swellings,  leprosy,  leucoderma,  and 
Gonorrhoea.  146-149 


ANOTHER  ASAVA. 

Take  a  measure  of  the  expressed  juice  of  Madhuka  flowers  (t.  e., 
the  flowers  of  Bassia  latifolia ). 

-  Boil  it  to  half  the  quantity  taken. 

Add,  when  it  is  cooled,  honey  equal  to  a  fourth  of  the  measure  in 
the  vessel. 

It  should  then  be  kept  in  a  jar  as  in  the  case  of  the  foregoing 
‘asava’  (i.  e.,  in  a  jar  the  interior  surface  of  which  has  been  plastered 
with  the  paste  of  Els  and  the  rest,  and  the  period  for  which  it  is  to 
be  kept  being  one  month). 

By  drinking  this  ‘asava,’  one  conquers  all  the  faults  of  one’s 
‘Grahani.’ 

While  taking  this  medicine  one  should  eat  food  that  is  beneficial. 
The  ‘asava’  may  similarly  be  prepared  of  Drfikha  (grapes),  of  Ikshu 
(Sugar-canes),  and  of  Kasmaryya  ( Gmelina  arborea ).  These  ‘asavas,’ 
similarly  drunk,  produce  similar  results,  15°-ISI 

DURALABHA  ASAVA. 

Duralabha  (Hedysarum  Alliagi)  and  Abhaya  (Chebulic  myro- 
balans),  of  the  measure  of  2  ‘prasthas,’  a  ‘prastha’  of  Amalaka  (fruits 
of  Phyllanthus  Emblica ),  two  ‘mushtis’  (a  ‘mushti’  is,  literally,  one 
handful,  i.  e.,  1  pala)  of  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica)  and  Danti 
(B alio sper mum  montmium-,  and  one  hundred  Chebulic  myrobalans, 
each  well-developed  : 

These  should  be  boiled  in  two  ‘dronas’  (equal  to  128  seers,  in 
practice  256  seers  are  taken). 

When  a  fourth  of  this  measure  remains,  the  vessel  should  be 
taken  down  and  allowed  to  cool. 


1436 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MR  IT  A. 


When  cooled,  the  decoction  should  be  strained,  and  one  ‘kudava’ 
(equal  to  4  palas)  of  honey  should  be  added,  as  also  a  ‘kudava’  of 
each  of  the  following,  viz.,  Priyangu  ( Aglaia  Roxburghiana),  Pippali 
(fruits  of  Piper  longum ),  and  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes ).  The  liquid 
should  be  kept  for  a  fortnight  in  an  earthen  jar  which  has  soaked 
a  sufficient  measure  of  ghee. 

After  this,  it  may  be  drunk  by  one. 

It  cures  ‘Grahani-disease,’  chlorosis,  piles,  leucoderma,  erysipelas, 
and  gonorrhoea. 

It  improves  the  voice  and  the  complexion,  and  cures  blood-bile 
and  (excited)  phlegm.  152-155 

MULA  ASAVA. 

The  two  groups  of  five  roots  (/.  e.  the  ‘swalpa’  and  the  'vrihat’), 
Rajani  ( Curcuma  longa ),  VirS  (otherwise  called  SSlaparni,  i.  e.,  Hedy - 
sarum  Gangeticum),  Rishabhaka  (not  being  obtainable,  bambu  manna 
is  used  instead),  and  Jivaka  (not  being  obtainable,  Guduchi,  i.  e. 
Tinospora  cordifolia  is  used  instead) : 

Five  palas  of  each  of  the  Jabove  should  be  boiled  in  4  ‘dronas’ 
(8  ‘dronas’  or  256  seers  are  taken  in  practice). 

When  the  above  measure  is  reduced  to  a  fourth  (three-fourths 
having  evaporated),  it  should  be  strained  through  a  piece  of  clean 
cloth. 

The  physician  should  then  add  200  palas  of  treacle,  and  also  half 
a  ‘kudava’  of  honey,  and  the  same  measure  of  pulv  of  each  of  the 
following,  viz.,  Priyangu  ( Aglaia  Roxburghiana ),  Musta  (tubers  of 
Cyperus  rotundas),  Manjishtha  (JRubia  Manjista),  Vidanga*  ( Embelia 
Ribes),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Plava  (the  tubers  of  an  aquatic  variety  of 
Cyperus  rotundas),  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racemosa),  and  Savaraka  (a 
variety  of  Lodhra  having  a  white  bark). 

The  liquid,  with  these  thrown  into  it,  should  be  kept  in  a  jar  for 
a  month.  It  should  then  be  drunk. 

This  ‘Mula  asava’  has  been  well-tested  as  regards  its  property  of 
of  kindling  the  digestive  fire.  It  conquers  also  blood-bile.  It  cures 


CHAR  AKA -SA  MBIT  A. 


1437 


other  diseases  also,  such  as  suppression  of  urine,  (excited  phlegm, 
chest-diseases, chlorosis,  and  langour  of  the  limbs.  156-159 

PINDASAVA. 

The  paste  of  Pippali  ( Piper  longum )  of  the  measure  of  2  ‘prasthas,’ 
the  same  measure  of  treacle,  and  the  same  measure  of  Vibhitaka 
(fruits  of  Terminalia  Bellerica,  those  of  middle  size  being  selected), 
and  one  ‘prastha’  (in  practice  2  ‘prasthas’  are  taken)  of  water. 

These  should  be  placed  in  a  jar,  and  the  jar  itself  should  be  kept 
(for  a  month)  within  a  heap  of  barley-straw. 

Taking  a  pala  from  this  jar,  when  the  '  liquid  within  it  has  been 
well  fermented,  it  should  be  drunk,  adding  to  it  a  palmful  of  water. 

This  vinous  spirit,  called  ‘Pindasava,’  cures  many  ailments. 

This  ‘Rasayana’  (tonic),  whose  virtues  have  been  well-tested,  may 
be  drunk  by  even  a  person  who  is  in  good  health.  He  may  take 
it  for  the  period  of  a  month. 

A  healthy  man,  by  taking  this  ‘Rasayana’  for  this  period,  will  not 
have  those  ailments  that  are  cured  by  it.  160-162 

MADHVARISHTA. 

Take  a  new  (earthen)  jar.  Fumigate  it  with  Aguru  ( Aquilaria 
Agallocha ),  and  plaster  its  interior  surface  with  the  paste  of  Pippali 
( Piper  longum )  and  honey. 

Put  within  it  an  ‘adhaka’  of  honey  (in  practice  2  fidhakas  are  put), 
with  an  equal  measure  of  water. 

Throw  into  the  vessel  the  pulvs  of  the  following  (in  the  following 
measures),  viz., 

Half  a  ‘kudava’  of  Vidanga  (Embelia  Ribes),  one  ‘kudava’  of 
Pippali  (Piper  longum ),  a  pala  of  Tvak-kshiri  (otherwise  called 
Vangsalochana,  i.  e.,  bambu  manna),  and  a  ‘kSrshika’  (equal  to 
2  tolas)  of  each  of  these,  viz.,  Kegara  (the  filaments  of  Mesua  ferrea ), 
Maricha  (black  pepper),  Tvak  (the  bark  of  Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum ), 
Ela  (seeds  of  Elettaria  cardamomum),  Patraka  (leaves  of  Cinna¬ 
momum  Tamala),  £athi  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet),  Kramuka  (areca  nuts), 
Ativisha  (Aconitum  heteropkylluvi),  Ghana  (otherwise  called  Mustaka 


H38 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


i.  e ,  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundas),  Harenuks  (Piper  aurantiacuni ), 
Elavaluka  (a  red  powder  sold  under  that  name\  Tejohva  (otherwise 
called  Chavya,  i.  e.,  Piper  Chaba),  Pippali-mula  (the  roots  of  Piper 
longum ),  and  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica ). 

The  jar  is  kept  for  a  month.  After  this,  the  liquid  should  be 
administered  in  proper  dose. 

It  kindles  the  digestive  fire  when  the  latter  has  become  weak. 

When  also  the  faults  become  inharmonious,  it  restores  their 
harmony. 

This  spirit  cures  diseases  of  the  chest,  chlorosis,  ‘Graham-ailments,’ 
leucoderma,  piles,  dropsical  swellings,  diverse  varieties  of  fever,  and 
other  diseases  born  of  excited  wind  and  phlegm.  163-167 

PIPPALADYA  CHURNA. 

Pippali  (fruits  of  Piper  longum),  Pippalirmula  (the  roots  of  Piper 
longum),  the  two  Ksharas  (vis.,  Yavakshara,  i.  e.,  the  ashes  of  green 
barley  shoots,  and  Sarjjikshara,  i.  e.,  carbonate  of  soda),  the  five  salts 
(viz.,  ‘Saindhava,’  ‘Vit’  ‘Samudrika,’  ‘Sanchala,’  and  ‘Audbhida’) 
Mfitulanga  (Citrus  medico),  Abhaya  (Chebulic  myrobalans),  RasnS 
(Vanda  Roxburghii),  <^athi  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet),  Maricha  (black 
pepper^  and  Nagara  (dry  ginger)  -. 

Taking  equal  measures  of  these,  reduce  them  to  pulv.  This  pulv 
should  be  drunk  with  water  agreeeably  hot  every  morning. 

In  ‘Grahani-disease’  born  of  (excited)  phlegm,  this  pulv  increases 
the  strength,  improves  the  complexion,  and  kindles  the  digestive 
fire.  168-169 

In  ‘Grahani-disease’  existing  with  (excited)  wind,  ghee  boiled  with 
the  drugs  named  above  should  be  drunk. 

‘Satpalaka’  ghee ,  of  which  mention  has  been  made  in  the  Lesson 
on  Abdominal  Tumours,  as  also  Bhallstaka  ghee,  may  be  drunk  in 
this  disease.  l7° 

KSHARA  GHRITA. 

‘Vit’  salt,  ‘Kala’  salt,  ‘SarjjikshSra’  (carbonate  of  soda),  Yavacuka 
(ashes  of  green  barley  shoots\  Nidigdhika  (Solanum  Xanthocarpum), 
Saptala  (a  variety  of  Sankhini,  i.  e.,  Andropogon  acicularis ),  and 
Chitraka  (Plumbago  Zeylanica)  ; 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


H39 


The  last  three  should  be  incinnerated  into  ashes. 

Equal  measures  of  all  these  should  be  taken  and  dissolved  in 
water  of  six  times  their  united  measure. 

Straining  the  liquid  seven  times  through  a  piece  of  clean  doth, 
of  the  saline  water  that  will  be  left  half  an  ‘adhaka’  should  be  taken. 
(In  practice  one  ‘adhaka’  or  eight  seers  are  taken).' 

Boil  an  ‘adhaka’  of  ghee  with  the  saline  water.  (In  practice 
double  the  measure  or  16  seers  are  taken). 

Thus  prepared,  this  ghee  is  a  kindler  of  the  digestive  fire.  171-172 
ANOTHER  KSHARA  GHRITA. 

Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longuni),  Pippalimula  (the  roots  of  the 
same),  Paths  ( Cissampelos  hernandifolia, ),  Chavya  ( Piper  Chaba), 
Indrayava  (the  seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica),  NSgara  (dry 
ginger',  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  Ativisha  ( Aconitum  hetero- 
phyllum ),  Hingu  (assafoetida),  £wadangshtrS  ( Tribulus  lanuginosus ), 
Katurohini  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ),  and  Vacha  ( Acorus  calamus ). 

Take  a  ‘Karshika’  (equal  to  two  tolas)  of  the  pulv  of  each  of  the 
above.  Take  also  a  pala  of  each  of  the  five  salts. 

Add  2  ‘prasthas’  of  curds.  (In  practice,  double  this  measure,  that 
is,  8  seers  are  taken). 

Boil  with  these,  2  ‘Kudavas’  of  ghee  and  oil.  (In  practice,  16  palas 
or  2  seers  are  taken). 

The  boiling  should  go  on  till  the  contents  of  the  vessel  become 
dry.  In  fact,  these  will  become  dry  as  the  boiling  goes  on  in  the 
juice  that  issues  out  of  them. 

When  dry,  the  mass  should  be  incinnerated  within  a  closed  vessel 
and  then  reduced  to  pulv.  This  pulv  should  be  mixed  with  ghee. 

The  ghee  thus  prepared  should  be  taken  in  the  measure  of  a 
‘panitala’  (equal  to  2  tolas). 

When  the  ghee  taken  has  been  digested,  one  should  then  eat  food 
that  is  of  sweet  taste. 

It  conquers  all  diseases  characterised  by  wind  and  phlegm,  and 
also  all  ailments  due  to  the  presence  of  poison  in  the  system.  173-176 
182 


1440 


CH A  RA  KA  -  S4  M HI  T A , 


ANOTHER  KSRHAA  GHRITA. 

BhallStaka  (the  seeds  of  Semecarpus  Anacardium ),  Trikatuka 
(the  three  acrids,  i.  e.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum,  and 
black  pepper),  Triphals,  (the  three  myrobalans),  and  the  three  salts 
(viz.,  ‘Saindhava’  -Sanch5la’  and  ‘Vit’) : 

Take  two  palas  of  each  ,  of  these  and  incinnerate  them  within  a 
closed  vessel  placed  upon  a  fire  made  with  dry  cow-dung  (collected 
from  the  fields). 

This  ‘Kshfira,’  drunk  with  ghee,  or  eaten  with  (solid)  food,  cures 
diseases  of  the  chest,  chlorosis,  ‘Graham-disease,’  abdominal  tumours, 
flatulence,  and  ‘£ula’  pains.  177-178 

ANOTHER  KSHARA. 

Duralabha { Hedysarmn  Alhagi),  the  two  Karanjas  (viz.,' Dahar- 
karanja,’  that  is,  Pongamia  glabra,  and  Nata-karanja’,  that  is,  Guilan- 
dina  Bonducelld),  Saptaparna  (Echites  scholaris),  Vatsaka  (the  seeds 
of  Holarrliena  antidys enter ica ),  Shadgrantha  (otherwise  called  Vacha, 
that  .is,  Acorus  calamus),  Madana  (Randia  dumetorum),  Murva 
(Sanseviera  Zeylanica),  P&tha  (Cissampelos  hernandifolia),  and 
Aragbadha  ( Cassia  fistula)  : 

Taking  equal  measures  of  these,  and  reducing  them  to  pulv,  mix 
the  pulv  with  cow’s  urine.  Incinnerate  the  soft  mass  in  a  closed 
vessel. 

These  ashes  should  be  drunk,  (mixing  them  with  water  agreeably 
hot)  in  ‘Grahani-disease.’  They  increase  one’s  strength.  179-180 
ANOTHER  KSHARA. 

Bhunimba  (Agathotes  Cherayta),  Tikta  Rohini  (Picrorrhiza 
Kurroa),  Patola  (the  leaves  of  Trichosanthes  dioica),  Nimba  (Melia 
Azadirachta ),  and  Parppataka  (Oldenlandia  biflora ). 

Taking  equal  measures  of  these,  and  reducing  them  to  pulv,  mix 
the  pulv  with  buffalo’s  urine.  Incinnerate  the  soft  mass  in  a  closed 
vessel. 

These  ashes  should  be  drunk,  with  water  agreeably  hot,  in 
‘Grahani-disease.’  They  enkindle  the  digestive  fire.  l8i 


CH A  R  A  KA -SA  M HI  7  A . 


*44& 


ANOTER  KSHARA. 

The  two  Haridras  (viz.,  Curcuma  longa  and  Berberis  Asiatica ); 
Vacha  {Acorus  calamus ),  Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis  auriculata ),  Chitraka 
( Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  Katurohini  ( Pkrorrhiza  Kurroa ),  and  Musta. 
( Cyperus  rotundus) : 

Taking  equal  measures  of  these,  and  reducing  them  to  pulv,  mix 
the  pulv  with  goat’s  urine.  Incinnerate  the  soft  mass  in  a  closed 
vessel. 

These  ashes  should  be  drunk  with  water  agreeably  hot  They 
enkindle  the  digestive  fire.  182 

KSHARA  GUDIKA. 

Four  palas  of  ‘Sudhakanda’  (bark  of  Euphorbia  nerrifoti a),  3  palas 
of  the  three  salts  (vis.,  ‘Saindhava,’  ‘Sanchala,’  and  ‘Vit’},  a  ‘kuiava’ 
of  VSrtaku  (Brinjals),  8  palas  of  the  bark  of  Arka  ( Calatropis 
gigantea ),  and  2  palas  of  the  bark  of  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica ) : 

Incinnerating  these  into  ashes,  boluses  should  be  made  by  adding 
the  juice  of  Vartaku  (Solanum  Melongena).  These  boluses  should 
be  taken  after  meals. 

These  boluses  quickly  digest  the  food  taken.  One  should  take 
them  after  every  meal. 

They  are  beneficial  also  in  cough,  asthma,  and  piles.  183-184 

They  are  also  regarded  as  alleviatives  of  cholera,  catarrh,  of  the 
nose,  and  chest-diseases. 

Even  this  ‘Kshara-gudikS’  has  been  declared  by  the  dark-com¬ 
plexioned  scion  of  Atri’sirace.*  lS5 

ANOTHER  KHARA. 

The  same  drugs,  in  equal  measures,  should  be  reduced  to  pulv. 

This  pulv  should  be  thrown  into  the  ashes  of  Pala?a  ( Butea 
frondosa )  boiled  in  cow’s  urine.  (The  measure  of  the  urine  should 


*  ‘KrishnStreya’  means  the  dark  one  of  Atti’s  rase.  Of  course,  it  is  Punarvasu  that  is- 
implied.— T. 


1442 


CHAR  AKA  -SAM HIT  A. 


be  six  times  that  of  the  Palana  ashes,  and  the  boiling  should  go  on 
till  the  measure  of  water  is  reduced  to  half  of  what  is  taken). 

The  combined  product  should  be  kept  in  an  iron  vessel  till  it  be¬ 
comes  consistent.  The  measure  of  a  dose  is  about  the  size  of  a 
jujube,  and  it  should  be  taken  with  water  agreeably  hot,  or  with 
wines,  in  ‘Grahani-disease.’ 

In  fact,  if  one,  in  this  disease,  gets  dropsical  swellings,  or  piles,  or 
chlorosis,  one  may  even  then  take  this  medicine.  186-187 

ANOTHER  KSHARA. 

Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  Katabhi  (a  variety  of  Sirissa,  1.  e., 
Mimosa  Sirissa),  Chavya  ( Piper  Ckaba),  the  kernel  of  Vilwa  (the  fruits 
of  ZEgle  marmelos),  the  pulv  of  iron,  Katurohini  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa) 
Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundas),  Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis  auricu- 
lata),  Patha  ( Cissampelos  kernandifolia),  Hingu  (assafcetida).  Madhuka 
(liquorice),  the  ‘KshSra’  (ashes)  of  Mushkaka  (otherwise  called  Ghanta- 
parula,  i.  e.,  Schrebera  Swietenoides),  Yavakshara  (the  ashes  of  green 
barley  shoots),  Trikatu  (the  three  acrids),  Vacha  (A corns  calamus), 
Vidanga  [Embelia  Ribes),  Pippalimula  (the  roots  of  Piper  longum), 
‘Sarjjika’  (carbonate  of  soda),  Nimva  ( Melia  Azadirachta),  Chitraka 
{Plumb Ago  Zeylanica)  Murva  ( Sanseviera  Zeylanica),  Ajamoda  (the 
seeds  of  Pimpinella  involucrata ),  Indrayava  (the  seeds  of  Holarrhena 
antidysentericd),  Guduchi  ( Tinospora  cordifolia ),  and  Devadaru  ( Pinus 
deodara) : 

A  ‘karshika’  (equal  to  2  tolas)  of  each  of  the  above  should  be 
taken  and  reduced  to  pulv. 

A  pala  should  also  be  taken  of  each  of  the  five  salts. 

All  these,  laved  with  ghee  and  oil,  should  then  be  mixed  with 
three  ‘kudavas’  (equal  to  three-fourths  of  a  seer  ;  in  pratice  a  seer  and 
half  are  taken)  of  curds, 

The  mass  should  then  be  incinnerated  within  a  closed  vessel. 
A  ‘panitala’  (equal  to  2  tolas)  of  the  ashes  should  be  taken,  adding 
a  little  ghee  to  it.  . 

One.  afflicted  with  piles  born  of  (excited)  phlegm  and  wind,  or 
with  ‘Grahani-disease,’  or  with  chlorosis,  should  take  it. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1443 


This  medidhe  cures  enlarged  spleen,  difficulty  of  micturition, 
asthma,  hiccup,  cough,  intestinal  worms,  diverse  varieties  of  fever, 
waste  or  consumption,  diarrhoea,  dropsical  swellings,  gonorrhoea, 
suppression  of  urine,  sensation  of  pressure  on  the  chest,  and  the  action 
of  all  sorts  of  poison  on  the  system. 

This  KshSra  is  the  foremost  of  those  medicines  that  kindle  the 
digestive  fire. 

When  the  medicine  taken  has  been  digested,  the  patient  should 
then  eat  boiled  rice  with  sweet  juices  or  with  milk. 

This  Kshara,  it  has  been  declared  by  the  dark-complexioned  one 
of  Atri’s  race,  is  possessed  of  great  energy.  188-194 

When  the  three  faults  are  simultaneously  excited  (in  ‘Grahani- 
disease’)  the  physician  should  have  recourse  to  the  five  acts  {viz., 
Swedana,  Snehana,  £uddhi,  Langhana,  and  Dipana  as  mentioned  in¬ 
verse  197  below). 

He  should  also  administer  such  ghees,  and  ‘ksharas,’  and  ‘asavas,’ 
and  ‘arishtas’  as  are  capable  of  increasing  the  strength  of  the  digestive 
fire.  i95 

The  physician,  who  is  conversant  with  the  attributes  of  particular 
diseases,  should,  in  ‘Grahani-disease’  characterised  by  the  simulta¬ 
neous  excitement  of  the  faults,  adopt  all  those  modes  of  treatment, 
that  have  been  laid  down  for  the  disease  as  characterised  by  each 
separate  fault,  combining  them  suitably  as  the  case  may  require.  196 

Swedana  (fomentation,  &c.,  for  promoting  perspiration),  Snehana 
(application  of  ghees  and  oils  as  emollients),  ^uddhi  (administration 
of  correctives,  such  as  purgatives,  emetics,  &c.\  Langhana  (fasts), 
Dipana  (enkindling  the  digestive  fire\  the  pulvs  (mentioned  above), 
things  that  are  sweet,  the  several  (alkaline)  ashes,  the  ‘arishta’  (spirit) 
of  honey,  the  wines  called  ‘sura’  and  ‘asava,’  the  diverse  preparations 
of  whey,  and  the  various  combinations  of  ghees  that  kindle  the 
digestive  fire, — these  should  be  had  recourse  to  by  those  who  are 
afflicted  with  ‘Grahani-ailments.’ 

Listen  (after  this)  to  the  treatment  of  these  ailments  in  particular 
sages.  197-198 


*444 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


If  the  phlegm  predominates  (in  ‘Grahani-disease’  born  of  all  the 
faults),  gargles  of  the  decoctions  of  drugs  that  are  dry  and  capable 
of  kindling  the  digestive  fire,  mixed  with  those  that  are  bitter, 
followed  by  expectorations,  are  beneficial. 

If  the  phlegm  predominates  largely  and  the  patient  is  emaciated, 
the  continued  administration  of  drugs  that  are  dry  followed  by  those 
that  are  oily,  is  beneficial.  *99 

Ascertaining  the  presence  of  'Sma'  in  ‘Grahani-disease,’  the  physi¬ 
cian  should  administer  the  drugs  that  are  ‘Dipana’  or  enkindlers  of 
the  digestive  fire,  combined  with  oily  substances,  since  this  course  of 
treatment  is  beneficial. 

If  the  bile  predominates  largely,  the  administration  of  ‘Dipana’ 
combined  with  bitters  and  sweets,  is  beneficial.  200 

Unto  one  in  whom  the  wind  predominates  (in  Grahani-disease), 
the  administration  is  beneficial  of  ‘Dipana’  combined  with  oily,  saline, 
and  sour  drugs. 

As  a  fire  blazes  up  when  it  gets  a  supply  of  fuel,  even  so  the  diges¬ 
tive  fire  of  person  afflicted  with  ‘Grahani-disease’  blazes  up  when  fed 
by  ‘Dipana’  drugs.  201 

Oily  drugs  should  be  known  to  be  the  foremost  of  those  which 
enkindles  weak  digestive  fires.* 

Even  heavy  food  is  not  capable  of  extinguishing  the  digestive  fire, 
that  has  been  enkindled  by  (the  administration  ofj  oils.  202 

One  who,  afflicted  with  -Grahani-disease,’  has  a  weak  digestive 
fire,  and  who,  on  that  account,  passes  undigested  stools  in  copious 
measure,  should  drink  (medicated) ghee  in  proper  measure,  mixed  with 
‘Dipana’  drugs.  203 

By  this  means,  the  ‘SamSna’  life-breath,  restored  to  its  own  place, 
becomes  cheerful,  and  in  consequence  of  its  proximity  to  the  digestive 
fire,  quickly  strengthens  it.f  204 


*  The  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  ‘Durvalanaladipanam.’  This  seems  to  be 
correct.  Gangadhara’s  reading  is  ‘Durvalanam  pradipanam.’  This  is,  rather,  slovenly. — T. 

t  ‘Taya’  has  reference  to  the  course  of  treatment  laid  down  in  the  previous  verse. 
‘Sarnana’  is  one  of  the  five  life-breaths.  The  function  of  each  of  the  life-breaths  has  been 
explained  before. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1445 


The  man  who,  in  consequence  of  their  hardnesss,  passes  stools 
with  difficulty  (while  suffering  from  ‘Grahani-disease),  should  take 
ghee ,  mixed  with  salt,  along  with  (boiled)  rice.  205 

If  one  afflicted  with  ‘Grahani-disease’  has  his  digestive  fire  weak¬ 
ened,  through  (injudicious  administration  of)  dry  drugs,  one  should 
then  drink  ghee  or  oils  cooked  with  drugs  that  are  ‘Dipana.’ 

If  one’s  digestive  fire  has  become  weakened  through  administra¬ 
tion  of  copious  measures  of  oil,  then  pulvs,  and  ‘arishtas’.  and  ‘asavas’ 
are  beneficial.*  206 

If  in  consequence  of  the  obstruction  of  the  anal  duct,  liquid 
motions  occur,  (medicated)  oils  and  wines  and  ‘asavas’  prove  beneficial. 

If,  however,  the  digestive  fire  becomes  weak  in  consequence  of 
flatulence,  then  enemata,  dry  or  oily,  prove  beneficial.  2°7 

If  the  digestive  fire  becomes  weak  through  increase  of  the  fault 
{viz.,  phlegm),  then  one  should,  having  undergone  correctives,  follow 
the  ordinances  (already)  laid  down  about  the  alleviation  of  the  fault. 

If  the  digestive  fire  of  a  person  who  has  supervening  ailments 
becomes  weak,  ghee  boiled  with  ‘Dipana’  drugs  proves  beneficial. j-  2°S 

If  the  digestive  fire  becomes  weakened  through  fasts  (abstinence 
from  all  food,  or  indulgence  in  scanty  food),  one  should  then  take 
ghee  boiled  with  gruels  (of  barley  and  other  grains). 

When  the  digestive  fire  is  weakened  in  consequence  of  stuffing 
the  stomach  with  food,  then  ghee  boiled  with  ‘Dipana’  and  ‘Vring- 
hana’  drugs  is  competent  to  cure  such  weakness.^  2°9 

If  in  consequence  of  the  ‘Grahani-disease’  being  old  (one’s  digest¬ 
ive  fire  becomes  weakened  and)  one  becomes  weak  and  emaciated 


*  ‘Arishtas’  and  ‘asavas’  are  both  spirits.  When  raw  vegetables  are  used  for  fermenta¬ 
tion,  the  resulting  fluid  is  called  ‘asava.’  But  when  the  decoction  of  drugs  is  used,  the 
fermented  liquor  is  called  ‘arishta.’ — T. 

f  ‘Supervening  ailments’  such  as  fever,  blood-bile,  cough,  See.,  supervening  upon 
‘Grahani-disease.’ — T. 

+  ‘Alam’  means  competent  in  such  connections.  It  frequently  implies  ‘not  called  for,’ 
or,  ‘not  needed.’— T. 


1446 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


through  indulgence  in  sexual  congress,  then  such  a  person  should  be 
made  to  eat  (boiled  rice  and  other)  food  mixed  with  meat-juice  pre¬ 
pared  from  the  flesh  of  such  birds  of  prey  as  live  entirely  upon 
flesh.*  2io 

(The  flesh  of)  birds  of  prey  speedily  kindle  the  digestive  fire  in 
consequence  of  such  virtues  as  lightness,  keenness,  capacity  of 
producing  heat  as  also  of  correcting  the  faults. 

In  consequence  of  their  flesh  having  been  nourished  by  the  flesh 
of  other  animals,  it  speedily  operates  as  a  ‘Vrighana.’f  2n 

The  fire  in  the  body  does  not  blaze  up  if  one  abstains  from  food. 
Nor  does  it  blaze  up  by  loading  the  stomach  excessively  with  food  ; 
even  as  a  small  fire  does  not  blaze  up  if  not  fed  with  fuel  or  if  fed 
with  a  large  measure  of  fuel.  212 

The  physician,  by  proper  administration  of  oily  food  and  drink  of 
diverse  kinds  as  also  of  pulvs  and  ‘arishtas’  and  ‘asavas,’  should 
increase  the  strength  of  the  digestive  fire.  213 

As  the  fire  of  solid  wood  lasts  steadily  for  a  long  time,  even  so 
the  internal  fire  (of  human  beings)  becomes  steady  with  the  aid  of 
oily  food  and  the  rest.  214 

One,  who  takes  beneficial  food  (and  drink)  in  frugal  measure  after 
the  food  last  taken  has  been  digested,  always  enjoys  good  health. 
When  there  is  the  absence  of  harmony  in  the  ‘Dhatus,’  one  should 
strive  to  increase  the  strength  of  the  digestive  fire.j  2IS 

The  heat  residing  in  the  fire  within  the  body,  acquiring  steadiness 
through  the  harmony  of  the  faults  (vis.,  wind  bile,  and  phlegm), 
digests  the  food  (taken). 


*  Gangadhara  takes  ‘rasaih’  as  implying  ‘sSmlaih  rasaih,’  that  is,  ‘meat-juice  mixed  with 
sour  juices.’  Some  editions  wrongly  read  ‘pi^itaQinam’  for  pi^itSginam,’  the  genetive 
plural. — T. 

f  ‘Vringhana’  are  things  that  promote  nutrition  and  enhance  corpulency.  What  is  stated 
here  is  this  :  inasmuch  as  the  flesh  of  birds  of  prey  is  nourished  by  the  flesh  of  other  animals, 
such  flesh  speedily  promotes  the  nutrition  of  the  patient.  The  second  line  is  very  terse. 
Its  sense  has  been  misunderstood  by  some  of  the  Bengali  translators. — T. 

$  The  instrumental  ‘avaishamyena’  implies  ‘afflicted  by  absence  of  harmony  &c.’  Perhaps, 
the  locative  ‘avaishamye’  would  be  simpler. — T. 


CH A  R  AK A- S  A  M HI  T A . 


1447 


It  is  this  circumstance  that  contributes  to  health  freedom  from 
disease  ,  growth  (nourishment),  longevity,  and  increase  of  strength,*' 216 

The  digestive  fire,  weakened,  or  excessively  increased,  or  rendered 
inharmonious  by  the  .faults  (wind,  bile,  and  phlegm)  themselves 
becoming  inharmonious,  begets  diseases. 

The  operations  necessary  for  the  digestive  fire  when  it  becomes 
weak,  have  already  been  spoken  of.  Those  that  are  needed  for  treat¬ 
ing  that  fire  when  it  has  been  excessively  increased,  shall  now  be 
laid  down.-f  2I7 

In  a  person  whose  phlegm  has  been  attenuated,  the  bile,  being 
provoked  and  following  the  wind,  reaches  the  seat  of  the  digestive 
fire  {viz.,  the  ‘Grahani\  and  by  its  own  heat  imparts  strength  to  that 
fire.}  218 

Then,  having  got  an  accession  of  strength  in  the  body  that  has 
become  dry,  the  fire  accompanied  by  the  wind,  in  consequence  of  its 
keenness,  overwhelming  the  food  taken,  speedily  and  repeatedly 
digests  it.  2*9 

Continually  digesting  the  food,  that  fire  (when  there  is  no  food  to 
digest)  digests  (consumes)  the  ‘dhatus’  such  as  blood  and  the  rest. 
From  this,  weakness,  disease,  arid  even  death  overtakes  the  person.  22° 

Such  a  person  obtains  relief  when  he  stuffs  his  stomach  with  food 
and  begins  to  be  restless  and  uneasy  as  soon  as  the  food  is  digested. 

Such  diseases  as  thirst,  asthma,  delusions,  and  swoons,  are  born 
of  the  digestive  fire  which  has  been  excessively  enkindled.  221 

That  excessively  blazing  fire  should  be  extinguished  by  means  of 
food  and  drink  that  are  heavy  and  oily  and  cold  and  sweet  and 


*  ‘Arogya’  is,  literally,  ‘freedom  from  disease,’  that  is,  health. — T. 
f  The  Calcutta  edition  reads  ‘Vishamaih.’  This  does  not  seem  to  be  incorrect.  It  is  to 
be  taken  as  an  adjective  of ‘doshaih.’  The  meaning,  if  this  reading  be  adopted,  does  not 
require  to  be  stated.  This  reading  derives  force  from  the  fact  that  in  the  next  breath  only  two 
kinds  of  fire  are  spoken  of,  viz.,  ‘Manda’  and  ‘Ativriddha.’  No  reference  is  made  to  any 
fire  called  ‘Vishama.’— T. 

-r  The  Calcutta  edition  reads  ‘Soslimana  Gangadhara  reads  ‘Soshmakam’  and  explains 
it  as  equivalent  to  the  former. — T. 

183 


1448 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


slimy,  even  as  a  blazing  (external)  fire  is  extinguished  by  water 
(poured  upon  it).*  222 

Even  if  the  food  already  taken  be  not  digested,  diverse  kinds  of 
edibles  should  yet  be  frequently  placed  before  such  a  person,  so  that 
the  (digestive)  fire,  in  the  absence  of  fuel  (in  the  shape  of  food  and 
drink),  may  not,  obtaining  an  opportunity,  kill  the  person  outright 
(by  consuming  his  very  ‘dhatus’).  223 

‘Krigara’  (dish  made  of  rice,  pease,  sesame,  milk,  ghee ,  &c.), 
frumenty  with  a  mixture  of  oily  substances,  cakes  (of  boiled  rice  or 
wheat  and  other  edibles),  preparations  of  raw-sugar,  as  also  the  flesh 
of  animals  that  live  in  the  water  or  in  marshy  regions,  and  ghees ,  fish, 
especially  of  those  kinds  that  are  soft  and  that  live  in  stagnant 
waters,  and  mutton  cooked  with  ghee,  should  be  taken  by  one  whose 
digestive  fire  has  been  excessively  provoked,  till  one  gets  back  one's 
strength  (i.  <?.,  good  health).f  224-225 

Gruel  of  barley,  mixed  with  wax,  or  ghee,  a  person  afflicted 
with  abnormal  hunger  should  drink  ;  or,  he  should  drink  wheat-flour 
dissolved  in  some  liquid  substance,  after  causing  one  of  his  veins  to 
be  opened.  226 

Or,  he  should  drink  water,  or  sugar  (dissolved  in  water),  or  ghee 
boiled  with  the  drugs  that  compose  the  group  called  ‘Jivaniya’ ;  or, 
the  fruits  of  such  trees  as  yield  oils,  or  thin  plates  of  (burnt)  earth, 
mixed  with  sugar.J  227 

These,  as  also  meat-juice  mixed  with  oily  substances,  cause  the 
(digestive)  fire  to  become  mild.  Or,  such  a  person  may  drink  (liqui¬ 
fied)  ghee  and  wax,  mixed  with  cold  water.  228 


*  ]‘Vijjalaih’  is'explained  by  Gangadhara  as  ‘pichcchilaib’  or  slimy. — T. 

f  ‘Jirigara’  is  commonly  called  ‘khichri’  or  hodge-podge.  It  is  a  dish  made  of  rice, 
pulses,  milk,  ghee,  sweets,  &c. 

‘Snigdham’  is  an  adjective  of  ‘payasam.’ 

‘Gudavaikritam’  may  be,  taken  as  an  adjective  of  ‘pishtakam,’  in  which  case  it  would 
mean  diverse  kinds  of  sugar-cakes.  The  fact  is,  in  these  two  verses,  a  few  kinds  of  heavy 
and  oily  food  are  mentioned.  The  digestion  of  these  would  take  time. 

The  last  word  of  225  is  ‘avalam,’  that  is,  ‘till  strength  or  good  health  is  regained.  ’ — T. 

|  ‘Mritkuncha’  is  a  thin  earthen  cake, — T, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


iU9 


Or,  such  a  person  should  take  wheat-flour  mixed  with  milk  and 
ghee ;  or  the  meat-juice  of  animals  that  reside  in  marshy  region^ 
boiled  with  the  three  oily  substances,  excluding  mustard  or  sesame 
oil  * * * §  229 

Or,  he  may  take  wheat  flour  mixed  with  water  and  the  three  oily 
substances,  (viz.,  ghee,  fat,  and  marrow)  in  a  thick  state  ;  or  the  paste 
of  the  bark  of  Audumvara  (Ficus  glomerate i)  dissolved  in  human 
milk.  230 

Or,  he  may,  for  quenching  the  fire  that  blazes  forth  with  vigour, 
drink  the  frumenty  of  rice,  boiled  with  these  two,  (i  e.,  the  bark  of 
Ficus  glomerata  and  human  milk)  ;  or  milk  boiled  with  Trivrit  (Con¬ 
volvulus  Turpethum)  having  roots  of  a  dark  colour,  may  be  adminis¬ 
tered  to  him  as  a  purgative.  231 

The  physician  possessed  of  wisdom  and  conversant  with  the 
ordinances  in  respect  of  treatment  should,  after  a  careful  examination, 
frequently  administer  unto  him  frumenty  (of  boiled  rice)  cooked  with 
such  drugs  as  are  alleviative  of  the  bile.  Such  frumenty  should  be 
his  (ordinary)  food.j-  232 

Such  heavy  food  as  is  sweet  and  clean,  and  provocative  of 
phlegm,  is  beneficial  to  one  whose  (digestive)  fire  has  been  vigorously 
kindled.J  233 

He  who,  afflicted  with  over-strong  digestive  fire,  cheerfully  takes 
only  such  food  as  is  clean,  never  suffers  any  calamity  on  that  account 
on  the  other  hand,  he  derives  nourishment  from  it.§  234 


*  The  three  oily  substances  here  referred  to  are  ghee,  fat,  and  marrow.  The  oil  of  both 
mustard  and  sesame  seeds  is  expressly  excluded. — T. 

•j-  ‘Pratibhojanam’  seems  to  imply  that  frumenty  boiled  with  bile-alleviating  drugs  is  to. 
be  the  person’s  staple  food,  and  not  his  subsidiary  support. — T. 

J  ‘Medhyam’  is  clean.  All  heavy  food  is  not  prescribable.  For  instance,  beef  and  port,, 
which  are  unclean,  are  not  to  be  taken. — T 

§  What  is  stated  here  is  this  : — Food  that  is  heavy  is  prescribable  for  a  person  of  the 
description  mentioned.  Heavy  food,  however,  may  be  clean  as  also  unclean.  Only  heavy 
food  that  is  clean  is  directed  to  be  taken.  Such  food  never  produces  demerit  or  sin-. 
‘Vyasana’  is  demerit  or  calamity. — T. 


1450 


CHARAKA-SAMHlT A. 


When  (by  these  means)  the  phlegm  of  the  person  increases  and 
his  bile  and  wind  are  subjugated,  the  (digestive)  fire  becomes  steady. 

Of  one  whose  ‘dhatus’  have  become  harmonious,  the  fire  digests 
only  the  food  taken,  with  the  result  that  his  nourishment,  period  of 
life,  and  strength,  are  enhanced.  235 

( Here  are  some  verses.) 

In  the  matter  of  food,  the  taking  of  proper  and  improper  diet 
at  the  same  time  i's  called  ‘Samagana.’ 

The  taking,  at  one  time,  of  food  that  is  of  copious  measure  and 
at  another  time  of  food  that  is  scanty,  the  taking  also  of  food  before 
the  usual  time  or  after  it,  is  called  ‘Vishamagana.’ 

The  taking  of  food  at  a  time'  when  the  food  last  taken  has  not 
been  digested,  is  ‘Adhyagana.’ 

All  these  three  practices  produce  either  death,  or  dreadful  dis¬ 
eases.  236-237 

If  the  food  taken  in  the  morning  be  not  digested,  the  taking  of 
food  in  the  evening  (or  after  it)  is  not  baneful.  The  day-time 
causes  the  heart  to  expand  even  as  the  sun  causes  the  lotus  bud  to 
bloom.  238 

When  the  heart  is  expanded,  the  ducts  all  over  the  body  receive 
expansion.  This  is  due  also  to  physical  exercise,  locomotion,  and 
the  mind  turning  to  diverse  objects  (during  day-time).  239 

For  this  reason,  the  ‘dhatus,’  of  such  a  person  do  not  retain  their 
impurities  (but  throw  them  out). 

Such  being  the  state  of  the  ‘dhatus,’  other  food  that  may  come  in 
produces  no  evil  consequences  ;  24° 

Like  other  milk  which  is  poured  into  unburnt  milk,  producing  no 
bad  effect  but  getting  mixed  with  it  quickly.*  241 


*  The  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  this  verse  in  a  way  that  is  different  from 
Gang5dhara’s  reading.  I  adopt  the  former  reading.  The  sense,  however,  of  bath  the 
readings  is  almost  the  same,  though  the  language  is  different. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA . 


US  I 

in  the  night,  however,  when  the  heart  is  unexpanded  (like  the  lotus 
in  the  absence  of  the  sun),  when  the  ducts  are  obstructed  (through 
absence  of  physical  exercise,  &c.),  and  when  the  stomach  remains 
contracted,  the  ‘dhatus’  become  vitiated  with  impurities.  242 

When  the  ‘dhatus’  remain  in  a  state  of  immaturity  and  are  full  of 
impurities,  then  other  food,  coming  in  contact  with  them,  becomes 
vitiated,  even  as  fresh  milk  poured  into  milk  that  is  burnt  becomes 
vitiated.  243 

When,  therefore,  the  food  that  is  taken  in  the  night  remains 
undigested,  other  food  should  not  be  taken  by  a  person  of  intelligence 
who  is  desirous  of  cherishing  his  strength  and  life.  244 

(. Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary \ 

The  virtues  of  the  internal  fire, 

the  manner  in  which  it  sustains  the  body, 

the  manner  in  which  food  is  digested, 

that  which  food  accomplishes  and  the  manner  in  which  it  accom¬ 
plishes  it, 

the  several  varieties  of  fire, 

the  ‘dhatus’  which  those  varieties  feed, 

those  which  the  said  fires  digest, 

the  gradual  birth  (origin)  of  ‘Rasa’  and  the  other  ‘dhatus,’ 
the  impurities  which  arise  therefrom, 

the  cause  of  the  speedy  action  of  ‘Vrishyas’  in  producing  their 
effects, 

the  order,  in  respect  of  time,  of  the  origin  (or  transformation)  of 
the  ‘dhatus,’ 

the  causes  that  lead  to  the  appearance  of  disease  in  particular 
parts  of  the  body, 

the  manner  in  which  the  internal  fire  is  increased  in  respect  of 
its  intensity, 

the  manner  in  which  that  fire  becoming  itself  vitiated  vitiates 
others  and  the  diseases  which  it  generates, 
what  is  the  ‘Grahani,’ 


CHARAKA-SAMH-ITA  . 


1452 

the  symptoms,  in  brief,  of  ‘Grahani-disease,’ 

the  premonitory  indications,  the  symptoms,  and  the  treatment 
of  ‘Grahani-disdisease,’ 

description  of  the  four  varieties  of  ‘Grahani-disease,’ 

the  treatment  thereof  in  particular  stages, 

the  manner  in  which  the  internal  fire  becomes  exceedingly  intense, 
and  the  treatment  that  should  be  followed  for  lessening  that 
intensity, — ■ 

these  have  all  been  declared  by  the  great  ascetic  in  this  lesson  on 
‘Grahani-disease.’  245-250 

Thus  ends  Lesson  XV,  called  Treatment  of  Grahani-disease,  in 
the  Division  called  Chikitsa,  of  the  treatise  of  Agniveca  as  revised 
by  Charaka, 


LESSON  XVI. 


TREATMENT  OF  CHLOROSIS.  - 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  treatment  of  Chlorosis. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  scion  of  Atri’s  race,  i 

Chlorosis  is  regarded  as  of  five  varieties,  viz.,  the  three  born  of 
wind,  of  bile,  and  of  phlegm,  the  fourth  that  is  born  of  all  the  three 
faults  excited  simultaneously,  and  the  fith  that  is  generated  by  the 
use  of  earth  as  food.*  2 

If  the  faults  be  excited  in  the  ‘dhatus’  of  a  person’s  constitution, 
and  the  bile  be  excited  predominantly,  then  a  laxity  overtakes  the 
‘dhatus’  and  a  sensation  of  heaviness  also  (of  all  the  limbs)  arises.  3 

In  consequence  of  the  vitiation  of  both  the  faults  and  the  ‘dhatus,’ 
the  complexion,  the  strength,  the  oily  ingredients,  and  other  attri¬ 
butes  of ‘ojas,’  become  exceedingly  attennuated.f  4 

The  measure  of  blood  of  such  a  person  becomes  lessened.  His 
fat  also  decreases.  His  strength  also  suffers  diminution.  His  senses 
become  weakened.  As  the  consequence  of  all  this,  a  discolouration 
overtakes  him. 

Hear  now  its  causes  and  symptoms.  5 

From  indulgence  of  food  consisting  of  alkaline  ashes  or  of  sour  or 
saline  articles,  or  food  that  is  exceedingly  hot,  or  that  which  consists 
of  inharmonious  (or  hostile  ingredients). 

From  indulgence  also  in  food  consisting  of  beans  or  the  seeds  of 
Pkaseolus  radiatus,  or  the  paste  of  sesame  seeds,  or  the  oil  of  sesame 
seeds,  6 


*  Gangadhara  explains  that  although  the  use  of  (burnt)  earth  as  food  excites  one  or  two 
of  the  faults  or  even  all  the  three  according  to  the  constitution  of  the  person,  yet  the  disease 
born  of  this  food  is  taken  as  a  separate  variety  because  of  the  necessity  that  exists  of  treating 
it  in  a  separate  or  distinct  method.  By  only  alleviating  the  fault  excited,  this  variety  of 
the  disease  is  not  alleviated. 

+  Complexion,  strength,  &c.,  are  all  attributes  of  the  ‘dhatu’  called  ‘ojas’  which  has 
been  called ‘the  blood  of  blood.’  ‘Ojas’ is  the  foremost  of  all  the  ‘dhatus.’  In  the  second 
line,  ‘dosha,’  of  coarse,  means  the  faults,  and  ‘dushya’  means  the  ‘dhatus.’ — T. 


1454 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


From  indulgence  in  sleep  during  daytime  when  the  food  taken 
has  not  been  digested,  or  in  physical  exercise,  or  in  sexual  congress, 

From  improper  indulgence  in  the  five  acts  {viz.,  the  taking  of 
purgatives  and  the  rest),  from  inharmoniousness  of  the  seasons,  from 
suppression  of  the  urgingsof  nature,!  7 

From  also  the  fact  of  one’s  mind  being  afflicted  with  lust,  or 
anxiety,  or  fear,  or  wrath,  or  grief, 

One’s  bile  becomes  exceedingly  provoked  and  takes  its  seat  in 
the  cardiac  region.  8 

The  wind  also,  exceedingly  provoked  by  the  same  causes,  gains 
strength  and  diffuses  the  bile.  The  bile,  thus  diffused,  overtakes  the 
ten  ducts,  and  then  the  entire  body.  Entering  the  place  between 
the  skin  and  the  flesh,  it  vitiates  the  phlegm,  the  blood,  the  skin,  and 
the  flesh,  and  causes  diverse  colours  on  the  skin  such  as  paleness, 
yellowness,  greenness,  &c.  9-i° 

This  disease  is  known  by  the  name  of  ‘Pfindu’  (Chlorosis). 

-Its  premonitory  indications  are,— 

Palpitation  of  the  heart,  dryness  of  the  system,  the  absence  of 
perspiration,  and  a  sense  of  fatigue  (without  having  undergone  any 
exertion).  11 

When  this  disease  has  been  generated,  the  patient  (to  whatever 
cause  his  disease  has  been  due,  that  is,  whether  it  is  born  of  excited 
wind,  or  excited^  bile,  or  excited  phlegm,  or  all  the  three  faults  excited 
simultaneously,,  or  of  having  eaten  burnt  earth),  manifests  the  follow¬ 
ing  symtoms,  viz.,  the  appearance  of  a  rumbling  noise  in  his  ears, 
the  loss  or  weakness  of  the  digestive  fire,  general  weakness  of  the 
body,  langour  and  cheerlessness,  disgust  for  food,  sense  of  fatigue 
without  having  undergone  any  labour,  and  delusions  ;  12 

‘£ula’  pains  in  all  the  limbs,  fever,  asthmatic  breathing,  heaviness 


+  ‘Vidagdhe  anne’  is  connected  with  all  the  three  acts  following  it  ;  that  is,  with  indul¬ 
gence  in  sleep  during  the  day,  with  physical  exercise,  and  with  sexual  congress.  Every  one 
of  these  acts  is  forbidden  when  the  food  last  taken  has  not  been  digested.  Inharmonious¬ 
ness  of  the  seasons  implies  the  manifestation  of  the  characteristics  of  spring  in  summer,  or 
of  summer  in  spring,  &c.— T. 


CHA  RA  KA  -  SA  M  HIT  A . 


1455 


of  the  body,  disrelish  for  food,  a  sense  of  the  body  being  pressed 
down,  or  loaded,  or  pounded,  13 

Swollen  eye-balls,  greenness  of  complexion,  decay  of  hair  on  the 
body,  absence  of  lustre,  wrathfulness  of  disposition,  aversion  to  cold, 
sleepiness,  expectoration  of  salivary  secretions,  taciturnity  of  speech,  14 

A  sense  of  the  calves  being  struck  with  a  club,  pains  in  the  waist, 
the  thighs,  and  the  feet,  and  a  sense  of  lassitude  when  the  patient 
walks  or  ascends  a  flight  of  stairs ; 

These  are  the  symptoms  of  this  disease  in  general.  I  shall  now 
describe  what  the  symptoms  are  of  the  different  varieties. 

Through  indulgence  in  food  and  practices  that  are  capable  of 
exciting  the  wind,  the  latter,  becoming  provoked,  generates  the 
disease  called  ‘Pandu’  (chlorosis)  that  is  difficult  of  treatment  (or 
cure).  The  body  is  overtaken  by  dryness,  and  the  complexion  be¬ 
comes  reddish.  16 

The  other  symptoms  are  a  general  langour  of  the  limbs,  fever, 
piercing  pains  all  over  the  body,  shivering,  pains  in  the  sides,  head¬ 
ache,  drying  up  of  the  stools,  tastelessness  of  the  mouth,  dropsical 
swellings,  suppression  of  urine,  and  loss  of  strength.  *7 

Of  a  person  in  whose  constitution  the  bile  is  predominant,  the  bile 
becoming  enhanced  through  such  food  and  drink  as  have  the  virtue 
of  provoking  it,  vitiates  the  blood  and  the  other  ‘dhatus,’  and 
generates  the  disease  called  ‘Pandu.’  lS 

The  patient  becomes  yellow,  or  green,  of  complexion  ;  afflicted 
with  fever  and  burning  of  the  skin,  he  is  overtaken  by  vomiting, 
swoons,  and  thirst ;  his  stools  and  urine  become  yellow.  *9 

Such"  a  person  perspires  copiously.  He  feels  a  desire  for  all  sorts 
of  cool  things.  He  takes  no  delight  in  food.  He  feels  a  pungent 
taste  in  his  mouth.  Things  that  are  hot  or  sour  do  not  agree  with 
him.  20 

While  the  food  taken  by  him  is  in  course  of  digestion,  sour  eructa¬ 
tions  appear,  as  also  burning  of  the  skin,  weakness,  watery  motions, 
fetid  smell,  and  a  vision  of  darkness,  21 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


745  6 

Phlegm,  provoked  by  food  and  drink  that  excite  it,  causes,  after 
the  same  manner,*  Pandu  characterised  by  phlegm. 

The  symptoms  that  present  themselves  are  heaviness  of  the  body, 
drowsiness,  vomiting,  a  paleness  of  complexion,  22 

Discharge  of  salivary  secretions,  horripilation,  Iangour  of  the 
limbs,  swoons,  vertigo,  a  sense  of  fatigue,  asthmatic  breathing,  cough, 
idleness  (or  inability  for  exertion),  disgust  for  food,  suppression  of 
voice  and  speech  ;  23 

Paleness  of  the  urine,  of  the  eyes,  and  of  the  stools  ;  a  desire  for 
things  that  are  pungent,  or  dry,  or  sour  ;  swellings,  and  the  presence 
of  a  saline  taste  in  the  mouth.f 

These  are  the  symptoms  that  belong  to  ‘Pfindu’  characterised  by 
(excited)  phlegm.  24 

OF  a  person  who  takes  all  kinds  of  food  (that  is,  food  capable  of 
exciting  every  one  of  the  faults),  all  the  faults  become  vitiated  and 
generate  that  variety  of  ‘Pandu’  which  is  regarded  as  born  of  all  the 
faults. 

It  is  exceedingly  difficult  of  treatment  and  cure,  and  its  symptoms 
are  the  united  symptoms  of  the  simple  varieties  of  this  disease,  25 

Of  one  who  is  in  the  habit  of  eating  earth,  one  or  other  of  the 
( three)  faults  becomes  provoked. 

Earth  that  is  of  an  astringent  taste  provokes  the  wind ;  saline 
earth  provokes  the  bile ;  and  earth  that  is  sweet  provokes  the 
phlegm.  26 

The  earth  (that  is  eaten)  provokes  ‘Rasa’  and  the  other  ‘Dhatus.’ 
In  consequence  of  its  being  dry,  it  causes  the  food  in  the  stomach  to 
become  dry.  Being  itself  indigestible,  it  fills  the  ducts  and  thereby 
obstructs  them.  27 


*  That  is,  by  vitiating  blood  and  the  other  ‘dhatus.’ — T. 

t  The  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  ‘madhurasyatvam,’  meaning  ‘the  presence 
of  a  sweet  taste- in.  the  mouth.’— X 


CHAR  AKA -SAM HIT  A, 


1457 


Destroying  then  the  vigour  of  the  senses,  their  energy,  and  their 
power,  as  also  the  ‘ojas,’  it  quickly  generates  ‘Pandu’  which  is  des¬ 
tructive  of  strength  and  complexion.  28 

The  eye-balls,  the  cheeks,  and  the  eye-brows  swell.  The  feet,  the 
navel,  and  the  (male)  organ  of  generation  also  become  swollen. 

Worms  are  begotten  in  the  intestines.  The  patient  evacuates 
stools  that  are  liquid  and  copious,  and  that  are  mixed  with  bl'ood  and 
phlegm  (mucus).*  29 

That  chlorosis  which  has  become  old,  and  which,  in  consequence, 
of  the  time  that  has  passed  (since  its  generation),  has  caused  all  the. 
‘dhatus’  to  be  dry,  becomes- incurable. 

The  disease  also  of  the  person  whose  eye-balls,  &c.,  become: 
swollen,  and  who  sees  all  things  as  possessed  -of  a  yellow  hue,  is- 
incurable.f  3° 

That  person  attacked  by  chlorosis  who  frequently  evacuates- 
stools  that  are  hard  and  small  in  quantity  and  that-  are  of  a  green, 
colour  and  mixed  with  phlegm  (mucus),  or 

who  has  become  prostrated  and  cheerless,  or  whose  body  is 
entirely  overtaken  by  a  paleness  of  hue,  or 
who  is  afflicted  by  vomiting,  swoons,  and  thirst,  or 
that  person  seized  by  chlorosis  who,  from  loss  of  blood,  has; 
become  white  of  complexion, 

does  not  live.  Thus  have  been  declared  the  indications  of  the 
five  varieties  of  the  disease  known  as  chlorosis.!  3i-32 


*  The  second  half  of  the  first  line  is  read  differently  in  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay 
editions.  The  sense,  however,  remains  the  same. — T. 

t  ‘Kharibhutan,’  i.  e„  all  the  ‘dhatus’  of  the  person  (in  consequence  of  the  age  of  the 
disease)  become  dry.  Their  oiliness  disappears. 

‘Quno  na’  means  the  man  whose  eye-balls,  &c.,  have  become  swollen. — T. 

$  ‘Owetatidigdhangah’  means  ‘one  whose  body  has  been  entirely  overtaken  by  white¬ 
ness  (paleness)  of  hue.’ 

‘^wetatvamapnuat’  is  one  who  has  become  white  (pale)  through  loss  of  blood  as  stated 
immediately  before. — T. 


CHARAKA-SA  MHITA . 


145s 

The  bile  of  that  person  seized  by  chlorosis  who  copiously  indulges 
in  things  that  provoke  the  bile,  (becoming  exceedingly  provoked', 
bums  up  the  blood  and  the  flesh  and  generates  the  disease  called 
‘Kamala’  (anaemia).  33 

In  this  disease  {viz.,  ‘Kamala’),  the  eyes  and  the  skin  and  the 
nails  and  the  face  become  exceedingly  yellow. 

The  stools  and  the  urine  become  either  red  or  yellow. 

The  complexion  becomes  like  that  of  the  frog.  The  organs  of 
sense  become  (as  it  were)  lost.*  34 

One  seized  by  ‘Kamala’  becomes  afflicted  with  a  burning  sensa¬ 
tion  of  the  skin,  indigestion,  weakness  (prostration),  langour  of  the 
limbs  with  cheerlessness  of  mind,  and  disgust  for  food. 

This  disease,  called  ‘Kamala’  is  characterised  by  predominance 
of  the  bile. 

This  disease  is  regarded  as  of  two  varieties,  viz.,  i.  that  which  has 
the  ‘koshtha’  (stomach)  for  its  seat,  and  2.  that  which  has  the  juice, 
the  blood,  &c.,  for  it's  seat.  35 

That  ‘Kamala’  which,  in  consequence  of  Its  age,  dries  up  the 
‘dhatus,’  is  called  the  ‘Kumbha-kamala.’  It  is  very  difficult  of  cure. 

The  stools  and  urine  of  a  person  afflicted  with  this  disease  be¬ 
comes-  black,  or  yellow,  and  swellings  appear  in  all  his  limbs.  3& 

Or,  his  eyes,  face,  stools,  urine,  and  the  matter  vomitted,  be¬ 
come  red. 

That  person  afflicted  with  this  disease  who  becomes  subject  to 
swoons,  manifests  such  symptoms  as  burning  of  the  skin,  disgust  for 
food,  thirst,  epistasis,  drowsiness,  and  loss  of  sense  ;  37 

The  person  afflicted  with  ‘Kamala’  who  loses  his  senses  as  also  his 
digestive  fire,  is  soon  overtaken  by  death. 

I  shall  now  declare  what  the  treatment  is  of  those  varieties  of  this 
disease  which  are  curable  and  which  are  otherwise.  3« 


/.  e.,  the  organs  lose  their  power,  or  become  exceedingly  weakened.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1459 


One  afflicted  with  chlorosis  should  be  treated  (for  the  correction 
of  his  faults)  with  such  drugs  as  are  oily  and  keen  and  as  are  pos¬ 
sessed  of  emetic  and  purgative  virtues. 

One  afflicted  with  ‘Kamala’  (anaemia)  should  be  treated  with  pur¬ 
gatives  that  are  bitter  in  taste  and  possessed  of  mild  virtues.  39 

Unto  them  whose  stomachs  have  (by  these  means)  been  corrected, 
the  physician  should  give  proper  regimen,  consisting  of  old  ‘£ali’  rice, 
with  (old)  barley  and  wheat  (flour),  mixed  with  the  soup  of  the  seeds 
of  Mudga  (Phaseolus  Mungo)  and  Adhaki  [(  Cajanus  Indica)  and 
Masura  (Czcer  lens)  and  other  pulses,  as  also  with  the  meat-juice  of 
wild  animals,  both  of  which  are  beneficial. 

Especial  medicines  also  should  be  administered  that  are  prescrib¬ 
able  in  the  particular  faults  excited.  40-41 

Unto  persons  afflicted  with  ‘Kamala’  and  ‘Pandu,’  th z  ghee  called 
‘Kalyanaka,’  or  ‘Panchagavya,’  or  ‘Mah&tikta,’  should  be  administered 
for  oilifying  them.*  42 

DADIMADYA  GHRITA. 

Take  a  ‘kuclava’  of  Dadima  ( Punica  Granatum ,  the  husk  of  the 
fruits  being  taken),  half  a  ‘kudava’  of  Dhanya  (coriander  seeds),  one 
pala  from  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  one  pala  from  (^ringavera 
(dry  ginger),  and  an  ‘ashtamika’  (equal  to  a  ‘karsha’  or  two  tolas)  of 
the  fruits  of  Piper  longum.  43 

With  the  paste  of  these  should  32  palas  of  ghee  be  boiled,  adding 
an  ‘adhaka’  (equal  to  8  seers,  in  practice  16  seers  are  taken)  of  water. 

The  ghee ,  thus  prepared,  is  curative  of  chest-disease,  chlorosis, 
abdominal  tumours,  piles,  enlarged  spleen,  and  ailments  born  of 
(excited)  wind  and  phlegm.  44 

This  ghee  is  a  ‘Dipana’  (capable  of  enkindling  the  digestive  fire) ; 
It  is  also  capable  of  conquering  asthma  and  cough.  It  is  said  to  be 
...highly  beneficial  in  that  variety  of  rheumatism  in  which  the  patient 
loses  his  sense  of  touch. 


*  For  ‘Kalyanaka-Ghrita’  see  the  Lesson  on  Insanity,  ante,  and  for  the  other  two,  see 
the  Lesson  on  ‘Kushtha’  ante,  in  this  Division.— T. 


1460 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


It  is  beneficial  also  unto  those  women  whose  delivery  is  attended 
with  great  pain. 

It  also  cures  the  sterility  of  women  (for  it  causes  them  to 
conceive),  45 

KATUKADYA  GHRITA. 

Katurohini  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ),  Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus 
rotundas),  the  two  Haridras  (viz..  Curcuma  longa  and  Berberis 
Asiatica),  the  seeds  of  Vatsaka  (Holarrhena  antidysenterica ),  Patola 
(the  leaves  of  Trichosanthes  dioica ),  Chandana  (Pterocarpus  santa- 
linus',  Murva  (Sanseviera  Zeylanica),  Trayamana  (otherwise  called 
Bala-dumura,  i.  e.,  Ficus  heterophylla ),  Duralabha  (Hedysarum 
Alhagi),  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum,  Parppataka  (otherwise  called 
Kshetraparppati,  i.  e.,  Oldenlandia  Corymbosa ),  Bhunimba  ( Agathotes 
Cherayta ),  and  Devadaru  ( Pinus  deodara )  ;  46 

Take  an  ‘aksha’  (equal  to  2  tolas)  of  each  of  these,  and  reduce 
them  to  paste. 

Take  also  a  ‘prastha’  (equal  to  2  seers,  but  4  seers  are  actually 
taken)  of  ghee. 

Boil  these  in  an  ‘adhaka’  (equal  to  8  seers,  in  practice  16  seers  are 
taken)  of  milk.  47 

The  ghee  thus  prepared  cures  blood-bile,  fever,  burning  sensation 
of  the  skin,  dropsical  swellings,  fistula-in-ano,  piles,  leucorrhoea  with 
bloody  discharges,  and  malignant  boils.  48 

PATHYA  GHRITA. 

In  the  decoction,  measuring  a  hundred  palas,  of  Pathya  (Chebulic 
myrobalans),  a  ‘prastha’  (equal  to  two  seers,  in  practice  4  seers  are 
taken)  of  ghee  should  be  boiled  with  the  paste  of  the  stalks  of  fifty 
Pathyas  (Chebulic  myrobalans}. 

This  ghee  cures  ‘Pandu’  (chlorosis)  and  abdominal  tumours.*  49 


*  The  decoction  referred  to  is  prepared  by  boiling  a  hundred  Chebulic  myrobalans  in 
64  seers  of  water  down  to  16  seers.  A  hundred  palas  (equal  to  twelve  and  half  seers)  of 
this  decoction  is  to  be  taken. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1461 

In  the  decoction,  measuring  a  hundred  palas,  of  Danti  ( Baliosper - 
mum  montanum )  the  paste,  measuring  a  seer,  of  the  fruits  of  Danti 
(Baliospermum  montanum)  and  a  ‘prastha’  of  ghee  (the  actual  measure 
taken  being  two  ‘prasthas’  or  four  seers)  should  be  boiled. 

The  ghee  thus  prepared  cures  enlarged  spleen,  chlorosis,  and  drop¬ 
sical  swellings.*  5° 

DRAKSHA  GHRITA. 

One  ‘prastha’  of  old  ghee  (in  practice,  2  ‘prasthas’  or  4  seers  are 
taken)  boiled  with  half  a  ‘prastha’  of  grapes,  conquers  ‘Kamala,’  abdo¬ 
minal  tumours,  chlorosis,  gonorrhoea,  and  abdominal  dropsy .f  Si 

HARIDRA  GHRITA. 

Ghee  obtained  from  the  milk  of  buffalo,  cooked  with  milk  and  the 
paste  of  Haridra  ( Curcuma  longa ),  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans), 
Nimba  ( Melia  Azadirachta),  Bala  {Si da  cordifolia ),  and  Madhuka 
(liquorice),  is  one  of  the  foremost  curatives  of  ‘Kamala.J  5z 

DARBI  GHRITA  AND  KALIYAKA  GHRITA. 

One  ‘prastha’  (in  practice  2  ‘prasthas’  or  4  seers)  of  the  ghee  of 
buffalo-milk  is  boiled  with  cow’s  urine  of  double  the  measure  {i.  e., 
8  seers)  and  the  paste  of  Darbi  ( Berberis  Asiatica)  of  the  measure 
of  2  ‘akshas’  (or  4  tolas'. 

One  ‘prastha’  (in  practice  2  ‘prasthas’  or  4  seers)  of  the  ghee  of 
buffalo-milk  is  boiled  with  the  decoction,  measuring  5  palas  (in  prac¬ 
tice  10  palas  are  taken)  of  Darbi  {Berberis  Asiatica )  and  the  paste 
(measuring  2  ‘akshas,’  equal  to  4  tolas)  of  Kaliyaka. 

T-he  former  is  prescribable  in  the  former  (*. .  e.,  in  chlorosis) ;  and 
the  latter  is  highly  beneficial  in  the  latter  (i.  e.,  in  ‘Kamala’). 

Treating  the  patients  first  with  these  oily  preparations,  the 


*  The  decoction  is  to  be  prepared  after  the  manner  referrred  to  in  the  previous  verse. _ T. 

f  Water,  of  four  times  the  measure  of  thegAee  taken,  is  added.— T. 

|  The  measure  of  Haridra  and  the  rest  should  be  one  seer,  while  that  of  ghee  should  be 
four  seers.  The  measure  of  milk  should  be  sixteen  seers. — T. 


1462 


CHARAKA-SAMHJTA. 


physician,  when  he  understands  that  they  have  been  sufficiently 
oiled,  should  then  purge  them.*  53-S4 

The  purging  should  be  by  administering  milk  with  cow’s  urine, 
or  with  milk  alone,  frequently. 

In  the  decoction,  while  it  is  still  warm,  of  the  fruits  of  Danti 
( Baliospermum  montanum ),  an  ‘anjali’  (equal  to  4  palas)  of  DrakshS 
(grapes',  with  an  ‘anjali’  (equal  to  4  palas)  of  the  fruits  of  Kasmaryya 
(otherwise  called  GSmbhari,  i.  e.,  Gmelina  arborea),  should  be  thrown  ; 
or,  the  same  measure  of  grapes  pounded  with  the  same  measure  of 
the  fruits  of  Gmelina  arborea ,  should  be  thrown. 

Both  these  preparations  are  alleviative  of  chlorosis. 

One  afflicted  with  chlorosis  born  of  (excited)  bile,  should  drink 
half  a  pala  (equal  to  4  tolas)  of  the  pulv  of  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Tur~ 
pethum )  mixed  with  two  parts  of  sugar.f  55-56 

One  afflicted  with  chlorosis  characterised  by  predominance  of 
phlegm,  should  take  (as  a  purgative'  Chebulic  myrobalans  soaked  (in 
cow’s  urine',  with  cow’s  urine  ;  or  Chebulic  myrobalans  soaked  in  the 
decoction  of  Aragbadha  (the  kernel  of  the  fruits  of  Cassia  fistula ), 
or  in-  the  expressed  juice  of-  the  sugarcane,  or  in  that  of  Vidari 
{Batatas  paniculatus ),  or  in  that  of  Amalaka  (the  fruits -of  Phyllanthus 
Ernblica).\  57 


*  The  decoction,  measuring  5  palas,  of  Darbi,  being  mentioned,  twice  that  measure,  i.  e. 
10  palas  should  be  taken  in  practice.  Five  palas  of  Darbi  are  boiled  in  40  palas  of  water 
down  to  10  palas. 

The  measure  of  the  paste  of  ICaliyaka  should  be  ‘akshadwaya’  (as  mentioned  in  the  first 
line),  i.  e.,  2  akshas  or  4  tolas. 

‘ICaliyaka,’  as  used  here,  is  difficult  to  identify.  It  stands  for  a  variety  of  aloe,  or  a  kind 
•of  yellow  fragrant  wood,  or  a1  variety  of  sandal  wood  of  dark  hue.  It  stands  also  for  a 
variety  of  Darbi  or  Berberis  Asiatica.  It  is  curious  that  Gangadhara  does  not  explain  what 
is  meant  by  it. — T. 

•f-  The  decoction  of  the  fruits  of  Danti  is  prepared  by  boiling  4  seers  of  the  fruits  in 
32  seers  of  water  down  to  8  seers.  Throwing  4  palas  of  grapes  with  4  palas  of  the  fruits  of 
•1 ’Gmelina  arborea  into  the  8  seers  of  decoction,  the  mixture  should  be  boiled  down  to  a  fourth 

The  use  of  the  word  ‘pivet’  in  connection  with  the  pulv  of  Trivrit  and  sugar,  implies  that 
■the  mixed  pulv  should  be  dissolved  in  water. 

+  ‘Klinnam’  means  soaked,— soaked,  that  is,  in  cow’s  urine.  The  soaked  fruits  are 
taken  with  cow’s  urine.  Those  soaked  in  the  decoctions  and  expressed  juices  mentioned 
in  the  second  line,,  are  taken  with  water.  Hence  ‘pivet.’ — T. 


jartles  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland,  V.  S.  A.: — You  have  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California  y—  . . As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent . .  ... 

there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  .-—You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c. ,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O,  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis ,  Ohio ,  V.  S.  A.  : — The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  which  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge: — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York-. — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  American  foitrnal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia-. — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A,  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia : — I  'have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  iny  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr,  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  o)  Cashmere  .-—No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-Western 
University,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  Worlds  Columbian  Exposition  : — I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  : _ Be 

assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  iq,  East  38th  Street,  New  York : — Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Traise,  Dramstadt  -. — The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  Well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brothers’  Druggist: — I  shalltake  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere,  174,  Bou/evatse,  Saint  Germain  : — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  .will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  : — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  of 
Charaka  I  arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day 
would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat 
their  patients  according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the 
undertakers,  and  fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to 
the  completion  of  the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street,  Calcutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  ICabiratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
[about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after. — 

Ah  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia : — I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing : — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R,  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector Your  patriotic, 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F,  A.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  : — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A,  Grierson,  Esq.,  C,  S.,  Gya  It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  Wales -—The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  Illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  : — Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  thg  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  In  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is 
a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every' Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji, — The  work- is  not  only  of  value  to  the 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will' be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


PART  XLVII. 


47357 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 

# 

(TRAN SLA  TED  INTO  ENGLISH ). 

PUBLISHED  BY 

PARESHNATH  SARMA, 

SON  OF  LATE 

KAVIRAJ  AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  Original)  WITH  COMMENT¬ 
ARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 
journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  the  HINDU 
SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C.,  &C. 


CALCUTTA : 

2oo,  Cornwallis  Street. 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N.  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRATNA  PRESS, 
12,  SIMLA  STREET,  BYE-LANE. 

1907. 

(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved. ) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters.) 

Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may- wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — ....  . I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention. 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E,  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office—  .  Your 

excellent  translation  . ..  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

...  . . Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York ,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A. — I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing.  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my'  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris  Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  of  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris : — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany : — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 

I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsbureh,  Germany  : — English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal: — I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life, 
cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


CffA  RAKA  -  SA  Mill  TA . 


1463 


the  paste  of  the  three  acrids  and  the  leaves  of  xEgle  marmelos ,  dis¬ 
solved  in  cold  water,  should  be  drunk  (as  a  purgative)  as  it  is 
alleviative  of  ‘Kamala’. 

Or,  the  paste  of  half  a  pala  (equal  to  4  tolas)  of  the  roots  of  Danti 
{Baliospermum  montanum ),  mixed  with  treacle  of  double  tile  measure, 
should  be  drunk,  dissolved  in  cold  water,  58 

One  afflicted, with  ‘Kamala’  should  take  (as  a  purgative)  the  pulv 
of  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpetham )  with  the  decoction  of  the  three 
myrobalans. 

Vi?ala  (the  roots  of  Cucumis  Colocynthis),  Triphala  (the  three 
myrobalans),  Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundas ),  Kushtha  ( Apia - 
taxis  auriculata),  Daru  ( Pimis  deodaAi),  and  Kalingaka  (otherwise 
called  Indrayava,  i.  e.,  the  seeds  of  Holarrhetia  antidysmterica )  : 

One  ‘karsha’  (equal  to  2  tolas)  of  each  of  these  is  to  be  taken.  To 
these  should  be  added  half  a  ‘karsha’  (equal  to  r  tola)  of  AtivishS 
{Aconitum  heierophylluvi),  as  also  2  ‘karshas’  (equal  to  4  tolas)  of 
Madhurasa  (otherwise  called  Murva,  i.  <?.,  Sanseviera  Zeylanica). 

All  these,  pounded  together,  and  then  dissolved  in  water  agree¬ 
ably  hot,  and  strained  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth,  should  be  drunk 
(as  a  purgative). 

After  taking  this  medicine,  the  patient  should  lick  a  little  honey. 

This  medicine  cures  cough,  asthma,  fever,  burning  of  the  skin, 
chlorosis,  disgust  for  food,  abdominal  tumours,  retention  of  urine, 
urticaria,  and  blood-bile. 

Or,  one  may  take,  every  morning  regularly,  for  a  number  of  days, 
the  decoction  of  the  three  myrobalans,  mixed  with  honey,  or  that  of 
Guduchi  ( Tinospota  cor  difolia),  or  that  of  Darbi  ( Berberis  Asiafica), 
or  that  of  Nimba  ( Melia  Azadirackla),  each  mixed  with  honey. 

Each  of  these  is  curative  of  ‘KamalS.’ 

One  afflicted  with  chlorosis  should  drink  for  a  fortnight  the  milk, 
mixed  with  the  urine,  of  the  cow,  or  the  milk,  mixed  with  the  urine, 
of  the  buffalo  ;  or,  he  may  drink  the  decoction  of  the  three  myroba¬ 
lans,  mixed  with  the  urine  of  the  cow  for  a  week, 

185 


CHAR  A  KA  -  S  AM  HIT A. 


14C4 

Or,  one  may  drink  the  sprouts  of  the  Matulunga  tree  ( Citrus 
medico),  burnt  in  fire,  and  soaked  in  cow’s  urine.  The  burnt  sprouts  ■ 
should  be  pounded  with  the  urine  Jn  which  they  are  extinguished). 
The  liquid  should  be  strained  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth  (before 
it  is  drunk).  This  medicine  is  curative  of  chlorosis  as  also  abdominal 
swellings. 

Or,  one  may  drink  Swarnakshiri  ( Polanasia  felind),  Trivrit  ( Convol¬ 
vulus  Turpethum),  £yama  ( Ichnocarpus  frutescens ),*  BhadradSru 
(Pinus  deodara ),  and  dry  ginger,  reduced  to  paste  by  being  pounded 
with  an  ‘anjali’  (equal  to  4  palas)  of  cow’s  urine. 

The  decoction  of  the  same  obtained  by  boiling  them  in  cow’s  urine 
may  also  be  drunk. 

Or,  milk  boiled  with  these  may  be  drunk. 

All  these  preparations  are  capable  of  restoring  the  faults  to  their 
normal  course.  S9-66 

Or,  chebulic  myrobalans  (soaked  in  cow’s  urine  and)  mixed  with 
cow’s  urine  as  also  with  other  prescribable  drugs,  may  be  taken. 

When  the  chebulic  myrobalans  thus  taken  are  digested,  boiled 
rice  may  be  taken,  mixed  with  milk  or  with  meat-juice  sweetened 
(by  the  addition  of  sugar).f  67 

Qr,  the  physician,  for  alleviation  of  chlorosis,  should  cause  the 
patient  to. drink  the  pulv  of  iron  macerated  for  seven  nights  in  cow’s 
urine,  and  dissolved  in  milk.  68 

NAVAYASA  CHURNA. 

Tryushana  (the  three  acrids),  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans), 
Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  Vidanga  (Embelia  Ribes ),  and 
Chitraka  (the  roots  of  Plumbago  Zeylanica ) : 

Take  equal  measure  of  these  nine.  Add  nine  parts  of  the  pulv 
of  iron.  Pounding  all  these  together,  and  mixing  the  pulv  with  ghee 
and  honey,  one  should  take  it. 


*  ‘QylmS’  is  identified  by  Gangadhara  as  Trivrit  with  dark-coloured  roots. — T. 
4  ‘Prayogena’  implies  ‘with  the  addition  of  proper  ingredients.’ 

‘Kshirena  bhunjita’  means  ‘eat  with  milk,’  that  is,  boiled  rice  with  milk.— T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA . 


1465 

This  medicine  cures  chlorosis,  diseases  of  the  chest,  leucoderma, 
piles,  and  anaemia. 

This  medicine,  called  ‘NavSyasa  Churna,’ has  been  declared  by 
Krishnatreya  (dark-complexioned  scion  of  Atri’s  race),  69-70 

MAN  DURA  BAT  AKA. 

Treacle,  Nfigara  (dry  ginger),  Mandura  (iron  pyrites);  and  sesame 
seeds  :  take  equal  measures  of  all  these.  Add  the  pulv  of  the  fruits 
of  Piper  longuin,  of  twice  the  measure  of  the  other  drugs. 

Make  boluses  of  the  compound,  and  administer  them  to  one 
afflicted  with  chlorosis.*  7i 

TriphalS.  (the  three  myrobalans',  Tryushana  (the  three  acrids), 
Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes \  Chavya 
{Piper  Chabd),  Chitraka  {Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  Darbi  {Berberis 
Asialica),  Tvach  (the  bark  of  Cinnamomum  Zeylanica ),  Makshika 
(iron  pyrites  of  the  best  variety),  Granthika  (otherwise  called  Pippali, 
i.  e.,  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum ),  and  Devadaru  {Pinus  deodara ) : 

Take  two  palas  of  each  of  these,  and  reduce  each  of  them,  separate¬ 
ly,  to  pulv.  Take  also  pyrites,  reduced  to  pulv,  of  twice  the  united 
measure  of  the  pulvs  mentioned  above.  The  pyrites  used  should  be 
pure  and  of  the  complexion  of  antimony. 

Boiling  the  pyrites  in  cow’s  urine  of  eight  times  its  measure,  throw 
into  the  vessel  the  pulvs  of  the  three  myrobalans  and  the  rest. 

Boluses  are  then-  made  of  the  size  of  the  fruits  of  Udumvara 
( Ficus  glomerata). 

The  measure  of  a  dose  should  depend  on  the  strength  of  the  digest¬ 
ive  fire. 

It  should  be  administered  with  whey. 

After  the  medicine  taken  has  been  digested,  the  patient  shauld 
eat  such  food  as  is  easily  assimilable. 

These  are  called  ‘Mandura-Bataka.’  Unto  those  afflicted  with 
chlorosis,  these  are  givers  of  life.  72-75 


*  This  verse  occurs  lower  down  in  GangSdhara’s  edition.  There  is  a  difference  of  read- 
ing  also.  GangSdhara  reads  ‘tinisSn’  for  'tiianggan,'.  ‘Tinisa’  is  (Dalber^ia  Oojeinemii 
Roxb). — T. 


1466 


CHARAKA-SA  MI11TA . 


These  alleviate  leucoderma  and  other  skin-diseases,  indigestion, 
gonorrhoea,  paraplegia,  diseases  born  of  (excited)  phlegm,  piles,  anaemia, 
and  enlarged  spleen.  76 

Three  parts  of  Triphala  (the  three  myroba!ans\  three  parts  of 
Trikatuka  (the  three  acrids),  one  part  of  the  roots  of  Chitraka 
{Plumbago  Zeylanica),  one  part  of  Vidanga  ( Embclia  Ribes),  five 
parts  of  Agmajatu  (otherwise  called  £ilajatu)  the  same  measure  Y  e., 
five  parts)  of  the  dross  of  silver,  five  parts  of  that  variety  of  iron 
pyrites  which  is  called  ‘M&kshika’  (or  Svarna-makshika),  five  parts 
of  the  pulv  of  pure  iron,  and  eight  parts  of  sugar  :  77-78 

All  these  are  pounded  into  fine  pulv.  Mixed  with  honey,  the 
united  product  is  kept  in  a  clean  vessel  of  iron.  79 

Boluses  should  be  made  of  the  size  ofUdumvara  (Ficus  glomeratd. 
The  measure  of  a  dose  depends  upon  the  strength  of  the  digestive 
fire.  It  should  be  taken  day  after  day. 

After  the  medicine  taken  has  been  digested,  the  patient  my  eat 
what  food  he  likes.  80 

He  should  not,  however,  take  Kulattha  (the  seeds  of  Dolickos 
bijlorus),  Kakamachi  ( Solarium  nigrum ),  and  the  flesh  of  the  pigeon. 

This  combination  is  called  ‘Yogarfija’.  It  is  equal  to  nectar  in 
effects.  81 

This  ‘Rasayana’  is  the  foremost  of  its  kind.  It  is  highly  auspi¬ 
cious  and  is  capable  of  conquering  all  diseases. 

It  cures  chlorosis,  the  effects  of  poison,  coUgh,  phthisis,  chronic 
intermittent  fever,  leucoderma  and  other  skin-diseases,  indigestion, 
gonorrhoea,  asthma,  hiccup,  disgust  for  food,  and  especially  epilepsy, 
and  anaemia,  and  diseases  of  the  rectum  and  the  anal  canal  (such  as 
piles,  &c.)  82 -S3 

QILAJATU  BATAKA. 

Eight  palas  of  <£ilajatu,  macerated  for  ten,  twenty,  or  thirty  days, 
in  the  expressed  juice  of  Kutaja  (the  seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidy- 
scnterica ),  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  Nimba  (Melia  Azadirackta ), 
Patola  (the  leaves  of  Trichosanthes  dioica ),  Ghana  (the  tubers  of 
Cyperus  rotundas),  and  NSgara  (ginger),  with  sugar  added  to  it  of  the 
same  measure,  and  one  pala  of  each  of  the  following,  -viz,,  Tvakkshiri 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1467 

(bambu  manna',  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longuvi ,  Dhatri  (the  fruits 
of  Phyllanthus  Emblica),  and  Katuka  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa), 

and  one  pala  of  the  fruit  and  roots  of  Nidigdhika  ( Solatium 
Xanthscarpum),  and  I  pala  of  the  three  Gandhakas  [viz.,  cardamoms, 
the  bark  of  Cinnamomum  Zeylanica,  and  the  leaves  of  Cinnaviomum 
Tatnala). 

To  these  should  be  added  3  palas  of  honey. 

After  this,  boluses  should  be  made  of  the  measure  of  an  ‘aksha’ 
(equal  to  2  tolas)  each. 

Having  taken  these  boluses  in  a  full  or  an  empty  stomach,  one 
should  drink  the  juice  of  pomegranates,  or  milk,  or  the  meat-juice 
of  fowls,  or  water,  or  ‘Sura’  (wines),  or  ‘asava’  (spirituous  liquors). 

These  boluses  cure  chlorosis,  leucoderma,  fever,  enlarged  spleen, 
that  variety  of  asthma  which  is  called  ‘Tamaka’,  piles,  fistula-in-ano, 
putrefaction  of  the  chest  (lungs),  vitiation  of  the  semen,  of  the  digest¬ 
ive  fire  and  of  the  urine,  dropsical  swellings,  effects  of  poison,  ab¬ 
dominal  dropsy,  cough,  leucorrhoea  with  bloody  discharges,  blood- 
bile,  consumption  or  waste,  abdominal  tumours,  and  all  diseases 
arising  from  poisons  introduced  into  the  system.* 

Besides  the  above,  this  medicine  cures  all  varieties  of  boils  and 
abscesses. 

Indeed,  it  is  regarded  as  a  curative  of  all  diseases.  It  is  highly 
auspicious.  S4S9 

PUNARNAVA-MANDURA. 

Punarnava  [Boerhavia  diffusa),  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethuvi), 
Vyosha  (the  three  acrids\  Vidanga  [Evibelia  Ribes),  Daru  [Pinus  deo- 
dara),  Chitraka  [Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  Kushtha  [Aplotaxis  auriculatd', 
the  two  Haridra’s  [Curcuma  longa  and  Berberis  Asiaticd),  Triphala 
(the  three  myrobalans),  Danti  [Baliospermum  montanum,  syn.,  Croton 
polyandruin),  Chavya  [Piper  Chaba),  Kalingaka  (otherwise  called 
Indrayava,  i.  c.,  the  seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica),  Katuka 
[Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ),f  Pippalimula  (the  roots  of  Piper  longuvi),  and 
Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundas ). 


*  The  reading  ‘Jwaramayan'  occurs  in  some  texts  for  ‘Garamayan.’ — T. 
f  For  ‘Katuka’ some  texts  read  ‘Pippali,’ — T- 


1 468 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


One  pala  of  each  of  the  above  is  taken,  and  pounded  into  pulv. 
Add  the  pulv  of  iron  pyrites  of  twice  the  measure. 

All  these  are  boiled  in  two  ‘adhakas’  (equal  to  16  seers,  in  practice 
double  that  quantity  is  taken). 

Boluses  are  then  made  of  the  size  of  jujubes.  Stirring  them  in 
whey,  they  are  taken. 

These  boluses  cure  chlorosis,  enlarged  spleen,  piles,  chronic  inter¬ 
mittent  fever,  dropsical  swellings,  ‘Grahani-disease,’  leucoderma,  and 
intestinal  worms. 

Thus  has  Atri’s  son  declared  the  composition  of  ‘PunarnavS 
Mandura’  which  is  a  highly  beneficial  medicine.  9°-93 

Darbi  {Berber is  Asiatica),  Tvach  (the  bark  of  Cinnamomum  Zey- 
lanica ),  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids), 
Vi^anga  ( Embelia  Ribes),  and  the  pulv  of  iron,  mixed  with  honey  and 
ghee ,  should  be  licked  by  one  afflicted  with  chlorosis  or  anaemia.*94 

Equal  measures  of  the  pulv  of  iron,  the  pulv  of  Pathyfi  (otherwise 
called  Haritaki,  i.  e.,  Chebulic  myrobalans),  and  the  pulv  of  HaridrS 
(1 Curcuma  longa),  mixed  with  honey  and  ghee ,  should  be  given  to  one 
afflicted  with  anaemia  to  be  licked  by  him). 

Or,  Abhayft  (Chebulic  myrobalans),  pounded  into  pulv  and  mixed 
with  treacle  and  honey,  should  be  given  to  him  for  licking.  95 

Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  the  two  Haridra’s  ( Curcuma 
longa  and  Bcrberis  Asiatica),  Katurohini  ( Picrorrkiza  Kurroa ),  and 
and  the  pulv  of  iron  : 

All  these  are  pounded  together  into  pulv  and  mixed  with  honey 
and  ghee.  The  compound  should  be  licked  by  one  afflicted  with 
anaemia.  It  is  beneficial  in  this  disease.  96 

DHATRYABALEHA. 

Two  palas  of  Tugakshiri  (bambu  manna),  one  ‘prastha’  of  Nigara 
(dry  ginger),  the  same  measure  of  Madhuka  (liquorice),  of  Pippali 
{Piper  longum),  and  of  Draksha  (grapes),  half  a  ‘Tula’  (equal  to 
50  palaS)  of  sugar  : 


*  Equal  measures  are  directed  to  be  taken  of  Darbi  and  the  rest.— T. 


CH A  RA  K A  -  SAM  HI  TA 


1469 


These  are  pounded  into  pulV  and  boiled  in  one  ‘drona’  (equal  to 
32  seers,  in  practice  double  the  quantity  is  taken)  of  the  expressed 
juice  of  Dh&triphala  (the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica ),  till  it  becomes 
lickable. 

When  cooled,  one  ‘prastha’  (equal  to  4  seers)  of  honey  should  be 
added. 

The  patient  should  lick  a  measure  of  this  that  is  equal  to  a  pSni- 
tila’  (3  tolas). 

This  linctus  cures  malignant  jaundice,  chlorosis,  and  anaemia. 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  ‘Dhfitryavaleha’  as  declared  by 
Atri’s  son.  97-99 

MANDURA  BATAKA. 

Tryushana  (the  three  acrids),  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans), 
Chavya  {Piper  Chaba),  Chitraka  {Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  Devadaru 
{Pinus  deodara),  Vidanga  {Embelia  Ribes),  Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus 
rotundas),  and  Vatsaka  (the  seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica) : 

Equal  measures  of  these  are  taken  and  pounded  into  pulv.  100 

Add  the  pulv  of  iron  pyrites,  of  measure  equal  to  the  united 
measure  of  the  above. 

These  are  boiled  in  cow’s  urine  of  eight  times  their  measure. 
The  boiling  should  be  slow,  on  a  mild  fire.  When  the  boiled  product 
becomes  cool,  boluses  should  be  made,  of  the  measure  of ‘karsha’  each 
(i.  e.,  2  tolas).  i°i 

The  measure  of  a  dose  depends  upon  the  strength  of  the  digest- 
ive  fire. 

This  medicine  cures  enlarged  spleen,  and  chlorosis,  as.  also  ‘Gra¬ 
ham-disease,’  and  piles. 

After  taking  this  medicine,  one  should  it  is  said,  drink  whey  as 
also  the  gruel  of  barley.  102 

GANDA-ARISHTA. 

DrakshS  (grapes),  Haridra  {Curcuma  longa ),  Manjishtha  {Rubio. 
Manjista),  Bala-mula  (the  roots  of  Sida  cordifolia),  the  pulv  of  iron, 
Lodhra  {Symp locos  racemosa) : 


[470 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


Equal  measures  of  these  are  taken  and  pounded  into  pulv.  Add 
treacle  (of  four  times  their  united  measure,  and  water  of  measure 
equal  to  four  times  that  of  the  pulv  and  treacle  together). 

The  ‘arishta’  prepared  from  these  is  beneficial  to  one  afflicted 
with  chlorosis.  io3 

Sixteen  palas  of  Vijaka  (sediment  of  Kanji),  20  palas  of  Triphala 
(the  three  myrobalans),  5  palas  of  Draksha  (grapes),  and  7  palas  of 
Laksha  (lac) : 

These  are  boiled  in  a  ‘drona*  of  water  (equal  to  32  seers,  in  prac¬ 
tice,  double  the  quantity  being  taken)  down  to  a  fourth  of  the 
measure  (i.  e.,  16  seers). 

The  liquid  should  be  strained  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth. 
When  cooled,  the  following  are  thrown  into  it,  vis.,  sugar  of  the 
measure  of  a  ‘tula’  (equal  to  twelve  and  a  half  a  seers),  one  ‘prastha’ 
(equal  to  2  seers,  in  practice  4  seers  are  taken)  of  honey,  and  one 
‘karshika’  (equal  to  2  tolas)  of  the  pulv  of  the  following,  viz.,  Vyosha 
(the  three  acrids),  By&ghranakhi  ( Unguis  odoratus ),  Ushira  (the  roots 
of  Andropogon  muricatnvi),  Kramuka  (areca  nuts',  ElubSluka  (a  red 
powder  obtainable  under  that  name),  Madhuka  (the  flowers  of  Bassia 
latifolid),  and  Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis  auriculata>. 

All  these  should  be  kept  in  an  earthen  vessel  that  has  sucked  a 
sufficient  quantity  of  ghee. 

This  vessel  should  be  kept  for  ten  nights  within  a  heap  of  barley, 
if  it  is  summer,  or  for  twenty  nights  if  it  is  winter. 

The  ‘arishta’  thus  prepared  should'  be  drunk  for  curing  ‘Grahani- 
disease,’  chlorosis,  piles,  dropsical  swellings,  abdominal  tumours,  diffi¬ 
culty  of  micturition,  calculi,  gonorrhoea,  anaemia,  and  the  simultane¬ 
ous  excitment  of  the  three  faults. 

Even  this  is  the  method  of  preparation  of  ‘Vijak&rishta’  as  de¬ 
clared  by  him  of  Atri’s  race.  104-108 

DHATRY  ARISHTA. 

Taking  the  expressed  juice  of  two  thousand  fruits  of  Dhatri 
(Emblic  myrobalans',  the  physician  should  throw  into  it  honey  equal 
to  an  eighth  of  the  measure  ;  half  a  ‘kudava’  (equal  to  2  palas)  of  the 
pulv  of  Piper  longuvt ,  and  half  a  ‘tula’  (equal  to  50  palas)  of  sugar. 


CHA  RA  KA  -  SA  MHITA. 


1471 


All  these  should  be  kept  for  a  fortnight  in  an  earthen  jar  that .  has 
sucked  a  sufficient  measure  of  ghee. 

One  should  take,  in  proper  dose,  this  ‘arishta’  every  morning. 

When  it  has  been  digested,  one  should  take  food  that  is  beneficial 
in  proper  measure. 

This  ‘arishta,’  thus  taken,  conquers  anaemia,  chlorosis,  diseases  of 
the  chest,  tubercular  leprosy,  chronic  intermittent  fever,  cough,  hiccup, 
disgust  for  food,  and  asthma.  109-111 

Water  boiled  with  Sthira  ( Hedysarum  Gangeticum )  and  the  rest, 
is  regarded  as  highly  beneficial  food  and  drink  unto  one  afflicted 
with  chlorosis. 

Unto  one  afflicted  with  anaemia,  administer  the  expressed  juice  of 
Amalaka  (Emblic  myrobalans)  with  raisins  soaked  in  it.  112 

Even  this  is  the  treatment  that  has  been  declared  (by  Punarvasu) 
for  the  cure  of  the  disease  known  by  the  name  of  chlorosis. 

The  physician  should,  in  view  of  the  strength  (or  weakness)  of 
particular  faults,  make  his  selection  (from  among  the  medicines 
declared).  ”3 

In  the  wind-born  variety  (of  the  disease),  drugs  characterised  by- 
predominance  of  oil  are  fit  for  administration. 

In  the  bile-born  variety,  drugs  that  are  (predominantly)  bitter 
and  cooling  are  fit  for  administration. 

In  the  phlegm-born  variety,  drugs  that  are  pungent,  dry,  and 
heating,  are  fit  for  administration. 

In  that  variety  (of  the  disease)  which  is  born  of  the  simultaneous 
excitement  of  all  the  faults,  drugs  characterised  by  a  union  of  the 
above  virtues  are  fit  for  administration.*  n4 

Having  ascertained  the  strength  or  weakness  (of  the  fault  or 
faults  excited),  the  physician  conversant  with  considerations  of 


*  Gangadhara  reads  'snehaprSyam;’  and  explains  that  ‘prayam’  is  connected  with  each 
set  of  virtues  following.  The  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  ‘sneha-bhuishtam.’ 
'Pray a’  means  ‘bhuishta’  or  ‘vahula,’  and  not  ‘generally.’ — T. 

186 


[472 


CHAR  A  KA-  SA  M  Hi  TA  , 


propriety  or  otherwise  should,  by  correctives  possessed  of  keen  virtues, 
•expel  from  the  body  the  earth  that  has  been  eaten  (in  the  case 
of  patients  afflicted  with  chlorosis  caused  by  the  eating  of  earth).  “5 

After  the  person’s  body  has  been  corrected  (by  the  above  means), 
such  ghees  as  impart  strength  should  be  administered. 

Vyosha  (the  three  acrids),  Vilwa  (dried  fruits  of  AEgle  mannelos  , 
the  two  Haridras  ( Curcuma  longa  and.  Berberis  Asiatica ),  Triphala 
(the  three  myrobalans),  the  two  Punamavi&s  (i.  e.,  Boerhavia  diffusa 
of  the  white  and  the  red  variety',  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus), 
the  pulv  of 'iron,  Patha  ( Cissampelos  hernandifolia),  Vidanga  ( Embelia 
Rites),  Devadiru  ( Pinus  deodara),  Vrighikali  ( Tragia  involucrata ), 
Bhargi  ( Siphonanthus  Indica )  and  Kshara  (the  ashes  of  green  barley 
shoots)  : 

Take  equal  measures  of  the  above  [i.  e.,  Vyosha  and  the  rest), 
adding  ‘Kshara’  the  measure  of  which  should  be  equal  to  the  united 
measure  of  the  former. 

Add  ghee.  All  these  are  boiled  together. 

One  afflicted  with  earth  in  the  stomach  should  drink  this  ghee  in 
judicious  measure.* 

Ghee,  similarly  boiled  with  Kegara  (the  flowers  of  Mesua  ferrea\ 
liquorice,  the  fruits  of  Piper  tongum,  Kshara  (the  ashes  of  green 
shoots  of  barley),  and  S&dvala  (earth  obtained  from  a  place  overgrown 
with  green  grass  of  the  variety  called  ‘Durva’  or  Panicum  Dactylon), 
may  also  be  administered  (unto  one  afflicted  with  chlorosis  born  of 
eating  earth).  u6.n8 

If  one  afflicted  with  chlorosis  be  incapable  of  resisting  the  tempt¬ 
ation  of  eating  earth,  then,  for  causing  in  him  an  aversion  for  the 


*  ‘Ksharaistaih  samaih’  implies'that  the  measure  of  ‘Kshara’  or  the  ashes  of  green 
shoots  of  barley  should  be  equal  to  the  united  measure  of  Vyosha  and  the  rest.  Gangadhara 
takes  It  as  implying  that  the  measure  should  be  equal  to  that  of  each  of  the  drugs  named 

According  to  him,  the  measure  of  ‘Vyosha’  and  the  rest,  including  ‘kshara,’  should  be 
i  seer  ;  that  of  ghee  should  be  4  seers  ;  and  that  of  the  water  (to  be  added)  should  be  16  seers. 
These  should  be  boiled  down  to  4  seers. _ T. 


CHARAKA-SA  MHI7  A. 


*473 

substance,  earth  macerated  in  the  decoction  of  Vidanga  ( Embelia 
Ribes),  or  that  of  Ela  (seeds  of  Elettaria  cardamomum),  or  that  of 
Ativisha  {A  coni  turn  heterophyllum) ,  or  that  of  the  leaves  of  Nimba 
( Melia  Azadirachta ),  or  that  of  Patha  ( Cissampelos  hernandifolia',  or 
that  of  Vartfika  ( Solatium  Melongond,  or  that  of  Katurohini  (Picrorr- 
hiza  Kurroa ),  or  that  of  the  seeds  of  Kutaja  ( Holarrhena  antidysen- 
terica ),  or  that  of  Murva  ( Sansviera  Z.eylanica)  may  be  given  in  as 
large  a  measure  as  he  may  desire.  All  these  decoctions,  are  alleviative. 
of  the  faults  of  earth. 

For  those  afflicted  with  chlorosis  born  of  eating  earth,  the  physi"- 
cian  should  select  that  particular  decoction  which  would  alleviate  the: 
particular  fault  or  faults  that  may  have  been  excited. 

That  particular  course  of  treatment  should,  it  is  said,  be  adopted" 
which  is  suited  to  the  particular  cause  that  has  produced  the- 
disease.* 

That  person  afflicted  with  anaemia  who  evacuates  stools  resembling 
sesame  paste,  should  be  known  to  have  his  ducts  obstructed  by 
phlegm. 

This  disease  should  be  conquered  by  the  aid  of  drugs  that  are 
alleviative  of  (excited)  phlegm  and  bile.  122 

•  The  wind,  mixing  with  the  phlegm,  in  consequence  of  indulgence 
in  food  and  .drink  that  are  dry  and  cold  or  heavy  or  sweet,  or  in 
consequence  of  physical  exercises,  or  the  suppression  of  the  urgings 
of  nature,  becomes  strong  and  expels  the  bile  from  its  own  place.f  123, 

The  person’s  eyes,  urine,  and  skin  become  yellow.  His  stools- 
also  become  white.  Flatulence  comes  in  with  rumbling  noise  in  the 
stomach  and  intestines.  A  sensation  of  heaviness  is  felt  in  the  chest. 


*  If  the  object  be  only  to  excite  the  aversion  of  the  person  to  earth,  the  most  ordinary 
means  may  accomplish  this.  Earth  may,  for  example,  be  mixed  with  some  thing  that  is  of 
fetid  smell,  or  that  is  of  repulsive  taste.  What  is  stated  here,  however,  is  that  such 
drugs  should  be  mixed  with  the  earth  given  to  the  person  as  neutralise  its  faults,  so  that 
by  continuing  to  take  earth  he  may  not  aggravate  his  disease.  The  creation  of  a  feeling  of 
repulsion  is,  no  doubt,  the  object,  but  it  should  be  brought  about  gradually  and  not  all  at 
once  violently. — T. 

f  ‘Sanmurcchita’  imphes  ‘mixing  or  uniting  for  acquiring  force.’— T. 


H  74 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHIT A. 


Weakness,  a  weak  digestive  fire,  pains  in  the  flanks,  hiccup,  asthmatic 
breathing,*  disgust  for  food,  and  fever,  gradually  make  their  appear¬ 
ance,  when  bile  takes  possession  of  the  ducts.  124-125 

Such  a  person  should  be  fed  with  boiled  rice,  and  the  soup  of  the 
flesh  of  peacocks,  francoline  partridges,  fowl  (cocks  and  hens'',  mixed 
with  dry,  sour,  and  pungent  juices,  or  with  the  soup  of  dry  radishes 
and  the  seeds  of  Kulatttha  ( Dolichos  biflorus).  126 

Or,  he  may  be  given  the  expressed,  juice  of  ‘Matulanga’  [Citrus 
Medico),  with  honey  and  the  pulv  of  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum  and  of 
black  pepper,  and  of  dry  ginger. 

In  consequence  of  this  (treatment)  the  bile  of  the  person  returns 
to  its  own  place.  127 

Till  the  alleviation  of  the  (provoked)  bile,  and  till  also  the  allevi¬ 
ation  of  the  (provoked)  wind,  treatment  with  things  that  are  pungent, 
keen,  saline,  and  sour,  should  be  continued.  128 

When  the  bile  (by  the  course  of  treatment  explained  above)  has 
returned  to  its  own  place,  and  when  the  stools  once  more  take  the 
colour  of  the  bile  (i.  e.,  change  their  whiteness  into  yellowness),  then 
for  the  person  that  has  thus  been  freed  from  these  supervening  symp¬ 
toms,  the  ordinances  laid  down  before  for  anaemia  should  apply.  129 

When  of  a  person  afflicted  with  chlorosis  the  complexion  becomes 
green,  or  dark,  or  yellow,  when  his  strength  and  energy  suffer  dimi¬ 
nution,  when  drowsiness,  and  weakness  of  the  digestive  fire,  mild 
fever,  loss  of  pleasure  in  women,  Iangour  of  the  limbs,  asthmatic 
breathing,  thirst,  disgust  for  food,  and  vertigo  and  swoons  appear, 
then  the  disease  should  be  known  as  ‘Halimaka’  or  malignant  jaun¬ 
dice,  born  of  (provoked)  wind  and  bile.  130-131 

One  afflicted  with  malignant  jaundice  should  drink  the  ghee  of 
buffalo  milk,  boiled  with  the  expressed  juice  of  Guduchi  (Tinospora 
corifolia ),  and  (cow’s)  milk. 

Thus  oilified,  he  should  then  take  the  pulv  of  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus 
Turpethum),  mixed  with  the  expressed  juice  of  Amalaka  (the  fruits  of 
Phyllanthus  Emblica).  132 

•  GangSdhara  reads  ‘K5;a’  and  not  ‘<Jw5sa.’  T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHIT  A.  1475 

When  the  patient  has  been  purged  (by  the  drugs  mentioned 
above),  he  should  take  such  things  as  are  predominantly  sweet  inas¬ 
much  as  these  are  alleviative  of  bile  and  wind. 

He  should  take  the  linctus  of  grapes  as  explained  before,  as  also 
ghees  mixed  with  honey.  1 33 

Milky  enemata  of  the  variety  called  ‘Yapana’  (explained  in  the 
Division  called  Siddhi),  should  be  administered,  as  also  enemata  that 
is  oily. 

For  increasing  the  strength  of  his  digestive  fire  he  should  drink, 
with  discretion,  such  ‘arishtas’  as  those  of  Draksha  (grapes),  &c.  134 

The  following  also  may  be  administered,  agreeably  to  the  fault  or 
faults  excited,  and  agreeably  to  the  strength  (or  weakness)  of  the 
patient,  viz.,  that  linctus  of  Abhaya  (Chebulic  myrobalans)  which  has 
been  explained  in  the  Lesson  on  Cough,  as  also  the  pulv  of  Pippali 
(fruits  of  Piper  longuni),  liquorice,  Bala  {Si da  cordifolia ),  dissolved 
in  milk.  i3S 

( Here  are  two  verses  containing  a  summary ). 

The  ‘Hetu’  (causes),  ‘Lakshana’  (symptoms),  and  ‘Bhesaja’  (medi¬ 
cines)  of  the  five  varieties  of  Pandu  (chlorosis)  have  been  set  forth. 
The  two  varieties  of  ‘Kamala’  (anaemia)  have  also  been  spoken  of,  as 
also  their  curability  and  incurability.  That  variety  also  of  chlorosis 
and  anaemia,  which  is  called  ‘Halimaka’  and  which  is  a  dreadful 
disease,  has  also  been  discussed.  The  symptoms  of  this  disease,  as 
also  its  treatment,  has  been  spoken  of  in  brief.  136-137 

Thus  ends  Lesson  XVI,  called  ‘Pandu,’  in  the  Division  named 
(Treatment)  of  the  treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised  by  Charaka. 


LESSON  XVII. 

THE  TREATMENT  OF  HICCUP  AND  ASTHMA. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  treatment  of  Hiccup- and  Asthma. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  one  of  Atri’s  race.  1 

Agnivega  possessed  of  great  intelligence,  joining  his  hands,  asked 
that  foremost  of  ascetics,  viz.,  him  of  Atri’s  race,  who  was  well  conver¬ 
sant  with  all  truths  Vedic  and  profane,  for  the  resolution  of  his 
doubts.  2 

Thou  hast,  O  illustrious  one,  said  that  the  diverse  diseases  which 
afflict  human  beings  are  of  two  kinds  ;  that  they  are  born  of  the 
three  faults  ;  and  that  those  three  faults  are  provoked  by  three  causes. 
I  now  ask  thee,  which  amongst  them  are  unconquerable.*  3 

Hearing  these  words  of  Agnivega,  that  foremost  of  all  intelligent 
persons,  (viz.,  Punarvasu',  being  highly  gratified,  said  these  words 
fraught  with  the  certainty  of  truth.  4 

Without  doubt,  there  are  many  diseases  which  are  destructive  of 
life,  but  there  are  no  diseases  which  destroy  life  so  soon  as  hiccup 
and  asthma.  5 

Of  one  afflicted  with  even  other  diseases,  hiccup  and  asthma, 
fraught  with  great  pain,  arise  at  the  end.  6 

These  two  diseases  are  characterised  by  (provoked)  phlegm  and 
wind.  They  arise  from  the  place  where  bile  is  located.  They  dry  up 
the  ‘dhatus’  beginning  with  ‘Rasa’  (juice)  which  have  their  seat  in  the 
heart.  7 

Hence,  both  these  diseases  are  regarded  as  equally  incurable. 


*  Diseases  are  of  two  kinds  ;  in  respect  of  their  origin  they  may  be  either  ‘Saumya’  or 
‘Agneya’  ;  or  iri  respect  of  their  seats  they  may  be  physical  or  mental  ;  or,  in  respect  of  the 
character  of  the  causes  that  produce  them,  they  may  be  Constitutional  or  Accidental. 

They  are  born  of  the  three  faults,  viz.,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm  ;  that  is,  of  one,  or  of  two 
of  these,  or  of  all  the  three.  The  causes  that  provoke  them  are  also  three,  viz.,  I.  contact 
with  such  objects  of  sense  as  are  nnassimilable  or  unsuitable,  or  hostile  i.  e.  fault  of  judg¬ 
ment,  and  3.  Parinama,  i.  e.,  time,  in  the  sense  of  both  the  season  and  age  or  years. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHiTA. 


'477 


If  treated  wrongly,  these  become  as  provoked  as  snakes  of  violent 
poison  when  struck.  8 

In  the  Lesson  on  Diseases  in  Brief  (called  Ashtodariya  in  the 
Division  called  Sutrasthana),  each  of  these  diseases  has  been  declared 
to  be  of  five  varieties. 

Hear  now  what  their  originating  causes  are  as  also  their  symp¬ 
toms  and  the  medicines  that  are  prescribable.  9 

By  dust,  by  smoke,  and  by  wind  (entering  the  mouth  and  the 
nostrils),  through  residence  (or  stay)  in  cold  places,  and  indulgence  in 
(cold)  water,  through  (undue),  indulgence  in  physical  exercises  and 
sexual  congress,  through  walking  long  distances,  as  also  through 
indulgence  in  food  that  is  dry  and  that  consists  of  hostile  ingredients, 
through  vitiation  (in  the  stomach)  of  the  juice  of  the  food  that  is 
taken,  through  suppression  of  urine,  through  dryness  'of  the  body),  and 
through' excess  of  abstinence  from  oily  food  and  drink,  through  weak¬ 
ness,  through  wounds  inflicted  on  vital  parts  of  the  body,  exposure  to 
pairs  opposites  (such  as  heat  and  cold,  hardness  and  softness  of  beds 
and  clothes,  fasts  and  excessive  indulgence  in  food  and  drink,  &c.\ 
excessive  administration  of  purgatives  and  other  correctives,  from 
diarrhoea,  fever,  vomiting,  catarrh  in  the  nose,  wounds,  and  waste  (of 
‘dhStus’),  from  blood-bile,  flatulence  of  the  stomach,  cholera,  and 
tympanites,  from  chlorosis,  and  from  poison  introduced  into  the 
system,  these  diseases  [viz.,  hiccup  and  asthma;  spring  up. 

From  also  the  following  causes,  viz.,  indulgence  in  beans,  in  seeds 
of  Mfisha  ( Pkaseolus  radiatus ),  sesame  paste,  or  sesame  oil,  from 
indulgence  in  cakes  (of  boiled  rice),  the  esculent  roots  of  different 
varieties  of  Nymphcea  lotus,  food  that  causes  flatulence  or  burning 
sensation  (of  the  chest  or  the  whole  body),  of  that  is  heavy,  the  meat 
pf  aquatic  animals  or  animals  that  live  in  marshy  regions,  curds,  and 
raw  milk  ; 

From  indulgence  in  food  that  owing  to  its  emollient  qualities 
retains  the  secretions  and  causes  heaviness  of  the  body,  or  food  that 
increases  the  phlegm, 

From  wounds  on  the  throat  and  the  chest,  and  from  constipation 
of  the  bowels  and  stoppage  of  urine  (or  difficulty  of  micturition),  the 
two  diseases  mentioned  {viz.,  hiccup  and  asthma)  spring  i°-i5 


1478 


CHA  R  AKA- SAM  HIT  A. 


The  wind  from  the  causes  mentioned  above',  entering  the  ducts 
that  bear  the  vital  breath  called  Prana,  becomes  provoked.  Repair¬ 
ing  to  the  chest,  it  then  causes  the  phlegm  to  rise  upward,  and 
produces  hiccup  and  asthma,  each  of  which  is  of  five  varieties.  These 
diseases  are  terrible  and  bring  on  the  destruction  of  life- 

Listen,  I  shall  now  state  the  incubatory  symptoms  of  both  these 
diseases. 

Heaviness  of  the  throat  as  also  of  the  chest,  the  presence  of  an 
astringent  taste  in  the  mouth,  and  a  rumbling  noise  in  the  intestines, 
— these  are  the  incubatory  symptoms  of.  Hiccup.  i8 

Stoppage  of  urine,  pains  in  the  flanks,  sense  of  oppression  on  the 
chest,  abnormal  course  of  the  vital  breath  called  Prana, — these  are 
the  incubatory  symptoms  of  Asthma.  19 

The  wind,  uniting  with  the  phlegm,  obstructs  the  ducts  that  bear 
the  ‘prana,’  water,  as  also  food,  and  produces  hiccup . 

Listen  now  to  the  symptoms,  laid  down  separately,  of  the  several 
varieties  of  hiccup.  20 

MAHA-HIKKA. 

Of  one  whose  flesh,  strength,  vital  breath,  and  energy,  have 
become  weakened  ^through  disease  or  other  causes),  the  wind,  with 
the  phlegm,  suddenly  seizing  the  throat,  causes  violent  and  continu- 
nuous  hiccup  accompanied  with  loud  noise. 

This  hiccup  may  be  single,  or  double,  or  treble  in  respect  of  the 
sound  uttered. 

Obstructing  the  ducts  of  the  vital  breath,  the  vital  parts  of  the 
body  (such  of  the  heart,  &c.\  as  also  the  heat  of  the  body,  the  wind 
with  the  phlegm  takes  away  consciousness,  and  generates  stupefac¬ 
tion  of  the  entire  body.  2I-22 

The  patient  loses  his  memory.  His  eyes  become  laved  with  tears. 
The  eye-brows  fall  away  from  the  forehead  and  become  immovable. 
His  speech  becomes  indistinct  and  delirious. 

The  ducts  through  which  food  and  drink  pass  become  obstructed. 

The  hiccup  never  stops  for  even  a  short  while.  23-24 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


14  79 


Such  hiccup  is  loud-sounding  ;  its  violence,  energy,  and  strength 
are  great.  It  is  called  ‘Maha-hikka’  (the  most  violent  hiccup). 

It  is  regarded  as  destructive  of  life  within  a  short  time  of  its 
appearance.  25 

GAM  BH I RA-  H I KKA. 

That  person  who,  having  become  emaciated,  and  exceedingly 
cheerless  of  mind,  gets  a  violent  hiccup,  whose  chest  has  become  very 
weak,  and  who  with  difficulty  hiccups  with  deep  sound,  26 

who  yawns  frequently  and  contracts  and  extends  his  limbs,  who 
swells  both  his  flanks  (by  filling  his  chest  with  air  when 
possible),  coos  (like  a  dove  or  pigeon),  who  is  overtaken  by 
stupefaction  of  the  body,  and  who  is  greatly  afflicted  by  the 
disease,  whose  hiccup  arises  from  the  region  of  the  navel  or  of 
.the  ‘pakkfigaya’  (z.  e.,  that  part  of  the  stomach  where  digestion 
goes  on),  whose  hiccup  agitates  (convulses)  the  whole  body  and 
bends  it  at  times,  and  causes  great  suffering,  and  escapes  with 
difficulty  (the  passage  being  obstructed),  and  whose  strength 
and  consciousness  are  gone,  is  said  to  be  afflicted  with  the 
hiccup  called  ‘Gambhira.’  It  is  regarded  as  destructive  of 
life  *  27-29 

VYAPETA-HIKKA  OR  YAMIKA-HIKKA. 

That  hiccup  which  arises  after  one  has  taken  the  four  kinds  of 
food  (viz.,  that  which  is  chewed,  swallowed,  licked,  and  drunk),  and 
which  gains  strength  after  digestion  takes  place  of  the  food  taken, 
which  appears  with  delirium,  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  thirst,  and  uncon¬ 
sciousness,  which  afflicts  one  who  yawns,  whose  eyes  are  laved  with 
tears,  whose  face  is  dry,  who  has  become  bent,  3Q-31 

whose  stomach  has  become  flatulent  and  produces  a  rumbling 
noise, 

that  hiccup  which  rises  from  the  region  of  the  shoulders  and 
which  is  not  continuous,  is  called  ‘Vyapeta.’ 

This  variety  also  is  destructive  of  life.  32 


*  It  is  very  difficult  to  render  such  passages,  retaining  the  grammatical  construction  of 
the  original.  I  have  reproduced  the  sense  of  many  of  the  expressions,  without  endeavouring 
to  reproduce  the  genetive  forms. — T. 

187 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1486 


KSHUDRA-HIKKA. 

When  a  small  measure  of  wind,  stirred  by  physical  exercise,  arises 
from  the  stomach  and  overtakes  the  throat,  it  generates  a  mild 
variety  of  hiccup.  33 

This  hiccup  is  not  productive  of  much  pain.  It  does  obstruct 
(oppress)  the  chest,  the  head,  and  the  vital  parts  of  the  body. 

Neither  does  it  exist,  overwhelming  the  breath  or  the  food  and 
the  drink  bearing  ducts.  34 

This  hiccup  increases  in  consequence  of  physical  exertion. 

As  soon  as  one  eats  some  food  (or  takes  some  drink),  it  decreases 
in  strength  (and  disappears). 

That  from  which  it  first  arises  is,  again,  the  cause  of  its  stoppage 
(or  disappearance).  35 

This  hiccup  has  for  its  seat  the  chest,  the  shoulders,  the  throat, 
and  the  palate. 

This  variety  is  mild.  It  is  called  ‘Kshudra-hikka’  and  is  easily 
curable.  36 

ANNAJA-HIKKA. 

Afflicted  by  excess  of  food  and  drink,  or  by  spirits  that  cause 
excessive  intoxication,  the  wind  suddenly  rises  from  the  stomach  and 
takes  an  upward  course.  37 

Then,  through  indulgence  in  excessive  wrath,  or  loud  speech,  or 
loud  laughter  or  walking  long  distances,  or  bearing  heavy  weights, 
the  wind  in  the  stomach,  already  afflicted  by  excessive  food  and 
drink,  cuts  the  ducts  in  the  chest  and  generates  hiccup  born  of  food 
and  drink. 

Sometimes,  this  wind,  without  vitiation  by  food  and  drink,  causes 
sneezing  and  begins  to  escape  as  hiccup,  38-39 

This  hiccup  does  not  obstruct  or  oppress  any  vital  part  of  the 
body.  Nor  does  it  obstruct  any  of  the  organs  of  sense. 

Verily,  this  hiccup,  that  is.  born  of  food  (and  drink)  becomes 
alleviated  when  the  person  eats  and  drinks.  4° 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SA  M HIT A . 


[481 


The  hiccup  of  one  in  whom  the  faults  (wind,  bile,  and  phlegm) 
have  become  accumulated  in  excess,  of  also  one  who  has  become 
emaciated  in  consequence  of  abstention  from  food  and  drink  (through 
disgust\  also  of  one  who  has  been  emaciated  by  disease,  of  one  who 
is  aged,  of  one  who  indulges  in  excess  in  sexual  congress,  soon 
destroys  life. 

That  hiccup  also  which  is  called  ‘Yamika’  (Vyapeta)  and  which  is 
accompanied  by  delirium,  excessive  pain,  swoons  (unconsciousness), 
and  thirst,  (is  destructive  of  life).  41-42 

The  hiccup,  called ‘Yamika,’  of  a  person  whose  strength  remains 
undiminished,  who  has  not  become  cheerless,  whose  ‘dhatus’  have 
not  undergone  waste,  and  whose  organs  of  sense  also  have  not  been 
weakened,  is  curable. 

When  the  conditions  are  otherwise,  it  destroys  life.  43 
MAHA-gWASA. 

When  the  wind,  accompanied  by  the  phlegm,  obstructing  the 
ducts  (in  general),  courses  through  every  part  of  the  body,  being  itself 
obstructed  (by  the  phlegm),  it  generates  asthma  (difficulty  of 
breathing).44 

That  person  whose  wind  takes  an  upward  course  and  who  in 
great  affliction  incessantly  breathes  with  a  loud  noise  like  an  infuriate 
bull  chained  (to  a  post,  or  confined  within  a  small  inclosure),  whose 
knowledge  and  consciousness  has  been  suspended,  whose  eyes  roll 
and  have  lost  their  natural  aspect,  whose  face  also  presents  an  un¬ 
natural  appearance^  whose  stools  and  urine  have  become  constipated, 
whose  voice  has  become  weak,  who  has  become  exceedingly  cheerless 
and  whose  breathing  may  be  heard  from  a  distance,  is  said  to  be 
afflicted  by  ‘Mahacw&sa’  (violent  asthma). 

Such  a  person  is  soon  carried  off.  45-47 

URDDHA-QWASA. 

That  person  who  inhales  breath  for  a  long  while  without  being 
able  to  exhale  it  adequately,  whose  mouth  and  ducts  are  covered 
with  phlegm,  who  is  afflicted  by  the  wind  in  a  provoked'.state  :  48 


CHARAKA-SAM  HITA . 


14&2 

Whose  gaze  is  directed  upwards,  or  who,  with  rolling  eyes,  looks 
in  all  directions,  or  who,  being  afflicted  with  pains,  becomes  subject 
to  swoons,  whose  mouth  becomes  dry,  who  is  dissatisfied  with  every¬ 
thing,  is  said  to  be  afflicted  with  ‘Urddhagwasa.’  49 

When  this  ‘Urddhacwasa’  becomes  so  aggravated  that  the  down¬ 
ward  breath  becomes  (almost)  stopped,  and  the  person  becomes 
subject  to  swoons  and  sees  darkness  (when  he  is  conscious),  it  de¬ 
stroys  life.  5° 

CCHINNA-gWASA. 

That  person  who,  in  excess  of  affliction,  breathes  with  irregularity 
(z.  e.,  without  equal  intervals  of  time  between  the  acts  of  inhalation 
or  exhalation),  or,  who,  afflicted  with  pain  or  tortured  by  agony  in 
the  vital  parts  of  the  body,  can  scarcely  breathe,  5* 

or  who,  afflicted  by  epistasis  or  by  excessive  perspiration  or  by 
swoons,  or  by  a  burning  sensation  in  the  pelvis,  or  who  with 
rolling  eyes,  excessively  weakened,  breathing  hard,  and  with 
blood-shot  eyes,  52 

and  troubled  mind  and  mouth  dried  up  and  discoloured  com¬ 
plexion,  and  uttering  delirious  sayings,  is  said  to  have  that 
variety  of  asthma  which  is  called  “Cchinna.” 

Such  a  person  casts  off  the  life-breaths  soon.  55 
TAMAKA-gWASA. 

When  the  wind,  falling  away  from  its  normal  course,  getting  into 
the  ducts  (that  bear  the  life-breaths),  seizing  the  throat  and  the  head, 
and  exciting  the  phlegm,  causes  an  inflammation  of  the  Schneiderian 
membrane,  and  generates,  in  consequence  of  its  path  being  obstructed, 
the  sound  known  as  ‘Ghurghura’,  it  originates  a  variety  of  asthma 
of  exceeding  violence,  that  greatly  afflicts  the  life-breaths.  54-55 

The  person  becomes  greatly  afflicted,  and  coughs  with  violence, 
and  becomes  incapable  of  exertion. 

While  coughing,  he  repeatedly  swoons.  56 

Until  the  phlegmonous  matter  is  expelled,  he  suffers  great  pain. 
It  is  only  when  the  phlegmonous  matter  is  expelled  that  he  feels 
ease  for  a  moment.  57 


CHARAKA-SAMH1T  A. 


His  throat  tickles ;  he  speaks  with  great  difficulty  ;  he  gets  no 
sleep  ;  he  is  obliged  to  lie  down,  afflicted  all  the  while  with  hard 
breathing.  58 

As  he  lies  down,  the  wind  oppresses  his  sides.  When  seated,  he 
gets  a  little  ease.  He  feels  pleasure  in  things  that  are  warm.  59 

His  eyes  are  turned  upwards  ;  the  forehead  becomes  covered  with 
perspiration  ;  he  is-  in  great  agony ;  his  mouth  becomes  dry  ;  he 
breathes  hard  incessantly  ;  and  his  body  is  frequently  rocked  (like 
that  of  one  who  rides  on  elephant).  60 

This  disease  becomes  aggravated  by  clouds,  water,  east-wind  and 
all  such  articles  (of  food  and  drink)  as  generate  phlegm. 

This  variety  of  asthma,  ‘Tamaka,’  is  suppressible  (by  treatment). 

It  is  also  curable  if  treatment  is  commenced  when  it  has  newly 
manifested  itself.  61 

PRATAMAICA  AND  SANTAMAKA  gWASA. 

The  ‘Tamaka-£wasa’  of  one  who  has  fever  and  swoons,  should 
be’jknown  as  ‘Pratamaka.’ 

The  ‘Tamaka-^wasa’  which  is  born  of  flatulence  of  the  stomach 
or  of  dust  in  the  nostrils,  or  of  indigestion,  or  of  eating  before  the 
food  last  taken  has  beeen  digested,  or  of  suppression  of  the  urgings 
of  nature, 

and  which  becomes  aggravated  during  the  hours  of  darkness, 
which  becomes  alleviated  by  cold,  and  which  makes  the 
patient  feel  as  if  he  is  sinking  in  the  dark  pit  without  bottom, 
is  called  ‘Santama^a.*  62-63 


*  ‘Klinna’  is  explained  by  GangSdhara  as  equivalent  to  ‘bhuktam’  or  eaten.  What  is 
implied  is  ‘eating  before  the  food  last  taken  has  been  digested.’ 

‘Kayanirodha’  is  explained  by  the  same  commentator  as  equivalent  to  ‘KSySgninirodha’, 
t.  e.,  the  suppression  of  the  digestive  fire.  This  is  not  right.  It  cannot  come  after  ‘Ajirna’ 
and  ‘Klinna,’  both  of  which  have  the  effect  of  suppressing  the  digestive  fire.  Some  verna¬ 
cular  translators  take  it  as  implying  the  injudic  on  suppression  of  the  vital  breaths  by  a 
person  who  is  a  neophyte  in  yoga  practices.— T. 


14S4  charaka-samhita . 

KSHUDRA-gWASA. 

Through  food  and  drink  that  are  dry  (i.  e.,  not  oily),  as  also 
through  injudicious  physical  exercise,  the  mild  wind  in  the  stomach, 
going  upwards,  begets  that  variety  of  ‘ywasa’  which  is  called 
‘Kshudra.’* 

This  '‘^w5sa’  does  not  painfully  obstruct  any  of  the  limbs.  64 

It  does  not  destroy  the  functions  of  any  of  the  limbs  of  the  body. 
Nor  does  it  prove  so  painful  as  the  other  varieties. 

It  does  not  obstruct  the  usual  course  of  food  and  drink.f  65 

It  does  not  produce  any  kind- of  pain  in' any  of  the  senses;  nor 
does  it  produce  any  other  (supervening)  disease. 

This  variety  of  asthma  is  curable  when  the  person  affected  has 
strength  (z.  e.,  has  not  been  rendered  weak). 

As  regards  all  the  varieties  of  asthma  (mentioned  above).  They 
are  curable  when  their  indications  are  not  fully  mansifested  [i.  e., 
when  treatment  is  begun  in  their  incubatory  state).  66 

Thus  have  the  different  varieties  of  asthma,  as  also  those  of  hic¬ 
cup,  been  declared,  with  their  (respective)  symptoms. 

Those  amongst  the  varieties  mentioned  which  are  destructive  of 
life  should  be  avoided  (z.  e.,  should  not  be  taken  up  for  treatment), 
since  these  always  manifest  themselves  with  violence  and  quickly 
terminate  life.J  67 

As  regards  those  which  are  curable  or  Suppressible,  the  physician 
should  commence  to  treat  them,  without  delay,  by  the  aid  of  proper 
medicines  ;  for  if  neglected,  they  destroy  life  quickly  like  fire  consum¬ 
ing  a  house  made  of  dry  materials.  68  * 


*  ‘Kshudra- vata’  is  mild  wind,  i.  e.,  the  wind  which  has  not  been  provoked  into 
intensity. — T. 

•)•  The  language,  instead  of  being  terse,  is  evidently  pleonastic.  ‘Duhkhena  angaprabS- 
dhakah’  is  the  same  as  ‘Hinasti  na  cha  gatrffni.’ 

What  is  meant,  again,  by  ‘Uchitam  gatim’  of  ‘bhojanap5n5nam’  is  this  :  food  and  drink 
become  transformed,  in  the  first  instance,  into  ‘Rasa’  or  juice.  This  juice  becomes 
blood,  &c.  These  operations  are  no  way  affected  by  this  variety  of  asthma.— T. 

%  The  language  is  certainly  pleonastic. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHI7A. 


1485 


Listen  now  to  the  treatment,  as  propounded  by  the  Rishis, 
;Of  both  asthma  and  hiccup,  which  is  verily  the  same  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  sameness  of  their  originating  cause,  the  localities 
affected,  and  the  places  in  which  they  first  arise.* * * §  69 

One  afflicted  with  hiccup  or  asthma  should  at  first  be  treated  with 
oilifying  drugs. 

(When  sufficiently,  oiled  by  this  means)  his  body  should  then  be 
rubbed  with  oils  mixed  with  salts,  and  he  should  be  treated  with 
those  varieties  of  ‘sweda’  (fomentation  for  inducing  perspiration) 
which  are  known  by  the  names  of  ‘Nadi,’  ‘Prastara,’  and  ‘Sankara.’+  7° 

By  these  operations,  the  thickened  phlegm  (of  the  person  afflicted 
with  hiccup  or  asthma1  in  the  ducts  becomes  dissolved,  all  the  outlets 
become  softened,  and  the  wind  becomes  restored  to  its  normal 
course.^  7i 

Even  as  the  snow  in  mountain  valleys,  heated  by  the  rays  of  the 
sun,  melts  and  escapes  out  (in  a  liquefied  state), 

the  thickened  phlegm  (in  the  body  of  the  person  afflicted  with 
hiccup  or  asthma),  heated  by  the-  operations  of  ‘sweda’,  melts 
and  escapes  out.  72 

Having  ascertained  that  the  person  has  been  sufficiently  fomented 
(for  inducing  perspiration),  the  physician  should  give  him  oily  food 
to  eat  with  the  meat-juice  of  pork  and  fish,  and  a  copious  measure 
of  curds.  73 

Then  when  the  phlegm  is  increased  in  quantity  through  such  diet, 
the  physician  should  administer  emetics  unto  him,  consisting  of  the 
fruits  of  Pippali  ( Piper  longuin )  and  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  mixed  with 
honey,  and  other  drugs  that  are  not  hostile  to  the  wind.§  74 


*  ‘Karana’  indicates  the  originating  cause  or  causes,  such  as  indulgence  in  forbidden 
practices  ;  ‘Stliana’  implies  the  localities  affected  ;  and  ‘Mula’  (literally,  root)  implies  ‘Ud- 
bhava  sthana  prathamika,’  that  is,  the  place  where  these  diseases  first  arise. — T. 

f  Vide  ‘SutrasthSna’,  Lesson  IV,  called  ‘Sweda’. — T. 

+  ‘Khani’,  which  is  explained  as  ‘Randhrani’,  means  the  outlets,  such  as  the  nostrils, 
&c..  These  become  softened  or  yielding,  and  hence  afford  passage  for  the  liquefied  phlegm 
to  escape. — T. 

§  ‘Vatavirodhi yat’,  i.  e.,  as  do  not  provoke  the  wind,  or  are  hostile  to  it.— T. 


[486 


CHAR  A  KA -SAM HIT  A. 


When  (by  means  of  emetics)  the  vitiated  phlegm  has  been  expelled 
from  the  body,  the  person  feels  ease,  since,  the  ducts  being  all 
cleared,  the  wind  courses  without  obstruction  of  any  kind.  75 

If  (after  the  above  treatment),  any  remnant  of  the  fault  (phlegm) 
still  adheres  to  the  ducts,  the  physician  possessed  of  intelligence 
should  then  expel  it  by  means  of  fumigation.  76 

Turmeric,  barley,  the  fruits  of  Eranda  (Ricinus  communis).  Lac,' 
galena,  Devadaru  (Pinus  deodara),  Ala  (yellow  orpiment)  and  Mangsi 
(2.  e.,  Jatamagnsi  or  Nardostachys  Jatamansi), — these  are  pounded 
into  a  paste  and  sticks  are  made  of  the  paste. 

Soaking  these  sticks  (when  dry)'  in  ghee,  their  smoke  should  be 
inhaled  ;  or  the  smoje  should  be  inhaled  of  the  paste  of  barley  alone 
(made  into  sticks)  soaked  in  ghee.  77 

Or,  the  person  may  drink  the  smoke  of  Madhuchcchista  (wax), 
Swarjjarasa  (the  exudation  of  Shorea  robusta),  and  ghee,  cooked 
within  two  earthen  vessels  one  placed  upon  another  with  the  joining 
line  luted  with  clay. 

Or,  he  may  drink  the  smoke  of  the  horns,  the  hair,  and  the  entrails 
of  a  cow  (similarly  made).|  78 

Or,  the  smoke  may  be  drunk  of  a  dry  pipe  or  tube  of  £yamaka 
(Bignonia  Indica),  or  of  Varddhamana  (otherwise  called  Eranda,  i.  e., 
Ricinus  Communis),  or  of  Kuga  (Poa  cynosuroides),  or  of  a  stick, 
dried,  of  the  paste  of  PadmakSshtha,  i.  e.,  a  fragrant  wood  of  that 
name,  Guggula  (the  exudation  of  Balsamodendton  Mukul),  and 
Lodhra  (Symplocos  racemosa ),  or  of  a  stick,  dried,  of  the  paste  of 


+  The  commentators  explain  that  two  concave  earthen  vessels  are  taken.  The  wax  and 
other  articles  are  placed  in  one  of  these  vessels.  The  other  vessel  is  then  placed  over  the 
first,  with  the  concave  side  down,  so  that  the  two  vessels  make  a  hollow  sphere  ;  the  joining 
line  is  luted  with  clay.  Living  coals  are  heaped  upon  the  vessels.  A  hole  is  made  in  the 
upper  one,  into  which  is  inserted  a  hollow  tube.  The  action  of  the  fire  causes  smoke  within 
the  vessels.  This  smoke  is  borne  upwards  through  the  hollow  tube,  and  is  inhaled  by  the 
patient. 

As  regards  the  horns,  &c.,  of  the  cow,  smoke  is  caused  by  a  similar  process  and  is  inhaled 
milarly. — T.  ■ 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1487 


^alwaki  ( Boswellia  serrata ,  syn.  Bosweelia  Thurifera ).  The  pipes  and 
the  sticks  should  be  laved  with  ghee  before  they  are  set  on  fire  for 
producing  smoke.  79 

Hiccup  and  asthma  accompanied  by  such  supervening  ailments 
as  weakness  of  voice,  diarrhoea,  blood-bile,  and  burning  sensation  of 
the  skin,  should  be  treated  with  sweets,  oily  drugs,  and  drugs  that 
are  cooling.  80 

‘Sweda’  (fomentation  of  the  varieties  called  ‘Nadi,’  ‘Prastara,’  and 
‘Sankara’)  should  not  be  applied  to  persons  afflicted  with  hiccup  or 
asthma,  when  they  happen  to  be  afflicted  with  excited  bile,  or 
burning  sensation  of  the  skin,  or  when  they  have  excessive  hemor¬ 
rhagic  discharges,  or  excessive  perspiration,  or  weakened  ‘dhatus’  or 
weakened  strength,  or  when  their  constitutions  have  been  exceed¬ 
ingly  dried  up,  or  when  they  happen  to  be  females  who  have  con¬ 
ceived,  or  when  the  bile  predominates  in  their  constitutions.  81 

If  ‘Sweda’  is  at  all  to  be  applied  to  such  persons,  their  throat  and 
chest  are  the  parts  where  it  should  be  applied  for  a  little  space  of 
time,  with  oily  substances  mixed  with  small  gravels,  heated  a  little, 
or  with  poultices  and  plasters  of  mild  virtues,  heated  a  little.*  82 

Tila  (sesame  seeds),  Uma  (linseeds),  Masha  (the  seeds  of  Phaseo- 
lus  radiatus ),  and  Godhuma  (wheat),  reduced  to  powder,  and  mixed 
with  such  oils  as  are  alleviative  of  the  wind,  should  be  used  to  make 
the  ‘Utkarika’  (poultice)  adverted  to  above.  It  should  be  mixed  also 
with  sour  juices  ;  or,  with  milk,  such  ‘Utkarika’  only  being  beneficial.  83 

As  regards  the  class  of  persons  mentioned  in  verse  81  above,  if 
they  happen  to  have  acute  fever  and  mucus  in  the  stomach,  ‘Sweda’ 
of  the  dry  kind  (i  e.,  with  dry  articles)  may  be  given.  They  should 
also  observe  fasts. 


*  Those  forms  of  ‘Sweda’  which  are  known  by  the  names  of  ‘Nadi’,  ‘Prastara’,  and 
‘Sankara’,  are  unsuitable  to  persons  of  this  description.  It  is  only  ‘Snehaseka’,  that  is, 
fomentation  with  oiiy  substances,  that  is  allowed.  Such  substances  are  mixed  with  small 
grains  of  gravel. 

The  composition  of  the  ‘Utkarika’  or  poultice  to  be  used  is  explained  in  the  next 
verses.— T. 

188 


1488 


CHARAKA-SA  MHJTA. 


Considering  also  the  strength  or  otherwise  of  the  persons,  they 
may  be  made  to  vomit  by  administering  to  them  salt  water.  84 

If  the  physician  sees  that  the  wind  is  provoked  by  excessive  ad¬ 
ministration  of  emetics,  &c.,  he  should  then  alleviate  the  provoked 
wind  by  giving  the  person  such  meat-juices,  &c.,  as  are  alleviative 
of  the  wind.  The  juices  should  be  neither  very  hot  nor  very  cold. 
He  should  also  prescribe,  for  the  same  purpose,  oils  for  rubbing  the 
body  with.*  85 

In  flatulence  of  the  stomach  and  noise  in  the  intestines  (of  one 
afflicted  with  hiccup  or  asthma),  boiled  rice  should  be  given  with  the 
expressed  juice  of  Matulunga  ( Citrus  medica),  Amlavetasa  ( Rumex 
vesicarms),  assafoetida,  Pilu  ( Salvadora  Indica ),  and  ‘Vit’  salt ;  for 
such  diet  is  capable  of  restoring  the  wind  to  its  normal  course.  86 
Persons  afflicted  with  hiccup  or  asthma  are  of  two  kinds,  1.  strong 
and  2.  weak. 

They  may  be  divided  in  another  way  into  two  classes,^.,  1. those 
in  whom  the  phlegm  is  predominant,  and  2.  those  whose  constitutions 
are  dry  and  in  whom  the  wind  is  predominant.  87 

As  regards  those  in  whom  the  phlegm  predominates  and  who  are 
strong,  the  administration  of  emetics  and  purgatives  is  prescribable. 
After  this,  proper  diet  should  be  given,  and  they  should  be  made  to 
inhale  (the)  smoke  (of  proper  drugs)  and  lick  (such)  linctuses  (as  may 
be  proper)  for  alleviating  the  phlegm.  88 

If  the  patient  happens  to  have  the  wind  predominating  in  his 
constitution,  or  if  he  happens  to  be  weak,  or  old,  or  young  in  years, 
he  should  be  treated  with  medicines  called  '(iamana,’  i.  e.,  such  oils 
and  soups  and  meat-juices  as  are  alleviative  of  the  wind.f  89 

As  regards  those  whose  phlegm  does  not  show  signs  of  coming 
out  (that  is,  whose  phlegm  becomes  adherent),  as  also  those  to  whom 
‘Sweda’  has  not  been  applied  (followed  by  the  administration  of  oils), 
and  those  that  are  weak,  emetics  and  purgatives  should  not  be  ad¬ 
ministered,  since  by  administering  these,  the  wind  is  given  an  oppor- 


*  ‘Atiyoga’  is  excess  of  correlation.  Here  it  refers,  as  Gang'!  dhara  explains,  to  the 
excessive  administration  of  emetics. — T. 

f  ‘Qamanas’  are  medicines  that  cool  and  oilify  the  system.  They  are  also  called  ‘Sam- 
Qarnanas’.  Vide  Lesson  on  Tarpana  in  Sutrashana.  It  should  be  remarked  that  the 
classifications  made  in  verse  86  are  not  followed  logically  in  89.— T. 


CHA  RA  KA  -  SAM  HIT  A . 


[489 


tunity  to  show  its  force.  It  then  dries  up  the  vital  parts  and  speedily 
destroys  the  life-breaths.*  9° 

Those  that  are  strong,  that  are  of  copious  phlegm,  and  that  have 
undergone  the  process  of  ‘Sweda’,  should  first  be  treated  with  the 
meat-juice  of  animals  that  live  in  the  water  or  in  marshy  regions,  and 
after  this  should  correctives  (emeties  and  purgatives,  &c.'  be  admi¬ 
nistered  unto  them. 

As  regards  others  (z.  <?.,  those  that  are  weak,  that  are  of  copious 
wind,  that  are  old,  or  of  tender  years'1,  the  physician  should  treat  with 
medicines  (and  regimen;  that  are  nutritive.  91 

Peacocks,  francoline  partridges,  fowl  (hens),  and  the  rest,  as  also 
animals  and  birds  of  the  wilderness, — these  boiled  in  the  decoction  of 
the  group  of  the  ten  roots,  or  in  the  decoction  of  the  seeds  of 
‘Kulattha’  ( Dolichos  biflorus ),  are  beneficial  (as  nutritive  regimen ).f  92 

Nidigdhika  (otherwise  called  KantakSri,  i.  e.,  Solarium  Xantho- 
curpuni),  the  kernel  of  Vilwa  {AEgle  marmelos,  raw  fruits  of  which  are 
taken),  Karkata  (otherwise  called  Karkatafringi,  i.  e.,  Rhus  succe- 
danea ),  Duralabha  (. Hedysarum  Alhagi),  Trikantaka  (otherwise  called 
Gokshura,  i.  e.,  Tribulus  lanuginosus),  Guduchi  {Tinospora  cor dif olid) 
the  seeds  of  Kulattha  {Dolichos  biflorus ),  and  the  roots  of  Chitraka, 
{Plumbago  Zeylanica'). 

These  should  be  boiled  in  water  for  their  decoction  which  should 
be  strained  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth. 

To  the  decoction,  thus  strained,  should  be  thrown  the  pulvs  of 
Pippali  ( Piper  longum ),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  and  salt.  The  com¬ 
pound  should  then  be  fried  in  ghee. 

Thus  prepared,  the  decoction  is  beneficial  to  take  with  meals,  j  93-94 


*  The  sense  seems  to  be  this  :  emetics  and  purgatives  are  not  to  be  administered  to  those 
whose  phlegm  is  adherent,  who  have  not  undergone  the  processes  of  ‘Sweda’,  and  who 
are  weak.— T. 

-j-  Meat-juice  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  these  birds  and  animals,  are  nutritive.  These 
are  prescribable  for  the  classes  of  persons  mentioned  in  the  second  para  of  verse  91 
above.— T. 

J  This  decoction  is  another  nutritive  regimen  prescribable  for  the  classes  of  persons 
mentioned  in  the  last  portion  of  verse  91  above.  The  commentators  explain  that  seven  of 


1490 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SAM  HIT  A. 


R&sna  (  VandaRoxburghii),  BalS  (Sida  cordifolia ),  the  group  of* 
the  smaller  five  roots  (*.  e.,  the  roots  of  (^alparni  or  Hedysarum  Gan- 
geticum,  Prisniparni  or  Doodia  logopodioides,  Vrihati  or  Solanum 
Indica,  and  Kantakari  or  Solanum  Xauthocarpum ,  and  Gokshura  or 
Tributus  lanoginosus),  the  seeds  of  Mudga  ( Phaseolus  Mungo ),  and  the 
roots  of  Chitraka  (Plumbago  Zeylanica )  : 

These  (with  the  exception  of  tlfb  seeds  of  Mudga)  should  be  boiled 
in  water.  In  the  decoction  thus  obtained  the  soup  (of  the  seeds  of 
Mudga)  should  be  cooked  as  before  (?'.  e.,  the  same  pulvs  as  those 
mentioned  in  the  previous  verse  should  be  added  and  the  compound 
should  also  be  firied  in  ghee).  95 

The  leaves  of  Matulunga  ( Citrus  medico),  the  leaves  of  Nimba  . 
( Melia  Azadirachta ),  and  also  those  of  Kulaka  (otherwise  called 
Patola,  i.  e.,  Trichosanthes  dioica),  the  seeds  of  Mudga  ( Phaseolus 
Mungo),  and  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids,  viz.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of 
Piper  longuin,  and  black  pepper),  should  be  boiled  together  and  a 
‘Kshara-yusha’  should  be  prepared.  96 

To  the  decoction  of  the  drugs  mentioned  above  the  following 
should  be  added,  viz.,  ‘Kshara’  (the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots', 
‘Saindhava’  salt,  the  seeds  of  £igfu  (Moringa  pterygosperma),  and 
black  pepper. 

The  ‘Yusha’  (soup),  prepared  with  judicious  measures  of  the  above 
ingredients,  conquers  hiccup  and  asthma.  97 

The  soups  of  Mudga  (seeds  of  Phaseolus  Mungo)  and  the  rest, 
cooked  in  the  decoction  of  the  leaves  of  Kasamardda  ( Cassia  Sophora) 
or  in  that  of  the  leaves  of  (^obhanjana  (Moringa  pterygosperma ),  or  in 
that  of  dried  radishes,  are  capable  of  alleviating  hiccup  and  asthma.  98 

The  soups  of  Mudga  (seeds  of  Phaseolus  Mungo'',  and  the  rest, 
with  the  fruits  of  Vartaku  (Solatium  Mel ongena),  and  curds  and  the 
pulvs  of  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids,  viz.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of  Piper 
longum,  and  black  pepper),  fried  in  ghee,  are  beneficial  in  hiccup 
and  asthma. 


these  are  boiled  together,  and  that  the  Seeds  of  Kulattha  are  boiled  separately.  The  two 
decoctions  are  mixed  together,  and  the  pulvs  are  added,  and  the  compounded  product  is 
fried  in  ghee. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITa 


149* 


Old  ‘9&li’  rice,  ‘Shashthika’  rice,  wheat,  and  barley,  (boiled),  are 
beneficial  to  persons  afflicted  with  hiccup  and  asthma.  99 

Gruel  of  barley,  boiled  with  assafostida,  ‘Sauvarchala’  salt,  the 
seeds  of  Ajaji  ( Nigella  sativa),  ‘Vit’ salt,  Pushkara  (a  kind  of  root 
which  not  being  available,  the  roots  of  Aplotaxis  auriculata  are  used 
as  a  substitute),  and  the  roots  of  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica ;, 

or,  with  Karkatajringi  ( Rhus  succedanea), 

is  beneficial  for  persons  afflicted  with  hiccup  and  asthma.*  100 

One  should  drink  gruel  of  barley,  duly  boiled  with  the  ten  roots, 
£ati  {Curcuma  Zerumbet),  Rasna  {Vanda  Roxburgh'ii),  Pippali  (the 
fruits  of  Piper  longum),  Vilwa  (fruits  of  Zigle  marmelos \  ‘Pushkara,’ 
£ringi  ( Rhus  succedana),  Tamalaki  {Phyllanthus  Niruri \  Bhfirgi 
{Siphonanthus  Indica ),  Guduchi  {Tinospora  cordifolia },  Nagara  (dry 
ginger),  and  Riddhi  (not  being  attainable,  Bala  or  Si  da  cordifolia  is 
used  as  a  substitute, )f 

or,  the  ‘Kashaya’  (decoction)  only  of  these,  for  the  alleviation  of 
cough,  feeling  of  oppression  on  the  chest,  pains  in  the  sides,  hiccup, 
and  asthma.  101-102 

Food  and  drink  boiled  with  the  decoction  of  Pushkara  'a  variety 
of  roots  which  not  being  obtainable,  those  of  Aplotaxis  auriculata  are 
used  as  a  substitute),  <^ati  ( Curcuma  Z erumbei),  Vyosha  (the  three 
acrids,  vis.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum ,  and  black  pepper), 
Matulunga  {Citrus  acidd),  and  Amlavetasa  (otherwise  called  Chukra, 
i.  e.,  Rumex  vesicarius), 

and  mixed  with  the  pulvs  of  ‘Vit’  salt  and  assafcetida,  and  ghee , 
should  be  prescribed  for  one  afflicted  with  hiccup  or  asthma.  103 

If  one  afflicted  with  hiccup  or  asthma  feels  thirsty,  he  should  drink 
the  decoction  of  the  ten  roots,  or  the  decoction  of  DevadSru  {Pinus 
deodara ),  or  wine.  104 


*  The  gruel  should,  after  being  boiled  with  the  drugs  named,  be  fried  in  ghee, 
before  use. — T. 

-]-  The  Calcutta  edition  has  ‘Mulapaushkaraih’  for  ‘Vilwapaushkaraih’  at  the  end  of  the 
first  line,  and  ‘Amvubhih’  for  ‘Riddhibhih’  at  the  end  of  the  second  line. — T. 


1 49  * 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Paths  '  [Cissampelos  herna?idifolia ),  Madhurasa  (otherwise  called 
Murva,  i.  e.,  Sanseviera  Zeylanica,  Rasna  ( Vanda  Roxburghii),  Sarala 
[Pinus  longifolia),  and  Devada.ru  ( Pinus  deodara )  : 

Wash  these  in  water,  and  then  pound  them  in  powder,  and  throw 
the  powder  into  ‘Suramanda.’* 

Adding  a  little  salt  to  it,  the  physician  should  cause  it  to  be  drunk, 
the  measure  of  a  dose  being  a  ‘prasrita’  (2  palas).  This  drink  allevi¬ 
ates  hiccup  and  asthma.  105-106 

One  afflicted  with  hiccup  or  asthma  should  drink  Hingu  (assa- 
fcetida),  ‘Sauvarchala’  salt,  Kola  (jujubes),  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper 
longmn),  and  Bala  <  Si  da  cor  difolia),  pounded  with  the  juice  of 
Matulunga  ( Citrus  medica ),  and  dissolved  in  ‘aranSla’  (a  variety  of 
’K&nji’).  i°7 

One  afflicted  with  hiccup  or  asthma  may  drink  the  paste  1.  of 
Bhargi  ( Siphonanthus  Indica),  and  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  or  2.  of  black 
pepper  and  the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots,  or  3.  of  Pitadru  (other 
wise  called  Daruharidra,  i.  e.,  Berberis  Asiatica ),  Chitraka  ( Plumbago 
Zeylanica, )  Ashphota  (otherwise  called  Haparm&li,  i.  e.t  Echites  dicho- 
toma),  and  Murva  ( Sanseviera  Zeylanica ),  dissolved  in  water.  108 

The  expressed  juice  of  the  flowers  of  Cirisa  [Mimosa  Sirissd),  as 
also  that  of  Saptaparna  [Echites  scholaris ),  each  mixed  with  the  pulv 
of  the  fruits  of  Pippali  [Piper  longum ),  and  honey,  is  beneficial  in 
hiccup  and  asthma  when  these  are  characterised  by  predominance  of 
phlegm  and  bile.  i°9 

Madhulika  (the  small  unbroken  particles  of  wheat-flour-),  Tuga- 
kshiri  (bambu  manna),  dry  ginger,  and  the  fruits  of  Pippali  ([Piper 
longum \  boiled  in  ghee,  form  an  ‘CJtk&rika’  that  is  beneficial  in  asthma 
when  it  exists  with  provoked  bile.f  110 


*  Yeast  or  froth  of  vinous  liquor. — T. 

-f-  Some  commentators  take  ‘Madhulika’  to  be  a  variety  of  liquorice  growing  in  water. 
Gangadhara  takes  it  for  the  small  unbroken  particles  of  wheat  that  remain  after  the  flour  has 
been  strained  through. 

The  articles  mentioned  are  boiled  in  water, with  a  sufficient  quantity  oi ghee.  ‘Utkarika’ 
is  known  as  ‘Mohanbhoga’  in  Bengal. — T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHITA . 


yh 

The  flesh  of  the  large  porcupine  and  of  the  hare,  and  blood  of  the 
small  porcupine,  boiled  with  the  pulv  of  Pippali  {Piper  longum )  and 
ghee  (adding  water  to  if',  is  beneficial  in  asthma  when  it  exists  with 
the  provoked  wind.  111 

The  expressed  juice  of  Suvarchala  (otherwise  called  Suryabhakta, 
or  Hudhude  in  Bengali,  i.  e.,  Cleome  Viscosa ),  or  the  milk  of  the  cow. 
or  ghee,  mixed  with  the  pulv  of  the  three  acrids  {viz.,  dry  ginger,  the 
fruits  of  Piper  longum,  and  black  pepper),  forms  a  beneficial  drink 
after  taking  boiled  ‘£ali’  rice,  in  asthma  existing  with  excited  wind 
and  bile.*  112 

Madhuka  (liquorice),  the  roots  of  Pippali  ( Piper  longum )  reduced 
to  pulv,  treacle,  the  expressed  juice  of  cow-dung,  honey,  and  ghee, 
constitute  a  linctus  which,  if  licked,  is  beneficial  in  those  varieties  of 
asthma,  cough,  and  hiccup,  in  which  secretions  take  place.  ”3 

In  asthma  characterised  by  copious  phlegm,  one  should  drink, 
mixing  it  with  honey,  the  expressed  juice  of  the  dung  of  the  ass,  or 
of  the  horse,  or  of  the  camel,  or  of  the  boar,  or  of  sheep,  or  of  the 
elephant.  ”4 

Or,  the  ashes  of  AjwagandhS  {Physalis  flexuosa),  mixed  with 
honey  and  ghee ,  may  be  licked  ;  or  the  ashes  of  the  peacock’s  leg, 
mixed  with  honey  and  ghee,  may  be  licked. j- 

Or,  the  ashes  of  the  quills  of  the  porcupine  (mixed  with  honey 
and  'ghee').,  may  be  taken,  ns 

Or,  the  hair  of  the  large  porcupine,  or  that  of  the  ‘Rohaka’  (not 
identifiable),  or  that  of  the  blue  jay,  or  that  of  the  osprey,  or  the 
horns,  the  skin,  the  bones,  and  the  hoofs  of  animals  that  are  of  cloven 
or  uncloven  hoofs,  should  be  incinnerated  into  ashes,  and  those  ashes, 
mixed  with  honey  and  ghee,  may  be  licked  by  persons  afflicted  with 


*  ‘Anupana’  is  after-drink.  It  means  vehicle  also.  What  is  stated  here  is  that  after 
taking  boiled  ?ali  rice,  one  should  drink  the  expresse  djtiice  named,  or  milk,  or  ghee,  each 
mixed  with  the  pulvs  of  the  three  acrids. — T. 

f  The  ashes  of  Physalis  flexuosa  are  first  thrown  into  water.  The  sediment,  deposited 
at  the  bottom,  is  taken  up  and  mixed  with  honey  and  ghee.  In  the  same  way,  the  ashes 
obtained  by  incinnerating  the  legs  of  the  peacock  are  thrown  into  water,  and  the  sediment  is 
taken  up  and  mixed  with  hor.ey  and  ghee. — T. 


1494 


CH.A  RA  K A-S  AM  HIT  A. 


asthma.  The  ashes  of  each,  separately,  or  of  all  mixed  together,  are 
used  for  the  purpose. 

The  ashes  mentioned,  thus  taken,  conquer  cough,  hiccup,  and 
asthma,  of  even  violent  types.*  116-117 

Since  these  varieties  of  linctus  alleviate  the  provocation  of  the 
life-breath  called  ‘Prana’  whose  course  is  obstructed  by  (excited)- 
phlegm,  therefore,  should  these  be  administered  for  clearing  the 
obstructed  course. 

These,  however,  should  not  be  administered  to  one  in  whom  the 
excited  phlegm  has  not  obstructed  the  course  of  the  life-breath.  118 

The  physician  possessed  of  intelligence  should  administer  emetics 
unto  one  who  is  afflicted  with  asthma  accompanied  by  cough,  as  also 
to  one  afflicted  with  asthma  accompanied  by  hoarseness  of  voice. 

In  that  variety,  however,  of  asthma  which  is  known  by  the  name 
of  ‘Tamaka,’  purgatives  (and  not  emetics)  should  be  administered, 
accompanied  by  drugs  that  are  alleviative  of  excited  wind  and 
phlegm. 

Purgatives  with  such  drugs  should  also  be  administered  in 
‘Tamaka’  accompanied  by  hoarseness  of  voice.  Il9 

As  the  waters  of  a  running  stream  swell  up  if  their  course  is 
obstructed  (by  a  dam  or  otherwise),  even  so  does  the  wind  of  one 
afflicted  with  hiccup  or  asthma  swells  up  (becomes  violently  provoked) 
when  its  course  becomes  obstructed. 

Plence,  the  course  (path)  of  the  wind  should  always  be  sought 
to  be  kept  clear  (in  one  who  is  afflicted  with  hiccup  or  asthma).  120 

QATYADI  PULV. 

<^ati  ( Curcuma  Zerumbef),  Choraka  {Andropogon  acicularis),-  Jivanti 
{Ccdogyne  ovalis),  Tvak  (the  bark  of  Cinamomum  Zeylanicum ;,  Musta 
(the  tubers  of  Cypcrus  rotundus),  Pushkara  (the  roots  so  called),  Surasa 
{Ocimum  sanctum' ,  Tiimalaka  (otherwise  called  Bhumygmaka,  i.  e. 

*  As  regards  the  ashes  of  the  hair  of  the  animals  named,  they  are  taken  separately.  It 
is  only  the  ashes  of  the  horns,  &c.,  of  the  animals  indicated,  that  may  be  taken  either 
separately  or  compounded  together. — T. 


James  W,  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland  U.  S.  A.: — You  have  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  Sait  Francisco,  California: —  . As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent . .  ... 

there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis ,  Ohio,  U.  S.  A.  : — The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  wich  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
'monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge  : — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat- 
iag  the  entire  Work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York : — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq .,  Editor  of  the  American  fournal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia  : — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq.,— Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine.  ' 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia': — I  have  found -it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical' Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  oj  Cashmere : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-Western 
University,  Sect  etary  to  the  Congress  of  the  Woolds  Columbian  Exposition  I  am 
ilready  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  :— Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  xg,  EastjSth  Strict,  Nejo  York: — Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Praise,  Dramstadt : — The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist: — I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere,  174,  Boulevatse,  Saint  German  Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  : — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  of 
Charaka  I  always  arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians  of  the  pre¬ 
sent  day  would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and 
treat  their  patients  according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the 
undertakers,  and  fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to 
the  completion  of  the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street,  Calcutta : — My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after. — 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  bcypnd  .anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  iriTJord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing: — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector-. — Your  patriotic 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  ...  ...  . . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  H.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  : — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  Itis 
marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Gya  : — It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  Wales : — The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India.  » 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  : — Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  "laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is 
a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji, — The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to 
the  physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as 
well.  Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


47^(7 


47357 


CHARAEA-SAMHITA 


(TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH). 


PARESHNATHl  SARMA, 


KAVIRAJ  AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  Original)  WITH  COMMEf 
ARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  :  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 
journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  the  Hindu 

SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C.,  &C. 


200,  Cornwallis  Street. 


(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved. ) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters .) 

■T 

Professor  Mas  Mailer  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish.— Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says,— . I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention. 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  Interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office—  .  Your 

excellent  translation  .  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

. Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A.— I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing.  .Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  of  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French.public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  'I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany: — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsburtk,  Germany  : — English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal: — I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life, 
cannet  be  other  than  valuable.  . 


CHA  RA  KA  -  SA  MHITA . 


1495 


Phyllanthus  Niruri\  Aguru  \Aquilaria  Agallocha ),  Nagara  (dry- 
ginger),  Valaka  (otherwise  called  Bala,  i.  e.,  Pavonia  odorata ) : 

Equal  measures  of  these  are  taken  and  reduced  to  pulv.  Mixing 
the  pulvs  and  adding  sugar  of  eight  times  their  measure,  the  com¬ 
pound  should  be  administered  in  that  variety  of  asthma  which  is 
called  ‘Tamaka,’  as  also  in  hiccup.  121-122 

M  UKTADYA-GH  RITA. 

Pearls,  corals,  lapis  lazuli,  cOnchs,  chrystals,  galena,  hard  glass, 
sulphur,  the  root-bark  of  Arka  {Calatropis  giganted),  the  small  variety 
of  Ela  ( Elettaria  cardamomuvi),  the  two  salts  (viz.,  ‘Saindhava’  and 
‘Sauvarchala’)  the  pulvs  of  copper  and  iron  and  silver,  Saugandhika 
(otherwise  called  KahlSra,  i.  e.,  Nymphcea  lotus ),  Kaseruka  (Scirpus 
kysoor ,  Jatiphala  (nutmeg  fruits),  the  seeds  of  £ana  (Indian  hemp) 
the  seeds  of  Apamarga  ( Achyranthes  aspera ) : 

Equal  measures  of  the  pulv3  of  these  are  taken  and  mixed  to¬ 
gether.  Two  tolas  of  the  compound,  mixed  with  honey  and  ghee, 
licked,  speedily  conquers  hiccup  and  asthma.  123-125 

If  the  compounded  pulv  be  used  as  collyrium,  it  cures  many 
varieties  of  eye-disease,  such  as  ‘Timira/  ‘Kacha,’  ‘Nilika,’  ‘Pushpaka’, 
‘Tam as,’  ‘Pailya,’  ‘Kandu,’  ‘Abhishyanda,’  and  ‘Manda.’*  126 

The  pulv  of  £ati  (1 Curcuma  Zerumbet ),  and  of  Pushkaramula  (the 
roots  of  that  name;,  or  of  Amlaka  (the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica ), 
mixed  with  honey, 

or  the  pulv  of  black  iron  mixed  with  honey,  forms  an  excellent 
linctus  in  hiccup  and  asthma.  127 

Tamalaka  {Phyllanthus  Niruri),  Draksha  (grapes),  the  expressed 
juice  of  cow-dung  and  horse-dung,  with  sugar,  and  treacle,  and  dry 
ginger,  each  taken  in  equal  measure,  should  be  administered  inter¬ 
nally  or  as  snuff.  128 

The  roots  of  Laguna  (garlics),  those  of  Palandu  (onions),  and  those 
of  Grinjanaka  (turnips),  (reduced  to  pulv)  should  be  administered  in 
the  same  form.  I29 


*  It  is  difficult  to  give  English  renderings  of  these  names  ;  ‘Timira’  is  vision  of  darkness  ; 
‘Tamas’  is  blindness  ;  ‘Kandu’  is  itching  of  the  eyes  ;  ‘Abhishyanda’  is  opthalmia. — T. 


1495 


CHAR  AKA -SA  M  HIT  A  . 


The  ‘manda’  (cream)  of  ghee ,  agreeably  warm,  mixed  with  ‘Said- 
dhava’  salt  reduced  to  pulv,  should  be  administered  as  snuff ;  or  the 
dung  of  the  bee,  pounded  with  the  juice  of  Alaktaka  'a  preparation 
of  lac),  or  with  human  milk,  should  be  administered  in  the  same  way.* 

Or,  ghee  boiled  with  ‘madhuraka’  (the  group  of  drugs  called 
‘Jivaniya’),  placed  in  the  nostrils,  or  drunk,  speedily  conquers 
hiccup.  130-131 

Once  milk  that  is  warm,  and  then  milk  that  is  cold,  one  after 
another,  are  prescribable  for  drink  as  regards  one  that  is  afflicted  with 
hiccup. 

As  regards  snuff,  cold  milk,  mixed  with  sugar  and  honey,  is  bene¬ 
ficial  for  such  a  patient.  J32 

Ghee ,  boiled  with  the  decoction  or  the  paste  of  such  drugs  as  are 
possessed  of  purging  virtues,  administered  as  enemata,  speedily  con¬ 
quers  hiccup. 

The  pulv  of  Pippali  (Piper  longum),  mixed  with  honey  and  the 
expressed  juices  of  Dhatri  (otherwise  called  Amlaka  i.  e.,  the  fruits 
of  Phyllanthus  Emblica )  and  Kapittha  (the  fruits  of  Feronia  Ele- 
phantuni),  -constitutes  a  beneficial  linctus  for  one  afflicted  with 
hiccup.  :33 

LakshS  (lac),  Laja  (fried  paddy),  honey,  Draksha  (grapes),  and 
Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longuni)  ; 

These,  pounded  with  the  expressed  juice  of  horse-dung,  forms 
a  linctus  which  is  beneficial  in  hiccup. 

Or  Kola  (jujubes),  Draksha  (grapes),  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper 
longum),  and  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  should  be  pounded  with  honey. 
This  also  forms  a  beneficial  linctus  in  hiccup.  *34 


*  ‘Alaktaka’  is  a  preparation  of  lac.  It  is  of  deep  red  colour.  Cotton  is  soaked  in  it  and 
dried  in  the  form  in  which  it  sells  in  the  market.  The  dried  cotton  is  drenched  in  water, 
and  the  red  juice  comes  out. 

Gangadhara  takes  ‘Narikshirena’  in  the  verse  131  as  connected  with -verse  130,  so  that 
the  dung  of  the  bee,  pounded  with  ‘Alaktaka’  or  with  human  milk,  is  to  be  administered 
as  snuff.— T. 


CHA  RA  K A-S AM HI  7  A. 


H97 


Sprinkling  of  cold  water,  exsiting  a  sudden  fear,  <^r  of  sudden 
wonder,  or  of  fear,  or  of  wrath,  or  of  joy,  or  of  grief  or  anxiety  for  a 
dear  one,  are  regarded  as  means  of  curing  hiccup.  r3S 

Those  afflicted  with  hiccup  and  asthma  should,  if  desirous  of 
getting  rid  of  their  disease,  avoid  all  those  causes  which  have  been 
laid  down  as  originators  of  hiccup  and  asthma.  t36 

Those  whose  chests  are  dry  and  void  of  phlegm,  and  who  are 
afflicted  with  hiccup  or  asthma  for  a  long  time,  are  by  nature  poss¬ 
essed  of  bodies  which  are  dry.  These  should  be  treated  with  ghees 
(as  those  laid  down  below).  '37 

D  Ag  AM  U  L  AD  Y  A-G  H  R I T  A. 

Boil  ghee  in  the  decoction  of  the  group  of  ten  roots,  and  the  cream 
of  curds,  adding  the  paste  of  Krishna  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum), 
‘Sauvarchala’  salt,  Kshara  (the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots), 
VayahsthS  ((otherwise  called  Haritaki,  i  e.,  chebulic  myrobalans), 
assafoetida,  and  Choraka  ( Andropogon  acicularis).  This  ghee  conquers 
hiccup  and  asthma. 

Or,  boil  ghee  in  the  decoction  of  the  ten  roots  and  the  cream  of 
curds,  adding  Kayastha  (the  paste  of  the  seeds  of  cardamums). 

Ghee  so  boiled,  cures  hiccup  and  asthma.* 
TEJOVATYADI-GHRITA. 

Tejovati  (otherwise  called  ChavyS,  i.  e.,  Piper  Chaba ),  AbhayS 
(Chebulic  myrobalans),  Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis  auriculata ),  Pippali  (the 
fruits  of  Piper  longum ),  Katurohini  (. Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ),  Bhutika 
(otherwise  called  Yamani,  i.  e.,  the  seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajozvan),  Push- 
karamula  (the  roots  of  Pushkara),  Palaca  ( Butea  frondosa ),  Chitraka 
{Plumbago  Zeylanica ),  Cati  ( Curcuma  Zetumbet ),  ‘Sauvarchala’  salt, 
Tamalaki  {Phyllanthus  Niruri ),  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  Vilwa-peshika  (dried 
pieces  of  the  fruits  of  ZEgle  marmelos ),  Talicapatra  (. Pinus  Webbiand), 
Jivariti  {Ccelogyne  ovalis'',  and  Vacha  {Acorus  calamus ) : 

An  ‘Asksha’  (equal  to  two  tolas)  of  each  of  these  is  taken,  and  of 
Hingu  (assafoetida)  a  fourth  of  that  measure  (z.  e.,  half  a  tola)  is  taken. 


*Tivo  varieties  of  Dagamuladya-Ghrita  are  explained  here.  The  measure  of  the 
decoction  of  the  ten  roots  is  twice  as  that  of  ghee  ;  that  of  the  cream  of  curds  is  also  twice 
that  of  ghee  ;  the  measure  of  either  of  the  pastes  is  a  fourth  of  that  ghee. — T, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1498 

With  all  t£e  articles  mentioned  afesve,  a  ‘prastha’  (equal  to  2  seers) 
of  ghee  is  boiled,  adding  water  of  four  times  that  measure  (i.  e., 
8  seers,  16  seers  being  taken  in  practice  because  of  its  being  a  liquid), 

A  person  by  drinking  this  medicated  ghee ,  the  measure  being 
dependent  upon  his  strength,  conquers  hiccup  and  asthma. 

The  other  diseases  conquered  by  this  ghee  are  dropsical  swellings, 
excited  wind,  piles,  disease  of  the ‘Grahani,’  pains  in  the  chest,  and 
pains  in  the  sides.  1 38-142 

MANAHgiLADI-GHRITA. 

ManahgilS  (realgar),  Sarjjara-sa  (the  exudation  of  Shorea  robusta', 
LakshS  (lac\  Rajani  (otherwise  called  Haridra,  i.  e.,  Curcuma  longa), 
Padmaka  (a  fragrant  wood  of  that  name  brought  from  Central 
India),  Manjistha  ( Rubia  Manjista },  and  Ela  (the  seeds  of  Elettatia 
cardamomum ) : 

One  ‘Karsha’  (equal  to  2  tolas}  of  each  of  these  is  taken. 

Boil  these  with  one  ‘prastha’  (equal  to  2  sebrs,  in  practice  4  seers 
are  taken)  of  ghee,  (adding  water  of  the  measure  of  16  seers). 

This  ghee  is  beneficial  in  hiccup  and  asthma.  *43 

Ghee  boiled  with  the  decoction  and  the  paste  of  the  drugs  in¬ 
cluded  in  the  group  called  ‘Jivaniya’,  and  mixed  with  honey,  forms 
a  linctus  that  is  beneficial  in  hiccup  and  asthma.  *44 

Or,  the  patient  may  drink  ‘Vasa-ghritam’,  or  ‘Dadhika-ghritam’ 
or  ‘Tryushana-ghritam.’  (All  these  are  beneficial  in  hiccup  and 
asthma).*  *45 

All  that  is  destructive  of  phlegm  and  wind,  all  that  is  of  heating 
virtues,  and  all  that  restores  the  wind  to  its  normal  course,  are  bene¬ 
ficial  in  hiccup  and  asthma.  *46 

There  are  drugs  which  excite  the  wind  but  alleviate  the  phlegm  ; 
there  are  drugs  which  excite  the  phlegm  but  alleviate  the  wind  ; 
none  of  these  should  be  administered  without  discretion  (in  hiccup 
and  asthma).  Very  generally,  drugs  that  are  only  alleviative  of  the 
wind  are  regarded  as  more  beneficial  than  either  of  the  two  classes 
mentioned.  *47 


The  composition  of  alljthese  ghees  has  been  explained  before. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1499 


Since  by  administering  medicines  (and  food  and  drink)  that  are 
‘Vringhana’,  it  is  seen  that  all  varieties  of  hiccup  and  asthma  are 
only  partially  allayed,  since  by  administering  medicines  (and  food 
and  drink)  that  are  ‘£amana,’  those  diseases  are,  without  doubt, 
wholly  allayed,  and  since  by  administering  medicines  (food  and 
drink)  that  are  ‘Karsh anas’,  no  benefit  is  derived,  148 

Therefore,  persons  afflicted  by  hiccup  and  asthma,  whether  cor¬ 
rected  or  not  by  purgatives,  should  be  treated  with  only  ‘Vringhanas’ 
and  ‘£amanas’  (but  never  with  ‘Karshanas’).*  H9 

( Here  occurs  a  verse  containing  a  summary ). 

The  causes  of  the  unconquerability  of  hiccup  and  asthma,  as  also 
of  their  origin, 

the.  causes  also  of  the  same  treatment  being  advisable  for  both 
these  diseases, 

the  symptoms  of  each  of  them,  and  the  regimen  prescribable  in 
each  of  them,  have  been  declared  in  this  Lesson.  IS°  i 

Thus  ends  Lesson  XVII,  called  the  treatment  of  Hiccup  and 
Asthma,  in  the  treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised  by  Charaka  (and  as 
regards  those  portions  of  the  work  that  become  unobtainable,  as 
revised  by  Dridavala,  in  the  Division  called  Chikitsita.f 


*  ‘Vringhanas’  are  medicines  that  promote  nutrition  and  growth  of  the  body. 

‘Qamanas’  are  medicines  that  alleviate  disease. 

‘Karshanas’  are  medicines  and  operations  that  weaken  and  emaciate,  snch  as  emetics, 
purgatives,  &c. — T. 

f  Portions  of  the  treatise  of  AgniveQa  as  even  revised  by  Charaka  became  unobtainable. 
A  person  of  the  name  of  Dridavala,  belonging  to  the  country  of  the  five  rivers,  supplied 
those  portions  after  having  worshipped  the  great  god,  Mahadeva,  for  years  and  obtained  his 
blessings.  Dri4avala’s  work  begins  from  this,  the  XVIIlh  Lesson. — T. 


LESSON  XVIII. 


We  shall,  after  this,  expound  the  treatment  of  Cough. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious’, one  of  Atri’s  race.  1 

Endued  with  austere  penances,  great  energy,  great  steadiness,  and 
great  intelligence,  Punarvasu  of  Atri’s  race  declared  the  following 
treatment  for  the  alleviation  and  cure  of  Cough.*  2 

These  five  are  the  varieties  of  cough  which  afflict  human  beings, 
viz.,  the  three  that  arise  from  wind  and  the  rest,  (i.  e.,  the  wind-born, 
the  bile-born,  and  the  phlegm-born),  the  one  that  is  born  of  wounds, 
.and  the  one  that  is  born  of  weakness  (or  waste  of  the  ‘dh&tus’). 

If  these  (through  neglect)  are  allowed  to  increase  in  intensity, 
they  bring  about  dissolution.  3 

The  premonitary  indications  of  all  the  varieties  are  a  sense  of  the 
throat  and  the  mouth  being  pierced  with  the  spicula  or  pointed  ends 
of  paddy  or  barley. 

There  is  itching  also  in  the  throat,  and  difficulty  of  deglutition 
(in  consequence  of  the  throat  being  dry).f  4 

Its  downward  course  being  checked,  the  wind  (viz.,  the  breath 
called  ‘Pr&na’)  goes  into  the  upper  ducts. 

There  obtaining  the  character  of  ‘Udana,’  it  adheres  to  the  throat 
and  the  chest.  5 

Entering  then  the  hollow  spaces  in  the  head  (*.  e.,  the  mouth,  the 
nostrils,  the  ears,  the  eyes,  &c.)  and  filling  them  up,  it  bends  and 
contracts  the  whole  body,  (especially)  the  cheeks,  the  jaws,  and  the 
the  eyes.  6 

It  then  bends  the  eyes,  the  back,  the  chest,  and  the  sides,  and 
stupefies  them. 


*  ‘Paraya’  qualifies  ‘tapasS,’  and  the  rest,  and  not  ‘dhiya  only. — T. 
f  ‘Bhojyanam  avarodha’  is,  literally,  ‘obstruction  in  swallowing  food,  ’  This  is  due, 
as  explained  by  the  commentators,  to  the  throat  being  dry. — T. 


CHARAKA-SA  MHI7A. 


150; 


Remaining  alone  or  uniting  with  the  phlegm,  it  escapes  with  a 
sound  and  is,  therefore,  calle^  ‘Kasa’  (cough  .*  7 

In  consequence  of  some  especial  obstruction  of  that  wind  which 
becomes  endued  with  great  force,  the  pain  and  the  sound,  that  are 
both  especial,  arise  of  the  disease  called  Cough.f  8 

Indulgence  in  food  and  drink  that  are  dr}'  or  cold  or  of  astringent 
taste,  insufficient  or  scanty  food  or  total  abstention  from  food, 
excessive  indulgence  in  sexual  congress,  suppression  of  the  (pro¬ 
nounced)  urgings  of  nature,  and  undue  physical  exertion —these  are 
inducers  of  that  cough  which  is  born  of  (excited)  wind.  9 

This  variety  of  cough  causes  excessive  pains  in  the  heart,  the 
sides,  the  chest,  and  the  head. 

It  also  causes  excessive  hoarseness  of  voice. 

Of  one  whose  chest,  throat,  and  mouth  have  become  dry,  and  the 
hair  on  whose  body  stands  erect,  and  who  feels  depressed  and  lan¬ 
guid,  this  variety  of  cough  is  characterised  by  loud  sound,  cheerless¬ 
ness  (of  both  body  and  mind),  haggardness  of  face,  and  causes 
weakness,  anxiety,  and  stupefaction. 

This  cough  is  dry.  The  dry  phlegm  (that  manifests  itself  in  it) 
being  expelled  with  difficulty,  the  cough  shows  signs  of  diminution. 

This  cough  becomes  alleviated  by  eating  and  drinking  what  is 
oily,  or  sour,  or  saline,  or  of  heating  virtues. 

Of  one  whose  wind  has  an  upward  course,  the  wind,  when  the 
food  taken  has  been  digested,  becomes  endued  with  great  force.J  1Q-12 


*  Kasa’  (cough)  is  an  onomatopoetic  word.  In  coughing,  the  sound  emitted  is  that  of 
.‘kah,’  ‘kah,’  ‘kah.’ 

The  explanation  of  the  origin  of  cough  is  scarcely  intelligible.  The  life-breath  called 
‘Prana,’ obstructed,  rises  upwards  and  takes  the  nature  of  ‘Udana.’"  It  then  enters  the 
parts  of  the  body  mentioned. — T. 

•j"  Here  an  explanation  is  offered  of  the  pain  and  the  sound  of  Cough.— T. 

J  In  these  three  verses,  the  characteristics  of  cough  born  of  excited  wind  are  set  forth. 
The  language  of  the  text  is  not  very  perspicuous.  Continuity  of  construction  is  not  main¬ 
tained.  The  genetive  forms,  viz-,  ‘of  one  whose  chest,  &c.’  and  ‘of  one  whose  wind  has 
an  upward  course,’  really  embody  the  symptoms  of  wind-born  cough.  They  might  have 
been  avoided. — T. 


502 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


Excessive  indulgence  in  things  tb@t  are  pungent,  hot,  burning, 
sour,  and  alkaline,  as  also  wrath,  and  tjie  heat  of  both  fire  and  the 
sun,  are  inducers  of  that  variety  of  Cough  which  is  characterised  by 
(excited)  bile.*  r3 

Yellow  expectorations,  yellowness  of  eyes,  the  presence  of  a  bitter 
taste  in  the  mouth,  hoarseness  of  voice  (literally,  disease  of  voice), 
the  sensation  of  vapours  exhaling  from  the  chest,  thirst,  burning 
sensation  all  over  the  body,  stupefaction,  disgust  for  food,  giddiness 
of  the  head,  sight  of  luminous  particles  while  coughing  violently,  and 
expectoration  of  phlegmonous  matter  mixed  with  bile, — these  are 
the  manifestations  of  Cough  characterised  by  bile.f  14-15 

The  phlegm,  enhanced  by  food  and  drink  that  are  heavy,  that 
cause  the  secretions  to  be  retained,  and  "that  are  sweet  and  oily,  as 
also  by  sleep  and  absence  of  exertion,  obstructs  the  wind,  and 
causes  that  variety  of  Cough  which  is  characterised  by  phlegm.  16 

Afflicted  with  loss  of  appetite,  disgust  for  food,  vomiting,  inflam¬ 
mation  of  the  Schneiderian  membrane,  nausea,  and  heaviness  of  the 
limbs,  as  also  with  horripilation,  sweetness  of  the  mouth,  accumu¬ 
lation  of  filth  within  the  body,  and  langour  of  limbs,  one  having  such 
a  cough  expectorates,  without  difficulty,  a  copious  measure  of  phlegm 
that  is  sweet  in  taste,  oily,  and  thick,  while  coughing.  He  feels  his 
chest  to  be  full  (that  is,  oppressed  with  a  sense  of  fulness). 

Through  excessive  indulgence  in  sexual  congress,  bearing  heavy 
burdens,  walking  long  distances,  exertions  in  battle,  curbing  of  steeds 
and  elephants,  of  one  whose  body  has -become  dry,  sores  are 
generated  in  the  lungs.  The  wind  seizes  the  sores  and  causes 
cough.  19 

One  afflicted  with  such  a  cough  at  first  coughs  dryly  (that  is, 
without  expectorating  any  phlegmonous  matter).  After  this,  he 
expectorates  phlegm  mixed  with  blood. 


*  By  ‘Vidahi’  is  meant  food  or  drink  that  causes  a  burning  sensation  in  the  stomach  or 
the  chest.— T. 

+  ‘Urodhum5yanam’  is  literally,  ‘the  appearance  of  vapours  exhaled  by  the  chest.  This 
is  not  intelligible. — T. 


CHARAKA  -SAM HIT  A.  1503 

His  throat  becomes  very  painful. 

His  chest  seems  to  him  to  have  become  broken. 

‘£ula’  pains  afflict  him  greatly  as  if  he  were  pierced  by  sharp 
needles. 

He  becomes  afflicted  with  such  severe  pain  as  is  felt  by  one  who 
is  pierced  by  a  dart  whose  touch  (or  stroke)  is  agonising. 

He  becomes  afflicted  also  with  pains  in  all  the  bone-joints,  fever, 
difficulty  of  breathing  (or  asthma),  thirst,,  and  hoarseness  of  voice. 

Verily,  through  the  violence  of  this  cough  that  is  born  of  sores 
(in  the  lungs),  one  coos  like  a  pigeon.  2°-22 

Through  eating  food  consisting  of  inharmonious  ingredients  or 
food  that  is  unassimilable,  through  excessive  indulgence  in  sexual 
congress,  through  suppression  of  urgings  (that  have  become  pro¬ 
nounced)  of  nature,  of  men  who  (from  necessity)  eat  the  food  they 
abominate,  or  who  indulge  in  grief,  the  three  faults  {viz.,  wind,  bile, 
and  phlegm),  rendering  the  digestive  fire  vitiated,  become  provoked 
and  generate  cough  born  of  waste.  Such  cough  wastes  the  body  and 
leads  to  dissolution. 

One  afflicted  with  such  cough  expectorates  greenish  blood,  and 
phlegm  resembling  pus.  23-?4 

While  coughing,  he  regards  his  heart  as  if  displaced  from  its 
position. 

Without  any  ostensible  reason  he  suddenly  feels  afflicted  with 
iieat,  or  cold. 

He  eats  copiously  but  feels  weak  and  becomes  emaciated.  25 

His  face  becomes  cheerful  and  flushed. 

His  aspect  becomes  agreeable,  and  his  eyes  become  beautiful. 

His  palms  and  soles  become  smooth  and  -bright. 

He  feels  a  disgust  for  many  things  and  becomes  displeased  with 
other  peoples’  good  luck.  26 

He  becomes  afflicted  with  fever  of  a  mixed  character  (that  is, 
fever  characterised  by  excitement  of  all  the  faults). 


1504 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


He  feels  pains  in  his  sides.  His  Schneiderian  membrane  becomes 
iuflamed.  He  feels  a  disgust  for  food. 

His  stools  consist  df  disjointed  and  hard  scybalae. 

Without  any  ostensible  cause  his  voice  becomes  hoarse.  27 

Even  these  are  the  symptoms  of  this  variety  of  Cough  (i.  e., 
waste-born). 

It  destroys  the  bodies  (/.  e.,  kills)  of  those  that  become  emaciated. 

Of  men  possessed  of  strength,  this  Cough  is  curable. 

The  Cough,  again,  that  is  born  of  sores,  of  men  possessed  of 
strength,  is  suppressible.*  28 

If  these  two  varieties  of  cough  be  new,  and  if  the  four  requisites 
of  treatment  (viz.,  physician,  nurse,  drugs,  and  patient)  be  possessed 
of  the  stated  qualifications,  then  they  may  sometimes  be  cured. 

Of  persons  that  are  old  in  years,  all  varieties  of  cough  born  of 
decrepitude,  are  suppressible.f  29 

The  first  three  varieties  of  Cough  (viz.,  that  born  of  wind,  that  of 
bile,  and  that  of  phlegm),  which  are  curable,  should  be  treated  (with 
proper  medicines).  m 

Those,  again,  that  are  suppressible  (viz.,  that  born  of  sores 
and  that  of  waste,  when  they  afflict  persons  possessed  of  strength) 
should  be  sought  to  be  suppressed  by  proper  regimen,  (including 
medicines).]: 


*  Diseases,  as  regards  curability  or  otherwise,  are  of  three  kinds,  viz.,  curable,  incurable, 
and  suppressible.  What  is  stated  here  is  that  waste-born  cough  destroys  those  that  are 
weak.  Such  cough,  however,  of  those  that  are  strong,  is  not  so.  On  the  other  hand, 
it  is  curable.  Then,  sore-born  cough,  Of  those  that  are  strong,  is  only  suppressible. 

The  last  line  may  also  mean  that  waste-born  cough  of  men  that  are  strong  is  curable  or 
suppressible.  The  same  may  be  said  of  sore-born  cough  when  it  seizes  a  strong  man. — T. 

t  What  is  said  in  this  verse  is  this  :  the  two  varieties  of  cough,  viz.,  that  born  of  waste 
and  that  born  of  sores,  kill  the  patients  if  they  happen  to  be  weak  and  emaciated,  but  are 
curable  or  suppressible  if  the  patients  are  strong. 

Generally  speaking,  those  varieties  are  sometimes  curable,  even  if  the  patients  be  weak 
and  emaciated,  if  treatment  is  taken  up  when  they  are  new,  and  if  the  four  requisites  of 
treatment  happen  to  possess  the  stated  qualifications,  that  is,  if  the  physician  be  skilful,  the 
nurse  careful,  the  drugs  good,  and  the  patient  obedient.' — T. 

£  Among  the  varieties  that  are  suppressible,  is  named  ‘Jar5-kSsha,’  i.  (.,  the  cough 
which  old  men  get  in  consequence  of  their  decrepitude. — T. 


CHARARA-SAMH17A.  1565 

Listen,  after  this,  to  the  treatment  that  is  curative  of  dough.  3° 

Of  one  who  has  become  dry  (that  is,  whose  body  is  no  longer 
oily),  wind-born  cough  should  be,  at  the  outset,  treated  with 
(medicated)  oils  as  also  with  medicated  ghees.,  enemata,  cooling  gruels, 
milk,  soups  of  pulses,  and  meat-juices.  31 

The  physician  possessed  of  intelligence  should  treat  such  patients 
judiciously  with  also  such  oils  and  ghees  as  have  been  cooked  with 
drugs  that  are  destructive  of  wind,  with  fumigation,  with  different 
kinds  of  linctus,  with  ointments  for  the  rubbing  the  body  with,  with 
medicated  waters  that  are  sprinkled  over  the  body,  and  with  fumi¬ 
gation  with  oily  substances.  32 

He  should  treat  one  whose  stools  and  wind  have  become  consti¬ 
pated,  with  enemata. 

One  whose  stools  have  become  dry  and  whose  wind  has  taken 
an  upward  course,  should'  be  treated  with  ghees  administered  after 
meals. 

That  wind,  however,  which  is  accompanied  by  (excited)  bile  and 
(excited)  phlegm,  should  be  conquered  by  oily  purgatives.  33 
KANTAKARI  GHRITA. 

Taking  30  palas  from  Kantakari  ( Solatium  Xanthocarpuin)  and 
the  same  measure  from  Guduchi  ( Tinospora  cordifolia ),  boil  them  for 
their  decoction.  (Eight  seers  of  water  are  taken,  and  the  same  is 
boiled  down  to  2  seers). 

Boil  a  measure  of  ghee  in  this  decoction,  and  take  2  prasthas 
(equal  to  4  seers)  therefrom. 

The  ghee  thus  prepared  is  alleviative  of  cough  born  of  wind. 

It  is  also  an  enkindler  of  the  digestive  fire.*  34 
PIPPALADYA  GHRITA. 

Take  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longuirp,  Pippalimula  (the  roots 
of  Piper  longum),  Chavya  {Piper  Chaba \  Chitraka  {Pumbago  zeyld- 


*  The  original  is  exceedingly  terse.  It  has  been  expanded  in  the  English  version  ft* 
order  to  make  it  intelligible.  The  commentators  say  that  8  seers  of  water  are  taken  and  this 
measure  is  boiled  dowll  to  2  seers.— T. 


CHARA  KA-SAMHITA.- 


1506 

nica),  NSgara  (dry  ginger),  DhSnya  (coriander  seeds),  Paths  [Cissam- 
pelos  hernandifolia),  VachS  ( Acorus  calamus ),  Rasna  ( Vanda  Rox- 
burghii ),  Yashthi  (liquorice),  the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots,  Hingu 
(assafoetida),  each  of  the  measure  of  a  ‘pala’  (equal  to  1  tola). 

Soil  these  in  an  ‘adaka’  (equal  to  8  seers,  double  the  measure,  i.  e., 
16  seers,  being  taken  in  practice)  of  the  decoction  of  the  ten  roots, 
with  one  ‘prastha’  (equal  to  2  seers,  double  the  measure,  i.  e.,  4  seers 
being  taken  in  practice)  of  ghee. 

The  measure  of  a  dose  is  a  ‘chathurthika  (equal  to  1  pala). 

Having  taken  this  ghee,  one  should  drink  ‘peya’  and  ‘mancfa’ 
of  rice.*  35-36 

This  medicine  cures  asthma,  cough,  pains  in  the  chest  and  the 
sides,  ‘Graham’  disease,  and  abdominal  tumours. 

Even  this  is  the  composition  of  ‘Pippaladya-Ghrita  as  declared 
by  him  of  Atri’s  race.  37 

TRAYUSHANADYA  GHfRITA. 

Take  ‘Tryu'sharla’  (dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum,  -  arid 
black  pepper),  ‘Triphala  ’  (the  three  myrobalans),  Drfiksha  (grapes), 
Kasmaryya  ( Gmelina  arbored),  Parushaka  ( Grewia  Asiaticd),  the  two 
Pathas  (two  varieties  of  Cissampelos  hernandifolia,  i.  e.,  smaller  and 
larger),  DevadSru  ( Pinus  deodard),  Riddhi  (not  being  obtainable, 
Bala  or  Sida  cordifolia  is  used  as  a  substitute),  Swagupta  (otherwise 
called  Atmagupta,  i.  e.,  Mucuna  pruriens),  Chitraka  [Plumbago  zey- 
lanica),  £athi' [Curcuma  Zerumbet),  Yyaghri  [Solanum  X anthocarpum), 
Tamalaki  (otherwise  called  Bhumy&mlaka',  i.  e.,  Phyllanthus  Nirufl), 
Meda  (not  being  obtainable,  Acwagandha,  i.  e.,  Physalis  flexuosa  is 
used),  Kakanasa  [Asclepias  curassavica ),  £atavari  [Asparagus  race- 
mosus),  Trikantaka  (otherwise  called  Kokilaksha,  i.  e\,  Rueltia  longi- 
folia ),  and  Vidari  [Batatas  pdniculatus). 

The  measure  of  each  of  the  above  should  be  a  ‘karsha’  (2  tolas). 
Reduce  these  to  paste  and  boil  the  paste  with  1  ‘prastha’  (equal  to 


*  ‘Peya.’  and  ‘niatida’  afe  gruels,  the  former  being  thinner  tlian  the  latter. — T. 


"  CHA RAKA-SA MH1TA. 


*597 


•2  seers,  double  the  measure,  or  four  seers,  being1  taken  in  practice), 
adding  milk  of  4  times  the  measure  (i,  e.,  16  see'rs). 

This  ghee  is  an  alleviative  of  cough  (born  of  wind). 

It  alleviates  also  the  following  ailments,  vie.,  fever,  abdominal 
tumours,  disgust  for  food,  enlarged  spleen,  headache,  pains  in  the 
chest  and  the  sides,  anaemia,  piles,  stony  tumours  in  the  abdomen 
born  of  vitiated  wind,  sores  (in  the  lungs),  consumption,  and  waste 
(of  dhfitus’). 

•  Even  this  is  the  composition  of  that  celebrated  ghee  known  by 
the  name  of  ‘Tryushauadya-Ghrita.’  3g-4i 

RASNADI-GHRITA. 

In  a  ‘drona’  (equal  to  32  seers,  in  practice  double  the  measure, 
i.  e.,  64  seers,  are  taken)  of  water,  boil  Rasna  (Vanda  Roxburghii), 
Dagamula  (the, group  of  ten  roots),  and  £atavari  (Asparagus  race- 
mosus),  each  of  the  measure  of  a  pala,  as  also  these  three,  vie., 
Kulattha  (Dolichos  biflorus),  Vadara  (jujubes),  and  Yava  (barley), 
each  of  the  measure  of  a  ‘manika’  (equal  to  8  palas).  42 

Boil  also  (with  the.  above):  half  a  tula  (equal  to  six  and  one-fourth 
seers)  of  the  flesh  of  a  (hermaphrodite)  goat. 

The  decoction  should  be  boiled  down  to  a  fourth  of  the  measure 
of  water  (that  is,  16  seers).  ,  ,  . 

Add  to  it  an  ‘5dhaka’ (equal  to  8  seers,  in  practice  double  the 
measure,  that  is,  16  seers  are  taken)  of  ghee,  and  the  same  measure  of 
milk,  and  (the  paste  measuring)  a  pala  of  each  of  the  ten  drugs  com¬ 
posing,  the  group  called  ‘Jrvaniya.’ 

The  ghee,  thus  prepared,  should  be  administered  as  snuff,  or  as 
drink,  or  as  enemeta,  in  diseases  of  the  wind. 

The  physician  should  administer  it,  after  a  careful  examination 
of  the  patient,  the  measure  being  determined  by  his  condition. 

This  ghee  conquers  the  five  varieties  of  cough,  tremour  of  the 
head,  ‘£ula’  pains  of  the  pubic  region  and  the  (female)  organ  of 
generation.  '  ’ 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1508 

It  conquers  such  diseases  of  the  wind  as  afflict  the  whole  body  or 
a  particular  district  of  the  body.  It  cures  also  enlarged  spleen,  and 
the  wind  having  an  upward  course.  43-45 

Take  Vidanga  (Embelia  Ribes),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  RasnS 
(Vanda  Roxburghii ),  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum),  Hingu 
(assafcetida),  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  Bhargi  ( Siphonanthus  Indica ),  and 
Kshara  (the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots). 

Reduce  these  to  pulv,  and  mix  the  pulv  with  ghee , 

This  ghee  should  be  taken  in  proper  measuies  in  these  diseases, 
viz.,  cough  born  of  (vitiated)  wind  and  accompanied  by  phlegm, 
asthma,  hiccup,  and  in  loss  of  appetite. 

The  two  ‘ksharas’  {viz.,  the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots,  and 
‘Sarjikshara’  or  carbonate  of  soda),  the  five  ‘Kolas’  (the  fruits  of 
Piper  longum,  the  roots  of  the  same,  Piper  Chaba,  Plumbago  zeylanica , 
and  dry  ginger),  the  five  salts  (viz.,  ‘Saindhava’  ‘Sanchfila’,  ‘Vit,’ 
‘Samudra’,  and  ‘Audbhida’),  £athi  ( Curcuma  7.erumbet).  Nagara  (dry 
ginger),  and  Udichya  (otherwise  called  Bala,  i,  e.,  Pavonia  odorata ) 
are  taken  and  reduced  to  paste. 

The  paste  is  strained  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth,  and  mixed 
with  ghee. 

The  ghee,  thus  prepared,  should  be  administered  as  a  drink.  It 
is  alleviative  of  cough  born  of  (vitiated)  wind.  46-48 

Take  Duralabhfi  ( Hedysarum  Alkagi),  £ringavera  (dry  ginger\ 
£athi  {Curcuma  Zerumbel),  Draksha  (grapes),  sugarcandy,  and  Karka* 
tajringi  (Rhus  succedanea ). 

Reduce  these  to  pulv,  add  (sesame)  oil,  and  make  a  linctus. 

This  linctus  should  be  licked  by  one  afflicted  with  cough  born 
of  wind.*  49 

Take  Dusparga  (otherwise  called  Duralabhfi,  it  e.,  Hedysarum 
Alhagi),  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum),  Musta  (the  tubers  of 


*  The  measures  of  Duralabhfi  and  the  rest  are  equal.  That  of  sugarcandy  is  equal  to 
he  united  measure  of  the  others.— T. 


CHA  RA  KA -SAM HIT  A. 


1509 

Cyperus  rotundus),  Bh3rgi  (Siphonanthus  Indica ),  Karkataka  ( Rhus 
succedanea ),  and  £athi  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet). 

Reduce  these  to  pulv,  and  mix  the  pulv  with  old  treacle  and 
(sesame)  oil.  Make  a  linctus. 

This  linctus  should  be  licked  vby  one  afflicted  with  cough  bom 
of  wind).  5° 

Take  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes ),  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  Kustha  ( Aplotaxis 
auriculata ),  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids,  viz.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of 
Piper  longum,  and  black  pepper),  Hingu  (assafcetida)  and  Manahfila 
(realgar). 

Reduce  these  to  pulv,  mix  the  pulv  with  honey  and  ghee ,  and 
make  a  linctus. 

This  linctus  should  be  licked  by  one  afflicted  with  hiccup,  asthma, 
and  cough.  51 

CHITRAKADYA-LEHA. 

Take  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  zeylanica ),  Pippalimula  (the  roots  of 
Piper  longum ),  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids),  Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus 
rotundus ),  Duralabha  ( Hedysarum  Alhagi),  £athi  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet, 
Pushkaramula  (a  kind  of  root  which  is  not  available,  that  of  Aplotaxis 
auriculata  being  substituted),  £reyasi  (otherwise  called  Gajapippali 
or  Pothos  officinalis'',  Surasa  (a  variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum),*  VachS 
( Acorus  calamus ),  Bhargi  ( Siphonanthus  Indica ),  Cchinnaruha  (other¬ 
wise  called  Guduchi,  or  Tinospora  cordi/olia),  Rasna  ( Vanda  Rox- 
burghii ),  and  Karkata  (Rhus  succedanea ).  Reduce  these  to  paste. 

The  measure  of  the  paste  of  each  of  these  should  be  a  ‘karsha’ 
(equal  to  2  tolas). 

Take  half  a  ‘tula’  (equal  to  six  and  one-fourth  seers)  of  Nidigdhika 
(Solannm  Xanthocarpum),  and  boil  it  for  decoction.t 

Boil  the  paste  of  the  drugs  named  above  in  this  decoction. 


*  Some  identify  it  with  a  variety  of  R5sn3  or  Vanda  Roxburghii.—T . 
f  GangSdhara  explains  that  32  seers  of  water  should  be  taken  for  boiling  half  a'-'tulS’  of 
Nidigdhika.  The  liquid  should  be  boiled  down  to  8  seers.— T. 


13  io 


CHARAkA-SAMHITA. 


Add  20  palas  of  Matsyandika  (sugarcandy)  and  a  ‘kudava’  (equal 
to  half  a  seer,  in  practice  double  the  measure,  i.  e.,  I  seer,  being  taken)- 
of ghee.  .  .  - 

After  the  boiling"  is  over  and  the  contents  of  the  vessel  have 
become  cool,  throw  a  ‘kudava’  of  honey  and  a  ‘kudava’  also- of  the 
pulv  of  the  fruits  of  Pippali  ( Piper  longuni ). 

Throw  also  into  the  vessel,-  4  palas  (half- a  seer.)  of  the  pulv  of 
TugSkshiri  (bambu  manna).  . 

Make  a  linctus.  This  linctus  cures  cough,  chest-disease,  asthma, 
and  abdominal  tumours.  52-5S 

AGASTYA-IIARITAKI.  - 

Take  Dagamuli  (the  group  of  ten  roots),  SwayamguptS  ( Mucuna 
pruriens),  (“Jankhapushpi  ( Pladera  decussatd),  £athi  ( Curcuma  Zerunt- 
bet ),  Bala  ( Sida  cordifolia ),  Hastipippali  ( Pothos  officinalis),  Apamfirga 
{Achyranthes  aspera),  Pippalimula  (the  roqts  of  Piper  longuni), 
Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica),  Bhargi  'Siphonanthus  Indica ),  and 
Pushkaramula  (a  root  that  is  not  obtainable,  the  roots  of  Aplolaxis 
auriculata  being  used  as  a  substitute). 

The  measure  of  each  of  these  should  be  2  palas. 

Add  an  ‘adhaka’  (equal  to  8  seqrs)  of  Yava  (barley,  tying  these 
grains  in  a  piece  of  cloth). 

A  hundred  fruits  of  Haritaki  (ehebulic  myrobalans),  of  the  best 
sort,  should  also  he  added. 

All  these  should  be  boiled  in  5  ‘adhakas’  (equal  to  one  maund, 
in  practice  double  the  measure,  i.  e.,  2  maunds)  of  water.  56-57 

When  the  grains  of  barley  have  been  well-boiled,#  the  decoction 
Should  be  strained  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth. 

Then  taking  out  the  hundred  (well-boiled)  myrobalans, .  diyest 
them  of  their  seeds. 


*  These  are  regarded  to  be  well-boiled  when  20  seers  or  half  a  maund  of  water  remains 
in  the  vessel.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA 


151s 


Fry  the  kernel  of  the  myrobalans  in  a  ‘kudava’  (equal  to  half  a 
seer,  in  practice  double  the  measure  is  taken)  of  ghee  as  also  a 
‘kudava’  (in  practice  double  the  measure  is  taken)  of  (sesame)  oil. 

Having  fried  it,  boil  it  with  the  decoction  already  indicated, 
adding  to  it  a  ‘tula’  (equal  to  twelve  and  half  seers)  of  treacle. 

When  the  boiling  is  complete,  throw  into  the  vessel  a  ‘kudava!’ 
■of  the  pulv  of  the  fruits  of  Pippali  ( Piper  longurri). 

When  the  contents  become  cool,  add  a  ‘kuclava’  (in  practice 
■double  the  measure  is  taken)  of  ihoney. 

The  medicine  (thus  prepared)  should  be  licked.  It  forms  a  good 
‘Rasayana.’  Qf  the  myrobalans,  again,  two  should  be  eaten  every 
'time. 

This  medicine  removes  wrinkles  and  other  symptoms  of  decre- 
;,pitude. 

It  improves  complexion  and  promotes  longevity. 

It  cures  the  five  varieties  of  cough  as  also’  consumption,  asthma, 
(hiccup,  chronic  intermittent  fever,  piles,  ‘Grahani-disease’,  chest- 
■disease,  disgust  for  food,  and  inflammation  of  tljg  Schneiderian  mem¬ 
brane  with  loss  of  sense  of  smell. 

This  superior  and  highly  praiseworthy  ‘Rasayana’  lhas  been  laid 
■down  by  (the  Rishi)  Agastya.*  58-61 

‘Saindhava’  salt,  Pippali  ( Piper  longum),  Bh&rgi  ( Siphonanthus 
indica ),  £ringvera  (dry  ginger),  and  DuralabhS  ( Hedysarum  Alhagi), 


*  Agastya  was  a  famous  Rishi.  Many  great  achievements  are  ascribed  to  him.  By  his 
‘‘Yoga’  puissance,  (he  drank  up  the  Ocean.  Once  on  a  time  the  Vindhya  increased  its  height 
so  much  that  >it  obstructed  the  very  Sun  in  his  course.  Vindhya -had  Agastya  for  his 
■preceptor.  The  latter  was  asked  by  the^deities  to  do  what  was  needed  for  the  benefit  of 
the  world.  He  appeared  before  the  Vindhya  who  immediately  bent  down  his  head  in 
reverence.  Agastya  then  proceeded  to  the  south  (Deccan),  telling  Vindhya  to  remain  in 
that  posture  till  his  return. 

’He,  however,  did  not  return ‘but  took  up  his  residence  permanently  in  Southern  India. 
Hence,  Vindhya  to  this  day  remains  with  bent  head.  On  one  occasion,  Agastya  benefited 
the  universe  by  hurling  Nahusa  from  heaven  and  converting  him  into  a  huge  snake.  Some 
important  works  are  ascribed  to  Agastya,  the  principal  are  being  ‘Agastya-Samhita’  which 
■treatss  of  diverse  topics. — T. 


1$12 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA . 


reduced  to  pulv,  should  be  taken  with  the  sour  juice  of  Dadima 
(pomegranates). 

Bhfirgi  ( Siphonanthus  Indica )  and  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  reduced 
to  pulv,  should  be  taken  with  hot  water. 

The  wood  of  Khadira  (Acacia  Catechu ),  reduced  to  pulv,  should 
be  taken  with  either  wines  or  the  cream  of  curds. 

Or,  the  paste  of  the  fruits  of  Pippali  (Piper  longuvi ',  fried  in  ghee 
and  mixed  with  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  should  be  taken.  62-63 

In  head-aches,  in  discharges  from  the  nose,  in  pains  of  the  chest 
of  a  person  afflicted  with  cough  and  catarrh  in  the  nose,  the  physician 
should  administer  smoke.  64 

The  person  afflicted  with  cough,  if  possessed  of  intelligence, 
should  make  a  crooked  pipe  of  the  measure  of  (the  breadth  of)  ten 
fiingers  or  eight  fiingers,  and  insert  one  of  its  ends  into  a  hole  kept 
in  the  upper  one  of  two  (concave)  earthen  dishes  enclosing  a  hollow 
space  within  them. 

Within  the  two  dishes  (whose  joining  line  is  luted  with  soft  clay) 
are  placed  certain  drugs  that  are  alleviative  of  cough.  These  drugs 
are  set  on  fire,  and  then  smoke  is  inhaled,  through  the  pipe,  with  the 
mouth. 

The  smoke  possesses  purgative  virtues. 

When  smoke  reaches  the  lungs,  one  should  exhale  it  then  through 
the  mouth. 

In  consequence  of  its  keenness,  the  smoke,  rending  the  phlegmo¬ 
nous  matter  adhering  to  the  lungs,  extracts  it  out  and  thereby  allevi¬ 
ates  the  person’s  cough  born  of  wind  and  phlegm.  65-67 

The  drugs  whose  smoke  is  to  be  inhaled  are  Manahgila  (realgar), 
Ala  (otherwise  called  Harit&la,  i.  e.,  yellow  orpiment),  Madhuka 
(liquorice),  Mangsi  (otherwise  called  Jatamagnsi,  i.  e.,  Nardostachys 
Jatamansi ),  Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundas),  and  Aingudi  (the 
fruits  of  Balanites  Roxburghii ). 

After  smoking,  one  should  drink  tepid  milk  mixed  with  treacle.  6S 


CHA  RAKA  -  SA  M HI  7  A. 


[513 


This  smoke  conquers  cough  born  'of  each  of  the  faults  or  all  of 
them  together.  In  fact,  it  cures  such  cough  as  is  incapable  of  being 
cured  by  even  hundreds  of  other  combinations.  69 

.  Take  Prapaundrika  (the  root-stock  of  Nymphaa  lotus),  Madhuka 
(liquorice),  £arngashta  (otherwise  called  GhantSravS,  Crotalaria 
sericea),  Manahgila  (realgar),  Maricha  (black  pepper),  Pippali  (the 
fruits  of  Piper  longum),  DrSkha  (grapes),  El  a  (cardamoms),  and  Surasa- 
manjari  (the  blossoms  of  Ocimum  sanctum). 

Reduce  them  to  paste,  and  lave  the  paste  in  a  piece  of  silken, 
cloth,  and  dry  it-in  the  sun. 

When  dry,  roll  up  the  cloth  into  a  cylinder,  and  dip  it  in  ghee. 
Set  fire  to  one  of  its  ends,  and  inhale  its  smoke  (with  the  mouth). 

After  the  act  of  smoking  is  over,  one  should  drink  milk,  or  water 
in  which  a  measure  of  treacle  has  been  dissolved.  7°-7i 

Take  Manahgila  (realgar),  Ela  (cardamoms  of  the  large  variety), 
Maricha  (black  pepper),  Kshara  (the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots), 
Anjana  (galena),  Kutannata  (otherwise  called  Kaivartamustaka,  a 
variety  of  Cyperus  rotundus  growing  in  aquatic  regions),  Vangsa- 
lochana  (bambu  manna),  Sevya  (otherwise  called  Ushira,  i.  e.,  the 
roots  of  Andropogon  muricatum),  Ala  (yellow  orpiment)  Kshauma 
(otherwise  called  ‘Atasivija’,  i.  e.,  linseeds),  Alaktaka  (otherwise  called 
LakshS,  i.  e.,  lac),  and  Rohisha  (otherwise  called  ‘Gandhatrina’,  i.  e., 
a  variety  of  fragrant  grass  called  Andropogon  Schcenanthus). 

The  smoke  of  these  should  be  inhaled  according  to  the  manner 
explained  above,  and  after  the  smoking  is  over,  one  should  take  the 
same  drink  {viz.,  milk  or  water  mixed  with  treacle). 

The  smoke,  again,  may  be  inhaled  in  the  same  manner  of  Manah- 
gilS  (realgar)1,  Ala  (yellow  orpiment)  with  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper 
longum),  and  Nagara^(dry  ginger).  72-73 

The  smoke  of  Tvach  (the  bark  of  Cinnamomum  Zeylanicuni', 
Ingudi  (the  fruits  of  Balanites  Roxburghii),  the  two  Vrihatis  (z.  e., 
Solanum  Indicum  and  Solatium  Xanthocarpuni),  Talamuli  {Curculigo 
orchioides ),  Manahgila  (realgar),  the  seeds  of  Karpasa  (cotton),  and 
Agwagandha  {Physalis  flexnosa),  is  alleviative  of  cough.  74 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


15H 

The  patient  should  be  given  ‘(^ali’  rice,  barley,  wheat,  and  ‘ShasFi- 
tika’  rice,  with  the  meat-juice  of  the  flesh  of  animals  that  are  domestic 
or  that  belong  to  marshy  or  aquatic  regions,  or  with  the1  soup  of 
Masha  (the  seeds  of  Pkaseolus  radiatus)  and  AtmaguptS  the  seed's 
of  Mucuna  pruriens.  75 

Such  food  is  beneficial  to  persons  afflicted'  with  cough. 

Take  Yamani  (the  seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan),  Pippali  (the  fruits 
of  Piper  longum),  Vilwa  (ASgle  marmelos)  (^athi  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet),. 
Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica),  Pushkara  (a  root  that  is  not  available, 
the  root  of  Aplotaxis  auriculata  is  substituted  for  it),  RasnS  (  Vanda 
Roxburghii),  Ajaji  (the  seeds  of  Nigella  sativa ),  Prithakparni  (other¬ 
wise  called  Prisniparni,  i.  e.,  Doodia  logopodioides ),  Palaga  [Butea 
frondosa ),  and  Viscwabheshaja  (dry  ginger). 

Boil  these  into  a  ‘peya,’  and  mix  it  with  ghee ,  and  sour  juices  (like 
those  of  pomegranate  fruits  and  jujubes)  and  salt. 

The  ‘peya/  thus  prepared,  should  be  drunk  in  cough  born  of 
(excited)  wind. 

This  'peya'  cures  pains  in- the' waist,  the  chest,  the  sides,  and  the 
stomach,  as  also  asthma  and  hiccup.*  76-77 

Boil  the  pulv  of  the  five  ‘kolas’  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum ,  the 
roots  of  the  same,  Piper  Chaba,  Plumbago  Zeylanica,  and  dry  ginger), 
with  treacle,  in  the  decoction  of  the  group  of  the  ten  roots. 

This  preparation  should  be  administered  to  one  afflicted  with 
cough  born  of  wind. 

Or,  ‘peya’  made  by  boiling  rice  with  an  equal  measure  of  sesame 
seeds  in  milk,  and  adding  ‘Saindhava’  salt  thereto,  may  be  adminis¬ 
tered  to  one  afflicted  with  cough  born  of  wind.f  78 

Or,  gruel  mixed  with  meat-juice  prepared  from  the  fish  and  the 


*  Gangadhara  explains  that  of  the  seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan  and  the  rest,  the  measure 
should  be  2  tolas  each.  These  should  be  boiled  in  four  seers  of  water  down  to  2  seers. — T. 

f  ‘Samatila’  implies,  as  Gang&dhara  explains,  ‘rice’  with  an  equal  measure  of  sesame 
seeds.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


>5*S 


flesh  of  fowl  and  the  boar,  adding  ghee  and  ‘Saindhava’  salt  thereto, 
may  be  given  to  one  afflicted  with  cough  born  of  wind. 

Gruel  so  prepared  is  alleviative  of  such  cough.*  79 

Vastuka  ( Chsnopodium  album \  Vayasi-cSka  (a  kind  of  pot-herb^ 
otherwise  called  kskamachi  i.  e.,  Solanum  nigrain),  Mulaka  (radish), 
Sunishannaka  (called  in  Bengali,  Susni,  i.  e.,  Marsilea  quadrifotia ), 
ghees,  and  oils,  milk,  the  juice  of  the  sugarcane,  preparations  of 
treacle,  curds,  ‘Aranala’  (kanji),  sour  fruits,  the  drinking  of  wines, 
and  things  that  agreeable,  sour,  and  saline,  are  regarded  as  beneficial 
in  cough  born  of  wind.  So-81 

(Thus  ends  the  treatment  of  cough  born  of  wind). 

In  cough  born  of  bile  and  accompanied  by  phlegm,  vomiting  by 
administration  of  ghees  is  beneficial. 

Also  vomiting  by  administration  of  the  decoction  of  Madana  (the 
fruits  of  Randia  dumetorum ),  Kfifmaryya  (otherwise  called  GambhSri, 
i.  e.,  Gmelina  arborea ),  and  Madhuka  (liquorice). 

Also  vomiting  by  administration  of  the  paste  of  liquorice,  Phala 
(the  fruits  of  Randia  dumatoruni),  dissolved  in  the  juice  of  Vidari 
(fruits  of  Batatus  paniculatus')  and  the  sugar-cane. 

When  by  means  of  these  emetics,  the  faults  of  the  person  are 
expelled,  he  should  adopt  cooling  and  sweet  regimen  (i.  e.,  take  such 
‘peya’,  or  ‘manda’,  or  ‘vilepi’,  as  are  cooling  and  sweet).  82 -s3 

In  cough  born  of  bile,  when  it  is  accompanied  by  phlegm  in  an 
attenuated  state,  the  physician  should  give  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Tur- 
pethum )  mixed  with  sweets,  for  purging  the  patient. 

When  accompanied  by  phlegm  in  an  aggravated  state,  he  should 
give  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethum ),  mixing  it  with  bitters,  for  the 
same  purpose.!  84 


*  Taking  the  gruel  (*.  e.,  manda’,  or  ‘peya,’  or  ‘vilepi,’)  of  rice  or  barley,  dress  it  with 
meat-juice  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  the  varieties  mentioned,  as  also  with  ghee  and 
‘Saindhava’  salt.  To  mix  gruel  with  meat-juice  is  a  common  practice. — T. 

■f  Cough  born  of  bile  may  be  accompanied  by  alleviated  or  aggravated  phlegm.  In  both 
cases,  Trivrit  is  prescribable.  In  the  former  case,  it  should  be  mixed  with  sweets  ;  in  the 
latter,  with  bitters.  The  object  sought  by  the  physician  is  the  purging  of  the  intestines  in 
both  the  cases. — T. 


1516 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


When  the  phlegm  exists  in  an  attenuated  state  (with  bile-born 
cough),  the  treatment  should  be  begun  with  the  administration  of 
drugs  that  are  oily  and  cold. 

When  the  phlegm  exists  in  an  aggravated  state,  the  treatment 
should  be  begun  with  drugs  that  are  dry  and  cold. 

After  this,  food  and  linctus  (consisting  of  proper  ingredients) 
should  be  taken  with  ghees  and  oils.  85 

The  five  following  combinations,  each  forming  a  linctus,  are  bene¬ 
ficial  for  persons  afflicted  with  cough  born  of  bile. 

Each  of  them  is  set  forth  in  half  a  verse.  They  are 

1.  Cringataka  (the  fruits  of  Trapa  bispinosa),  Padmavija  (the 
seeds  of  Nelumbium  speciosuni),  Nili  (the  Indigo  plant),  Sarani  (other¬ 
wise  called  ‘Gandhabhsdule’,  /.  e.,  Pcederia  fatida ),  and  Pippali  (the 
fruits  of  Piper  longum ) ; 

2.  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum),  Musta  (the  tubers  of 
Cyperus  rotundus ),  Yashtyahva  (liquorice),  Draksha  (grapes),  Murvfi 
{Sanseviera  Zeylanica),  and  Mahaushadha  (dry  ginger) ; 

3.  Laja  (fried  paddy),  Amrita  phala  (the  fruits  of  Phyllantkus 
Emblicd),  Draksha  (grapes),  Tvach  (the  bark  of  Cinnamomum  Zeyla- 
nicum),  Kshiri  (bambu  manna),  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum), 
and  Sita  (sugar) ; 

4.  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum),  Padmaka  (a  fragrant  root 
of  that  name  brought  from  Central  India),  DrakshS  (grapes),  and  the 
expressed  juice  of  Vrihati  ( Solanum  Indicum ) ; 

5.  Kharjjura  (dates),  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum),  Vangsi 
(bambu  manna),  and  (^wadangshtra  ( Tribulus  lanuginosus). 

Each  of  these  groups  should  be  reduced  to  paste  and  mixed  with 
ghee  and  honey,  and  a  linctus  formed.  86-87 

£arkara  (sugar),  Chandana  (red  sandal  wood),  Draksha  (grapes), 
Madhu  (honey),  Dhatri  phala  (the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica ),  and 
Utpala  (. Nymphcea  stellata )  are  pounded  together  into  a  paste  and  a 
linctus  is  made  of  that  paste. 

This  linctus  is  prescribable  in  cough  born  of  bile. 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MBIT  A. 


1 5i  7 


When  bile-born  cough  exists  with  phlegm,  the  tubers  of  Cyperus 
rotundus  and  black  pepper  should  be  added  to  the  ingredients  men¬ 
tioned  above  for  making  the  linctus. 

When  bile-born  cough  exists  with  wind,  ghee  should  be  added  to 
the  ingredients  named  for  making  the  linctus.  s9 

Half  a  century  of  dried  grapes,  30  fruits  of  Piper  longum ,  and  one 
pala  of  sugar  should  be  pounded  into  a  paste. 

Mixing  the  paste  with  honey,  a  linctus  should  be  made.  This 
linctus  is  beneficial  for  one  afflicted  with  bile-born  cough. 

Or,  the  expressed  juice  of  cow-dung,  boiled  with  cow’s  milk,  may 
also  make  a  linctus  that  is  beneficial  to  such  a  person.*  9° 

Tvach  (the  bark  of  Cinnamomum  Z,eylanicum\  Ela  (cardamom 
seeds),  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids),  Mridvika  (dried  grapes),  Pippali  (the 
fruits  of  Piper  longum ),  Paushkaramula  (a  root  of  that  name  whidh  is 
not  obtainable  ;  the  roots  of  Aplotaxis  auriculata  being  substituted 
for  it),  Laja  (fried  paddy),  Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus ), 
£athi  ( Curcuma  Tjerumbet '),  Rssna  ( Vanda  Roxburgkii),  Dhatri-phala 
(the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica'),  and  Vibhitaka  (the  seeds  of 
Semecarptis  Anacardium ) : 

Reduce' these  to  pulv,  mix  the  pulv  with  sugar,  honey,  and  ghee , 
and  make  a  linctus. 

This  linctus  is  alleviative  of  cough  (born  of  bile). 

It  also  cures  asthma,  hiccup,  consumption,  and  diseases  of  the 
chest.  92 

Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longmn ),  Amalaka  (the  fruits  of  Phyllan¬ 
thus  Emblica ),  Laja  (fried  paddy),  Laksha  (lac),  Draksha  (grapes),  and 
Sitopala  (sugar) : 

Boil  these  in  cow’s  milk.  When  the  product  thickens  and  be¬ 
comes  cool,  add  honey  equal  to  an  eighth  of  the  whole. 


*  At  the  end  of  the  second  line,  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read — (Jakridrasam.’ 
This  is  correct.  Gangadhara’s  reading  ‘£akridrasan’  is  incorrect.  ‘Rasa’  need  not  have 
a  plural, — T, 


CHA  RA  KA  -  SAM  HI  TA. 


(518 

Make  a  linctus.  (This  linctus  is  beneficial  in  bile-born  cough).  93 

Vidari  (the  fruits  of  Batatus paniculate s),  Ikshu  (sugar-cane),  Mri- 
nala  (lotus  stalks) 

Take  the  expressed  juice  of  these  :  add  cow’s  milk  and  sugar, 

(The  measure  of  each  of  these  ingredients  is  equal). 

Add  honey  (of  an  equal  measure) :  One  afflicted  with  bile-born 
cough  should  drink  this  liquid. 

This  drink  is  one  of  the  foremost  remedies  alleviative  of  bile-born 
cough.  '94 

The  rice  obtained  from  ‘£yamaka’,  or  ‘kodrava’,  or  barley,  boiled 
■and  mixed  with  sweetened  meat-juice  prepared  from  the  flesh  of 
wild  animals,  or  with  the  soup  of  such  pulses  as  Mudga  ( Phaseolus 
Mungo),  or  with  such  pot-herbs  as  are  bitter,  taken  in  proper  measure, 
is  beneficial  in  bile-born  cough.  95 

If  the  phlegm  be  thick  (in  bile-born  cough),  bitter  linctuses  with 
sweets  (entering  into  their  composition),  as  also  (boiled)  ‘£ali’  rice, 
are  beneficiai. 

If  the  phlegm  exists  in  an  attenuated  state,  (boiled)  ‘Shashtika'’ 
rice  taken  with  the  meat-juices  and  the  soups  (mentioned  in  the 
previous  verse)  is  beneficial.*  96 

After  taking  the  above,  one  should  drink  ‘sherbat’  of  sugar,  the 
juice  of  grapes,  the  juice  of  the  sugar-cane,  or  milk. 

All  drinks  that  are  sweet  as  also  cooling  and  incapable  of  causing 
a  burning  sensation  (in  the  stomach  or  the  chest),  are  regarded 
beneficial.  97 

The  two  Rakolis  (viz.,  Kakoli  and  Kshirakakoli,  i.  e.,  the  two 
roots  of  those  names  brought  from  the  Himavat  mountains),  the  two 
Vrihatis  (viz.,  Vrihati  or  Solanum  Indicum ,  and  Kantakari  or  Solanum 
Xanthocarpum \  the  two  Medas  (MedS  and  Mohameda  both  of  which 
not  being  obtainable,  Physalis  flexuosa  and  Ichnocarpus  fruitescens 


*  The  meat-juices  referred  to  are  those  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  wild  animals,  mixed 
with  sweets.  The  soups  are  those  of  ‘Mudga’  and  the  other  pulses. — T. 


CH A  RA  KA  -  SAM  HIT  A. 


1519 


are  used  respectively),  Vrisha  (otherwise  called  Vfisaka,  v.  e.,  Justicia 
Adhatoda ),  and  Nagara  (dry  ginger)  : 

With  the  decoction  of  these,  meat-juice  (of  the  kind  mentioned 
above),  or  milk,  or  the  soups  of  ‘Mudga’  and  the  rest,  should  be 
given  in  bile-born  cough.*  98 

Milk  boiled  with  the  decoction  of  the  five  roots  beginning  with 
£ara  (viz.,  Kuga  or  Poa  cynosuroides ,  Kaga  or  Saccharum  spontaneum, 
£ara  or  Saccharum  sara,  Darbha  or  Saccharum  cylindricum,  and 
Krishna  Ikshu  or  the  black  sugarcane),  and  mixed  with  honey  and 
sugar,  or, 

Milk  boiled  with  the  decoction  of  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper 
longum ),  and  Draksha  (grapes),  and  mixed  with  honey  and  sugar, 
should  be  drunk  by  one  afflicted  with  bile-born  cough.f  99 

Sita  (sugar),  SthirS  (otherwise  called  £alaparni,  i.  e.,  Hedysarum 
gangeticum),  Prisniparni  ( Doodia  lagopodioides ),  the  two  £rfivanis  (viz., 
the  larger  and  the  smaller  varieties  of  Sphceranthus  hirtus ),  the  two 
Vrihatis  (Solatium  Ittdicum  and  Solatium  Xanthocarpum ),  VirS 
(otherwise  called  Kshirakakoli,  a  root  brought  from  the  Himavat 
mountains), J  Rishabhaka  (not  being  obtainable,  bambu  manna  is 
used  as  a  substitute),  Kfikoli  (a  root  brought  from  the  Himavat 
mountains),  Tfimalaka  (otherwise  called  Bhumyamalaki,  i.  e.,  Phyllan~ 
thus  Niruri),  Ridhi  (not  being  obtainable,  BalS  or  Si  da  cordifolia  is 
used  as  a  substitute),  and  Jivaka  (not  being  obtainable,  Guduchi  or 
Tinospora  cordifolia  is  used  as  a  substitute) : 

Milk  boiled  with  (the  decoction  of)  these  should  be  drunk  by  one 


*  The  meat-juice  referred  to  in  this  verse  should  be  prepared  with  the  decoction  of  the 
the  drugs  named  instead  of  water.  So  also  milk  should  be  boiled  with  this  decoction.  The 
soups  also  of  the  pulses  should  be  made  with  this  decoction  —  T. 

f  GangS dhara  takes  this  verse  as  laying  down  only  one  combination.  Others  take  it  as 
1  aying  down'two.  — T . 

+  it  is  very  difficult  to  settle  the  reading.  Gang5dhara  reads  ‘VirS’  but  does  not  explain 
what  plant  is  meant  by  it.  The  Calcutta  edition  reads  ‘Jiralca,’  meaning  cumin  seeds.  This 
can  scarcely  be  correct.  The  mention  of  ‘Rishabhaka’  and  ‘Kakoli’  would  seem  to  indicate 
that  ‘Vira’  which  is  another  name  for  ‘Kshirakakoli’  is  the  correct  reading.  Some  of  the 
Bengali  translators  take  ‘VirS’  for  Nardostachys  Jatamami,  which  is  incorrect.— T. 

192 


1520 


6IJARAKA-SAMHITA. 


afflicted  with  (bile-born)  cough,  or  fever,  or  a  burning  sensation  of 
the  skin,  or  with  sores  (in  the  lungs),  or  consumption. 

The  physician  may  also  cook  ghee ,  obtained  from  milk  boiled 
with  the  decoction  of  the  above-mentioned  drugs,  adding  milk  and 
the  expressed  juice  of  Ikshu  (sugar-cane).* 

{Ghee  thus  prepared  is  beneficial  in  bile-born  cough),  ioo-ioi 

Take  the  paste,  measuring  three  ‘KSrshikas’,  of  each  of  the  drugs 
included  in  the  group  beginning  with  Jivaka  {viz.,  Jivaka,  Risha- 
bhaka,  MedS,  Mahameda,  Riddhi,  Vriddhi,  Kakoli,  and  Kshirakfikoli), 
and  of  the  sweet  fruits  beginning  with  grapes  and  the  like  (z.  e.? 
grapes  and  other  fruits  from  Cabul,  including  Arabian  dates) : 

Boil  ghee  with  the  pastes  mentioned  above. 

When  well-boiled  and  cool,  strain  it  through  a  piece  of  clean 
cloth.  Then  throw  into  the  vessel  the  pulvs  of  the  following,  viz., 
sugar,  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum),  Tvak-kshiri  (bambu 
manna),  Maricha  (black  pepper),  and  ^ringataka  (the  fruits  of  Trapa 
iispinosa).  (The  united  measure  of  the  pulvs  should  be  a  fourth  of 
the  ghee). 

When  the  ghee  thickens  (In  consequence  of  the  addition  of  these 
pulvs),  mix  a  measure  of  wheat-flour  with  it. 

After  this,  make  boluses,  each  of  the  measure  of  i  pala,  inserting 
honey  within  them. 

One  desirous  of  beneficial  diet  (in  bile-born  cough)  should  take 
these  boluses. 

These  boluses  should  also  be  taken  by  one  afflicted  with  the 
following  diseases,  viz.,  vitiation  of  the  semen,  vitiation  of  the  blood, 
consumption,  cough  (of  all  varieties),  weakness  and  emaciation,  and 
sores  (in  the  lungs).  102-104 

NSgara  (dry  ginger),  Udichya  (Bala,  i.  e.,  Pavonia  odorata)  Kanta- 
kari  ( Solatium  Xanthocarpuin),  and  £athi  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet) : 


Taj  jam-’  qualifies  ‘sarpis,’  hence,  ghee  obtained  from  milk  that  has  been  boiled  with 
the  decoction  of  the  drugs  named,  is  meant. 

The  measure  of  the  milk  with  which  such  ghee  is  to  be  boiled  should  b»  equal,  while 
that  of  the  juice  of  sugarcane  should  be  three  times  that  of  the  ghee. — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1521- 

Taking  equal  measures  of  these,  reduce  them  to  a  paste  and 
pressing  out  its  juice,  strain  it  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth. 

Drink  this  juice,  mixing  it  with  sugar  and  ghee.  !°5 

Ghee  boiled  with  equal  measures  of  the  milk  of  the  buffalo,  the 
goat,  the  sheep,  and  the  cow,  and  an  equal  measure  of  the  expressed 
juice  of  Dhfitri-phala  (the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica),  is  alleviative 
of  bile-born  cough.  It  should  be  taken  in  judicious  measure.  106 
THE  TREATMENT  OF  PHLEGM-BORN  COUGH. 

If  one  afflicted  with  phlegm-born  cough  happens  to  be  possessed 
of  strength,  then  he  should,  at  the  outset,  be  corrected  with  emetics. 

After  this,  he  should  be  given  food  prepared  of  the  flour  of  barley, 
mixing  it  with  articles  tha,t  are  pungent,  dry,  and  of  heating  virtues, 
as  also  such  food  as  is  alleviative  of  phlegm.*  107 

A  person  afflicted  with  phlegm-born  cough  should  take  light  food 
mixed  with  the  soup  of  Kulattha  (seeds  of  Dolickos  biflorus)  dressed 
with  the  pulv  of  Pippaji  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum  and  the  ashes  of 
green  barley  shoots), 

Or  with  the  decoction  of  Mulaka  (dry  radishes), 

Or  with  the  meat-juice,  dressed  with  bitters,  of  the  flesh  of 
animals  living  in  marshy  regions  or  in  holes. 

Or  with  the  oil  of  sesame  seeds,  mustard  seeds,  and  the  seeds  of 
the  fruits  of  Aigle  mannelos. 

After  taking  food  with  such  accompaniments,  he  should  take 
curds,  sour  liquids  (like  ‘Kanji’),  hot  water,  whey,  wines,  or  ^nigada' 
(a  kind  of  spirits). f  108-109 

The  cold  infusion  of  the  roots,  Paushkara  (a  root  of  that  name 
which  not  being  obtainable,  the  roots  of  Aplotaxis  auriculata  are 


*  GangSdhara  explains  that  a  patient  of  the  description  given  in  this  verse  should  at  first 
be  treated  with  oils  and  fomentation  before  the  administration  of  emetics.  He  thinks 
that  oils  and  fomentation  are  a  part  of  ‘godhana.’  Hence,  their  use  is  implied  in  such 
connection. — T. 

t  Some  editions  read  ‘Madhwamla’  &c.  in  the  last  line.  This  is  incorrect,  it  is 
‘Uadhyamla-  &c.’— T, 


'J22 


•  CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


used),  those  of  Aragbadha  {Cassia  fistula),  and  the  leaves  of  Patola 
( Trichosantkes  dioica),  should  be  drunk,  mixed  with  honey. 

Or,  it  should  be  drunk  three  times  during  meals.*  no 

Katphala  (. Myrica  sapida ),  Kattrina  {Hemionites  cordifolid)  Bhargi 
( Siphonanthus  Indica ),  Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundas),  Dhanya 
(coriander  seeds),  Vacha  {Acorus  Calamus),  Abhaya  (chebulic  myro- 
balans),  £unthi  (dry  ginger),  Parppataka  {Olenlandia  biflora ),  (^ringi 
{Rhus  succedanea),  and  Surahbha  (otherwise  called  Devadaru,  i.  e., 
Pinus  deodara) : 

These  should  be  boiled  in  water  ior  their  decoction. 

This  decoction,  mixed  with  honey  and  Hingu  (assafcetida) 
^should  be  drunk  in  cough  characterised  by  wind  and  phlegm. 

It  may  also  be  taken  in  diseases  of  the  throat,  in  diseases  of  the 
mouth,  in  dropsical  swellings  of  the  feet,  asthma,  hiccup,  and 
fevers.  ni-ua 

Patha  {Cissampelos  hernandifolia ),  £unthi  (dry  ginger),  £athi 
{Curcuma  Z erumbet),  MurvS  {Sanseviera  Z eylamca),  Gavakshi  (other¬ 
wise  called  IndravUruni,  i.  e.,  Cucumis  Colocynthis),  Musta  (the  tubers 
of  Cyperus  rotundas),  and  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum) ; 

Reduce  these  to  paste  and  dissolve  it  in  hot  water,  and  mix  it 
with  Hingu  (assafcetida)  and  ‘Saindhava’  salt 

This  drink  is  alleviative  of  phlegm-born  cough.  n3 

Nagara  (dry  ginger),  AtivishS  {Aconitum  heterophyllum),  Musta 
(the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundas),  Karkata-gringi  {Rhus  succedanea ), 
Haritaki  (chebulic  myrobalans),  and  £athi  {Curcuma  Zerumbet) : 

These  should  be  reduced  to  paste.  The  paste  should  be  dissolved 


*  The  correct  reading  is  ‘Kaleshvannasya  vSL  trishu,’  meaning  ‘three  times  during  meals,’ 
that  is,  in  the  beginning,  in  the  middle,  and  at  the  end  of  one’s  meals.’ 

Gangadhara’s  reading  ‘ratrishu,’  meaning  ‘at  nights’,  is  evidently  incorrect. 

What  is  said  in  this  verse  is  that  the  cold  infusion  of  the  three  drugs,  juixed  with  honey, 
should  be  drunk  thrice  during  meals  as  also  at  other  times— T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


*523 


in  hot  water,  and  drunk  after  the  above  manner  (that  is,  mixing  it 
with  assafcetida  and  ‘Saindhava’  salt}.  ”4 

An  ‘aksha’  (equal  to  2  tolas)  of  the  paste  of  Pippali  (the  fruits  of 
Piper  longuni ),  fried  in  (sesame)  oil,  and  mixed  with  sugar  and  the 
decoction  of  the  seeds  of  Kulattha  ( Dolichos  biflorus ),  should  be  taken. 
This  drink  is  alleviative  of  phlegm-born  cough.*  ”5 

The  expressed  juice  of  Kasmardda  ( Cassia  Sophora ), 
or  that  of  horse-dung, 

or  that  of  Bhringraja  ( Verbesina  calendulacea ), 
or  that  of  Bartfiku  (the  fruits  of  Solarium  Melongena ), 
or  that  of  black  Surasa  (a  variety  of  Ocimum  sanctum), 
mixed  with  honey,  is  alleviative  of  phlegm-born  cough.j-  116 

Devadaru  ( Pinus  deodara'',  £athi  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet),  Rfisna 
( Vanda  Roxburghii ),  Karkata  ( Rhus  succedanea),  and  Duralabha 
{ Hedysarum  Alhagi) ; 

Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longuni),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  Musta 
(the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundas \  Pathya  (chebulic.myrobalans),  Dhatri 
(the  fruits  of  Phyllanthns  Emblica),  and  sugar  ; 

Each  of  these  sets  of  drugs  should  be  reduced  to  pulv  and  mixed 
with  honey  and  oil  and  then  made  into  a  linctus. 

Both  these  linctuses  are  prescribable  in  phlegm-born  cough  exist¬ 
ing  with  (excited)  wind. 

Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum),  Pippalimula  (the  roots  of 
Piper  longum ),  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  zeylanica),  and  Hastipippali 
( Pothos  officinalis) ; 

Pathya  (chebulic  myrobalans),  Tfimalaki  {Phyllanthus  Niruri ), 
Dhatri  (the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica),  Bhadra-musta  (the  tubers 
of  Cyperus  partenuis),  and  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum)  ; 

Devadaru  ( Pinus  deodara ),  Abhaya  (chebulic  myrobalans),  Musta 
(the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus ),  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longuni), 
and  Vigwabhesaja  (ginger) ; 


*  GangSdhara  explains  that  the  measure  of  sugar  should  be  equal  to  that  of  the  paste 
of  Piper  longum,  i.  e.,  an  ‘aksha’  or  2  tolas.— T. 
f  Each  of  the  juiees  is  to  be  mixed  with  honey.— T, 


1524 


CHARA  KA-SAMHITA. 


VifSia  (otherwise  called  Indravaruni,  i.  e.,  Cucumis  Colosynthis), 
Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum),  Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus 
rotundas ),  and  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethum ) ; 

The  physician,  making  linctuses  of  each  of  the  four  sets  of  drugs 
mentioned,  adding  honey  thereto,  should  cause  them  to  be  licked  in 
phlegm-born  cough.  117-120 

‘Sauvarchala’  salt,  Abhayfi  (chebulic  myrobalans),  Dhatri  (the 
fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica),  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum\ 
Kshara  (the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots),  and  Nagara  (dry  ginger) : 

Reduce  these  to  pulv.  One  should  drink  ghee  mixed  with  this 
pulv.  This  medicine  is  alleviative  of  phlegm-born  cough  accompanied 
by  (excited)  wind.  121 

One  ‘prastha’  (equal  to  2  seers,  in  practice  double  the  measure  or 
4  seers  are  taken)  of  ghee  should  be  boiled  in  an  ‘adhaka’  (equal  to 
8  seers,  double  the  measure  or  16  seers  are  taken  in  practice),  of  the 
decoction  of  the  group  of  ten  roots,  along  with  an  ‘aksha1  (equal  to 
2  tolas)  of  the  paste  of  each  of  the  following,  viz.,  Pushkara  (a  root 
which  not  being  obtainable,  the  roots  of  Aplotaxis  auriculata  are 
used),  £athi  (( Curcuma  Zerumbet ),  Vilwa  (the  roots  of  ZEgle  mar- 
melos ),  Surasa  ( Ociuenm  sanctum ),  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids),  and 
Hingu  (assafcetida). 

This  ghee  should  be  drunk  in  phlegm-born  cough  accompanied  by 
(excited  wind). 

After  drinking  this  ghee ,  the  patient  should  drink  ‘peya’  (made  of 
rice  and  other  grains). 

This  ghee  is  prescribable  also  in  all  varieties  of  asthma  charac¬ 
terised  by  phlegm  and  wind.  122-123 

KANTIKARI-GHRITA. 

Boil  one  ‘prastha’  (equal  to  2  seers,  in  practice  double  the  measure 
or  4  seers  are  taken)  of  ghee  in  an  ‘adhaka’  (equal  to  8  seers,  double 
the  measure  or  16  seers  are  taken  in  practice)  of  the  decoction  of 
Kantikari  ( Solanum  Xanthocarpuni)  with  roots,  leaves,  and  branches,* 


*  The  Calcutta  edition  reads  ‘samulaphalapatrayah.’  This  seems  to  be  incorrect. 
GangStdhara  reads  ‘samulapatrajSkhayah.’— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


1525 


along  with  the  paste  of  the  following,  vis.,  Bala  [Sida  cordifolia)ffyosha. 
(the  three  acrids)  Vidanga  ( Embelia  Ribes\  £athi  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet), 
Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica),  ‘Sauvarchala’  salt,  Yavakshara  (the 
ashes  of  green  barley  shoots),  Vilwa  ( JEgle  marmelos ),  Amalaka  (the 
fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica \  Paushkara  (a  root  which  not  being 
obtainable,  the  roots  of  Aplotaxis  auriculata  are  used),  Vrigchira  (white 
variety  of  Boerhavia  diffusa ),  Vrihati  [Solatium  indicum ),  PathyS  (che- 
bulic  myrobalans\  YamSni  (the  seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowati),  Dadima 
(Pomegranates),  Riddhi  (not  being  obtainable,  Pavonia  odorata  is  used 
as  a  substitute),  DrSksha  (grapes),  Punarnavfi  [Boerhavia  diffused), 
Chavya  [Piper  Chaba ;,  Duralabha  [Hedysarum  Alhagi),  Amlavetasa 
[Rumex  vesicarius ),  £ringi  [Rhus  succedanea ),  Tamalaka  [Phyllanthus 
Niruri),  BhSrgi  [Siphonanthus  Indica ),  Rfisna  ( Vanda  Roxburghii),  and 
Gokshuraka  [Tribulus  lanuginosus \ 

The  united  measure  of  the  pastes  of  these  should  be  1  seer. 

This  ghee  is  beneficial  in  all  varieties  of  cough,  hiccup,  and 

asthma. 

This  ghee,  called  ‘KantakSri-ghrita’,  is  a  well-tested  medicine.  It 
cures  cough.  124- 127 

Ghee  boiled  in  the  decoction  of  the  seeds  of  Kulattha  [Dolichos 
bijlorus )  with  the  paste  of  the  group  of  five  roots,  should  be  given  as 
a  drink  in  phlegm-born  cough. 

This  ghee  is  beneficial  also  in  hiccup  and  asthma.*  128 

In  phlegm-born  cough  the  same  kinds  of  smoke  are  prescribable 
that  have  been  laid  down  for  persons  afflicted  with  wind-bore 
cough. 

The  smoke  may  be  taken  of  the  kernel  of  the  fruits  of  Koshatakr 
[Luff a  amora)  mixed  with  ManahgilS  (realgar).  129 

If  that  variety  of  asthma,  called  ‘Tamaka’,  be  present  in  phlem- 
born  cough  co-existing  with  (excited)  bile,  the  physician  should  then 
-apply,  agreeably  to  circumstances,  the  treatment  that  has  been  laid 
down  for  bile-born  cough.  130 


*  The  measure  of  the  decoction  should  be  four  times  that  of  ;  and  that  of  the  paste 
should  be  equal  to  that  of  ghcc.—-T. 


1526 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


In  wind-born  cough  co-existing  with  (excited)  phlegm,  the  treat¬ 
ment  that  alleviates  phlegm  should  be  adopted. 

In  wind-born  cough,  as  also  in  phlegm-born  cough,  if  it  co-exists 
with  bile,  that  treatment  should  be  adopted  which  is  alleviative  of 
bile.  131 

In  cough  characterised  by  wind  and  phlegm,  if  the  phlegm  be  soft 
(or  watery),  food  and  drink  that  are  dry  should  be  prescribed. 

In  similar  cough,  if  the  phlegm  be  dry,  food  and  drink  that  are 
oily  are  prescribable. 

In  phlegm-born  cough  co-existing  with  bile,  food  and  drink 
mixed  with  bitters  should  be  given.#  13* 

(Here  ends  the  treatment  of  cough  born  of  excited  phlegm). 

When  sore-born  cough  is  regarded  as  dangerous,  it  should  be 
speedily  allayed  by  means  of  the  articles  known  as  ‘madhura’  (sweet, 
such  as  grapes,  dates,  &c.',  and  the  drugs  known  by  the  name  of 
‘Jivaniya’,  which  increase  strength  and  flesh. f  *33 

PIPPALYADI-LAUHA. 

Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum ),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Sitopala 
(sugar),  the  measure  of  each  being  a  ‘karshika’  (equal  to  2  tolas) : 

Cow’s  milk,  goat’s  milk,  and  the  expressed  juice  of  the  sugar-cane, 
the  measure  of  each  being  a  ‘prastha’  (equal  to  2  seers,  in  practice 
double  the  measure,  or,  4  seers  are  taken) : 

The  pulv  of  Yava  (barley),  and  of  Godhuma  (wheat),  and  of 
Mridvika  (dried  grapes),  the  measure  of  each  being  one  ‘prasrita’ 
(equal  to  2  tolas) ; 

The  expressed  juice  of  Amalaka  (the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Em- 
blica),  and  (sesame)  oil,  the  measure  of  each  being  a  ‘prasrita’  (equal 
to  2  tolas) : 


*  ‘Ardre’  and  ‘tjushke’  have  reference  to  ‘Kapha’  or  phlegm. — T. 

•)•  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  When  sore-born  cough  takes  a  bad  turn,  or,  when  it  mani¬ 
fests  itself  in  a  severe  form,  its  treatment:" should  by  no  means  be  delayed.  On  the  other 
hand,  treatment  should  be  taken  up  speedily,  and  sweets  and  ‘Jivaniya’  drugs  should  be 
administered.  These,  by  imparting  strength  and  flesh,  conquer  this  cough  quickly. — T.  ’ 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland  U.  S.  A.: — You  have  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages,  thought  and 
taught' on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmette  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California:—  ...  ...  ...As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent . .  ... 

there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn....  ...  ... 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  .—You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  Or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and'one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis ,  Ohio,  U.  S.  A.  : — The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  wich  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly; 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge: — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat- 
iag  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement-when  finished. 

■  R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York  : — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  American  fournal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 

delphia  Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  ■  the  Medical 
literature.  >; 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  .  I. shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A,  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer-  of  Cashmere :— No medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

.  Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-  Western 

University,  Sectetary  to  the  Congress  of  the  WoolcCs  Columbian  Exposition  : _ I  am 

already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  :— Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  icy.  East  38th  Street,  New  York  /—Wish  you  a  success  in 
».  rar  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Moils.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Traise,  Dramstadt The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
io; getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  'A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

.Dr.  H,  N,  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S .,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  'a. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist:— l  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising  onr  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  g?  eat  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere,  174,  Boulevatse,  Saint  German  : — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  Jo  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
fo  r  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a. copy  of  a  lev'ew  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia  : — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  of 
Charaka  I  always  arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians  of  the  pre¬ 
sent  day  would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modem  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and 
treat  their  patients  according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the 
undertakers,  and  fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to 
the  completion  of  the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street ,  Calcutta : — My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after. — 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burlholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S-,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing  : — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  attd  Collector : — Your  patriotic 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  H.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  : — X  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Grierson>  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Gya  It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as.a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  IVaies : — The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has -placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is 
a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji,— The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to 
the  physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as 
well.  Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


PART  XLIX. 


47357 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 

(TRAN SL  A  TED  INTO  ENGLISH). 

PUBLISHED  BY. 

PARESHNATH  SARMA, 

SON  OF  LATE 

KAVIRAJ  AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAYIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  Original)  WITH  COMMENT¬ 
ARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SDSRUTA-SAMIfITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 

journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  OF  the  HINDU 

SYSTFM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C.,  &C,,  &C. 


CALCUTTA: 

200,  Cornwallis  Street, 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N.  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRATNA  PRESS, 
12,  SIMLA  STREET,  BYE-LANE. 

.  1908. 

(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved.- ) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters.) 

Professor  Max  Muller  I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla  : 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish. — -Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he'  says, — . /..  I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention 
.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 


Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my' 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office —  . Your 

excellent  translation . .  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

.„  . Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York ,  U.  S  A.  I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgh,  Sweden  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College ,  New  York,  U.  S.  A. — I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing.  Be 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  of  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches; 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris : — I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  Utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany : — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science; 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsburgh,  Germany  : — English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important! 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal: — I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life, 
cannot  be  other*than  valuable. 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHIT A.  > 


1527 


Boil  all  these  on  a  mild  fire  (till  the  contents  assume  some  measure 
of  consistency). 

Make  a  linctus  of  the  boiled  product.  Adding  ghee  and  honey 
to  it,  this  linctus  should  be  licked. 

It  cures  sore-born  cough,  as  also  asthma,  chest-disease,  and 
emaciation. 

It  is  beneficial  to  old  men  whose  semen  has  decreased.*  134-136 

Of  persons  afflicted  with  sore-born  cough,  the  regimen  should  be 
the  same  as  that  of  persons  afflicted  with  bile-born  cough. 

Such  regimen  should  consist  mostly  of  milk,  ghee,  and  honey. 

When,  however,  this  variety  of  cough  co-exists  with  some  other 
ailment  or  ailments,  the  regimen  should  be  different.  i37 

When  one  having  sore-born  cough  is  afflicted  with  wind  and  bile, 
and  when  his  limbs  are  languid,  rubbing  the  body  with  ghee  is 
beneficial, 

When,  however,  such  a  person  is  afflicted  by  the  wind,  rubbing 
the  body  with  such  oils  as  are  alleviative  of  the  wind,  is  beneficial.  >38 

If  pains  are  present  in  the  chest  and  the. sides,  ,  drink  should  be 
prescribed  of  ghee  boiled  with  the  group  of  drugs  called  ‘Jivaniya.’ 

If  one  afflicted  with  sore-born  cough  feels  a  burning  sensation 
of  the  skin,  if  he  vomits  blood,  if  his  digestive  fire  is  strong,  and  if 
he  is  accustomed  to  animal  food,  meat-juice  prepared  from  the  flesh 
of.  quails  ( Perdix  ckinensis)  and  birds  of  the  like  species,  is  beneficial 
for  him,  especially  if  he  has  been  weakened. 

If  one  afflicted  with  sore-born  cough  feels  thirsty,  goat’s  milk 
boiled  with  the  roots  of  Sara  ( Saccharum  Sard)  and  the  rest  is 
beneficial  for  him.f  139-140 


*  In  the  last  line  of  SI.  136  Gang3dhara  reads ‘Kasa  &c.’  This  is  incorrect.  -It  shobld 
be  ‘Qvasa&c.’  The  Calcutta  edition  reads  ‘Kaseshu’  for  ‘Karjyeshu’  in  the  same  line.— T. 

-‘Saramuladibhih  critam’  means  ‘boiled  with  the  group  of  roots  called  Trinadi-pancha- 
rnula,  i.  «.,  the  roots  of  Sara  ( Saceharum  sara),  Ku$a  [(Poa  cytios'ureidcs),  K3gH 
Y Saccharum  spontaneum),  Darbha  ( Saccharum  cylyndrUum),  and  Ikshu  ( Saccharum 
cfflcinarum  ), — T.  ( 

193 


1528: 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA . 


\  In  discharges  of  blood  from  any  of  the  ducts,  or  from  the  mouth, 
of  such  a  patient,  the  drinking  or  snuffing  of  ghee  prepared  from  fresh 
butter  of  cow’s  milk,  is  beneficial. 

If,  again,  such  a  patient  feels  fatigued  and  weak,  and  if  his 
digestive  fire  is  lost,  then  the  gruel  of  barley  (and  other  grains)  is 
beneficial  for  him.*  I4I 

In  stupefaction  of  the  body,  or  when  a  sense  of  fatigue  or  toil  is 
present,  the  patient  should  take  a  copious  measure  of  ghee  ; 

Or,  he  may  take  such  medicines  as  are  not  hostile  to  blood-bile, 
and  as  are  curative  of  wind-diseases  (nervous  ailments).  142 

If  in  sore-born  cough,  the  sores  have  healed  and  the  phlegm  has 
•increased, f  and  if  there  is  still  a  sense  of  oppression  in  the  parts 
afflicted  with  sores,  the  patient  should  then  inhale  the  following  kinds 
of  smoke.:  M3 

Take  the  two  varieties  of  Meda  {viz.,  Meda  and  Mahameda,  both 
of  which  being  not  available,  Acwagandha  or  Physalis  flexuosa  and 
£ariva  or  Echites  frutescens  are  used). 

Take  also  Madhuka  or  liquorice  ;  and  also  the  two  varieties  of 
Bala  (i.  e.,  Sida  cordijolia  and  Sida  alba).  Reduce  the  above  to  paste. 
Laying  this  paste  on  a  piece  of  silken  cloth  dyed  with  lacdye,  a  stick 
should  be  prepared. 

Burning  one  end  of  the  stick,  its  smoke  should  be  inhaled  (by  the 
■mouth). 

After  inhalation  of  the  smoke,  the  patient  should  drink  ghee 
boiled  with  the  group  of  drugs  called  ‘Jivaniya’.  r44 

Take  Manahcila  (realgar),  the  seeds  of  Palaca  {Butea  frondosd), 
Ajagandha  (the  seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowari),  Tvakshiri  (bambu  manna), 
and  Nagara  (dry  ginger). 

Reduce  these  to  paste,  and  lave  the  paste  over  a  piece  of  silken 
cloth. 


f  ‘Kshiryam  ghritam’  is  explained  by  the  commentators  as  meaning  ‘ ghee  prepared  from 
-fresh  vaccine  butter.’ — T. 

%  Commentators  explain  that  by  mentioning  the  increase  of  phlegm,  the  Rishi  impliedly 
■refers  to  the  absence  of  both  bile  and  wind, — T. 


CH A  RA  KA -SAM HIT A  , 


1529 


Make  sticks  of  the  cloth  so  laved,  and  inhale  (with  the  mouth)  the 
smoke  of  the  sticks  (according  to  the  manner  directed). 

After  inhalation  of  the  smoke,  the  patient  should  drink  the  juice  of 
the  sugar-cane,  and  water  in  which  sugar  or  treacle  has  been 
dissolved.  M5 

Take  a  number  of  banian  sprouts  drenched  in  water,  and  an  equal 
quantity  of  Manahgila  (realgar). 

Reduce  these  to  paste,  and  lave  the  paste  over  a  piece  of  silken 
cloth. 

Adding  ghee ,  make  sticks  of  the  cloth  so  laved. 

Inhale  the  smoke  of  these  sticks  (according  to  the  manner  directed). 

After  inhalation  of  the  smoke,  the  patient  should  eat  the  flesh  of 
francoline  partridges  (and  birds  of  the  same  description).  146 

Take  the  drugs  included  in  the  group  called  ‘Jivaniya’,  and  also 
the  liquid  portion  of  the  eggs  of  ‘Kulingas’  (hen-sparrows). 

Reduce  these  to  a  paste,  and  lave  the  paste  on  a  piece  of  silken 
cloth. 

Inhale  the  smoke  (according  to  the  manner  directed)  of  sticks 
made  of  the  cloth  so  laved. 

After  inhalation  of  the  smoke  the  patient  should  drink  milk  that 
is  boiled,  or  milk  made  hot  by  dipping  a  heated  ball  or  piece  of  iron 
in  it.  H7 

If  a  person  afflicted  with  waste-born  cough  presents  all  the  symp¬ 
toms  of  that  disease,  and  if  his  strength  has  been  greatly  reduced,  his 
treatment  should  not  be  taken  up  by  a  physician  (death  being  certain 
to  overtake  him  soon). 

If,  on  other  hand,  the  disease  be  new,  and  if  the  patient  has 
strength,  his  treatment  may  be  taken  up  after  explaining  it  to  his 
relatives  that  though  death  will  ensue  yet  there  is  just  a  chance  of 
recovery.  148 

As  regards  the  last-mentioned  patient  (that  is,  he  who  is  afflicted 
with  waste-born  cough  that  is  new  and  whose  strength  has  not  been 
reduced),  the  administration  of  ‘Yringhanas’  is  prescribable  at  the 


CHARAKA-SA  MH17A. 


*53  o 

outset.#  Medicines  should  also  be  administered  for  enkindling  his 
digestive  fire. 

If  many  ailments  supervene,  mild  oily  purgatives  should  be 
administered.-f  *49 

Ghee  boiled  with  £ampaka  (otherwise  called  Aragvadha,  i.  e.T 
Cassia  fistula ),  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethum ),  and  the  juice  of 
MridvikS  ( Vitis  vinifera),  the  decoction  of  Tilvaka  (otherwise  called 
Lodhra,  i.  e.,  Symplocos  racemosa ),  and  the  expressed  juice  of  Vidari 
( Batatus  paniculatus),  should,  with  discretion,  be  drunk  : 

This  medicated  ghee  corrects  the  bowels  of  a  weakened  system. 

It  is  beneficial  to  the  body  and  increases  its  strength. 

In  fact,  it  is  regarded  as  the  preservative  of  such  a  patient.  *50^5* 

When  the  bile  and  the  phlegm  have  become  attenuated,  and  when 
the  ‘dhatus  also  have  become  greatly  wasted,  the  patient  should  drink 
ghee  boiled  with  milk  and  the  paste  of  Karkataka  ( Rhus  succeedanea \ 
and  the  two  Balas  (i.  e.,  Sida  cordifolia  and  Sida  alba).  1S2 

If,  in  this  disease:,  the  urine  becomes  discoloured  and  comes  out 
with  difficulty,  the  patient  should  then  take  ghee  and  milk  boiled 
with  the  paste  of  Vidari  ( Batatus  paniculatus ),  or  with  Kadamba 
( Nauclea  Cadamba),  or  with  the  kernel  of  palmyra  fruits.  >53 

If  there  is  swelling,  with  pain,  in  the  genital  organ,  the  rectum, 
the  hips,  and  the  pubic  region,  of  such  a  patient,  enemata  should  be 
administered  consisting  of  the  inanda  of  ghee ,  or  of  ghee  and  oil 
mixed  together.  »54 

After  administration  of  such  enemata,  he  should  be  given  boiled 
rice,  with  the  flesh  of  wild  animals.  Gradually  the  flesh  should 
be  given  to  him  of  ‘Varttakas’  (a  variety  of  quails,  Perdix  slivacea), 
of  animals  residing  in  holes,  and  of  carnivorous  animals  and  birds  of 
prey,  iss 


*  ‘Vringhanas’  are  medicines  that  promote  nutrition  and  increase  corpulency. — T. 
t  ‘Vahudoshaya’  means,  literally,  ‘unto  one  in  whom  there  are  many  faults.’  Here  it 
weans*  one  who  has  many  supervening  ailments. T. 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SA  M HIT  A . 


153* 

These  kinds  of  meat,  in  consequence  of  their  heating  and  stimu¬ 
lating  virtues,  cause  the  phlegm  to  fall  away  from  the  ducts  of  the 
body. 

The  ducts  being  thus  cleansed,  the  ‘dhStu’  called  ‘Rasa’  (that  is, 
the  juice  into  which  food  is  converted  in  the  first  stage  of  digestion), 
being  freely  borne  through  them,  conduces  to  nourishment.*  >56 
DWI-PANCHAMULADI  GHRITA. 

The  two  groups  of  five  roots  (viz.,  ‘Swalpa’  and  ‘Vrihat’),  the  three 
myrobalans,  Chavika  (Piper  chaba),  Bhargi  (Siphonanthus  Indica), 
ChitrakS  (Plumbago  Zeylanica)  Kulattha  (Dolichos  biflorus),  Pippalil 
mula  (the  roots  of  Piper  longum ),  Paths  (Cissampelos  htrnandifolia), 
Kola  (dried  Jujubes),  and  Yava  (barley) : 

Boil  these  in  water  for  obtaining  their  decoction. 

Take  equal  measure  of  the  paste  of  each  of  the  following,  viz., 
Nagara  (dry  ginger),  Dusparja  (otherwise  called  Duralabha,’  i.  e., 
Hedysarum  Alhagi),  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum ),  £ati  (Curcuma 
Zerumbet),  Paushkara  (a  root  of  that  name  which  not  being  available, 
the  roots  of  Aplotaxis  auriculata  are  used),  and  Karkatacringi 
(Rhus  succeedaned)  : 

Boil  the  decoction  and  the  pastes  with  ghee.  157-158 

When  the  boiling  is  complete,  throw  into  the  boiled  product  the 
pulv  of  the  two  ‘KshSras’  (viz.,  ‘Sarjji’,  i.  e.,  carbanate  of  soda,  and 
‘YavakshSra’  the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots),  and  the  five  salts. 

One  afflicted  with  waste-born  cough  should  take  this  ghtt  in 
proper  measure.-)-  157-159 


*  The  reading  of  the  second  line  of  this  verse  is  evidently  incorrect  as  given  in  all  the 
printed  texts.  Gangadhara  has  ‘Kaphaih  $uddhasya  taih  &c.  vahan  rasah.’  He  explains 
that  ‘taih’  refers  to  ‘  varttakadibhih.  ’ 

The  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  ‘Kaphai’  juddhaigcha  taih  &c.  vahanrasa.’ 
If  this  reading  be  adopted,  ‘taih’  stands  for  ‘ducts.’ 

Whatever  the  reading,  the  meaning  does  not  seem  to  be  unintelligible. — T. 

The  difficulty  lies  with  ‘Kaphaih’  in  all  the  editions.  Evidently  ‘Kapha  is  intended  to 
be  the  object  of  the  verb  ‘Chyavayanti.’  The  varieties  of  meat  mentioned  above  cause  the 
phlegm  to  fall  away  from  the  ducts.  So  it  seems  that  the  word  in  the  second  line  should  be 
‘Kapham’  in  the  objective  case  and  not  ‘Kaphai.’ — Ed.  „ 

f  The  measure  of  ghee ,  as  explained  by  Gangadhara,  should  be  4  seers  ;  that  of  the 
decoction  should  be  16  seers  ;  and  that  of  the  pastes  should  be  I  seer  to  the  aggregate.— T. 


1532 


CHARAKA-SA  MH1TA. 


GU0UCHYADI  GHRITA. 

Guduchi  ( Tinospora  codifolia Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans1, 
Murvfi  ( Sansevieria  zeylanica ),  HaridrS  ( Curcuma  longa ),  £reyasi 
(otherwise  called  Gajapippali,  i.  e.,  Pothos  officinalis ),  Vacha  {Acorns 
Calamus'),  Nidigdhika  {Solatium  xantkocarpum ),  Kasamardda  {Cassia 
Sophora ),  Patha  {Cissampelos  kernandifolia),  Chitraka  {Plunibago  zey¬ 
lanica),  and  Nagara  (dry  ginger)  : 

These  are  boiled  in  water  of  four  times  their  united  measure  down 
to  a  fourth  of  the  whole. 

Boil  an  equal  measure  of  ghee  with  the  decoction  thus  obtained. 

This  ghee  should  be  drunk.  It  is  curative  of  abdominal  tumours* 
asthma,  and  waste-born  cough.*  160-161 

KASAMARDDADI  GHRITA. 

Kasamardda  {Cassia  Sophora ),  Abhaya  (chebulic  myrobalans), 
Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus  roiundus),  Patha  {Cissampelos  hernandi- 
folia),  Katphala  {Myrica  Sapida),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  Pippali  (fruits 
of  Piper  longum),  Katuka  {Picrorrhiza  Kurroa),  Dr&ksha  (grapes,) 
Kasmaryya  (otherwise  called  Gambhari,  i.  e.,  the  fruits  of  Gmelina 
arborea),  and  Surasa  (otherwise  called  Rasna,  i.  e.,  Vanda  Roxburghii).\ 

Take  an  ‘aksha’  (equal  to  2  tolas)  of  each  of  thes6  ;  also  ghee  of 
the  measure  of  4  seers  ;  and  an  ‘adhaka’  (equal  to  16  seers)  of  milk 
and  the  juice  of  the  grape. 

Boil  all  these  together. 

This  medicated  ghee  is  highly  beneficial  and  cures  consumption 
or  waste,  fever,  enlargement  of  the  spleen,  and  all  varieties  of 
cough.  162-163 


*  For  ‘Triphala’,  meaning  the  three  myrobalans,  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bomhay  editions 
read  ‘Pippali’,  meaning  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum. — T. 

-j-  ‘Surasa’  is  identified  with  ‘Rasna  or  Vanda  Roxburghii.  It  stands  also  for  a  variety 
of  Ocimum  sanctum. 

‘Qosha  stands  for  both  consumption  or  waste,  and  dropsical  swellings.  Here  it  means 
consumption. 

The  second  line  is  read  differently  in  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions.  We  adopt 
the  reading  of  Gangadhara.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHI7  A. 


f  533 

Or,  ghee ,  boiled  with  DhStri-phala  (chebulic  myrobalans)  them¬ 
selves  previously  boiled  in  milk,  and  (when  dry)  reduced  to  pulv, 

.  or  ghee  boiled  in  the  expressed  juice  of  Dadima  (the  fruits  of 
Panica  granatum)  of  twice  its  measure,  and  mixed  with  the  paste  of 
Vyosha  (the  three  acrids,  viz.,  dry  ginger,  the  fruits  of  Piper  Ion  gum, 
and  black  pipper), 

Should  be  drunk. 

Or,  the  man,  after  taking  his  meals,  may  take  ghee  boiled  with  the 
ashes  of  green  barley  shoots. 

Or,  he  may  take  ghee  boiled  with  Pippali  (the  fruits  reduced  to 
pulv  of  Piper  longum),  and  treacle,  and  goat’s  milk.*  164-165 

All  these  varieties  of  ghee  have  the  effect  of  increasing  the  strength 
of  the  digestive  fire  of  one  afflicted  with  waste-born  cough. 

They  have  the  effect,  besides,  of  correcting  the  (excited)  faults, 
constipated  bowels,  and  the  ducts  of  the  chest.  164-166 
HARITAKI-LEHA 

OR 

THE  LINCTUS  OF  CHEBULIC  MYROBALANS. 

Take  twenty  chebulic  myrobalans  and  boil  them  in  two  ‘adhakas’ 

.  of  the  decoction  of  barley  seeds. 

(Two  ‘adhakas  are  equal  to  16'  seers.  In  practice,  double  the 
measure,  that  is,  32  seers  are  taken.) 

After  they  have  been  boiled,  their  seeds  should  be  thrown  away, 
■and  the  kernel  reduced  to  paste. 


*  The  first  of  these  ghees  is  thus  prepared  :  the  chebulic  myrobalans  are  first  boiled  in 
'  milk  ;  their  seeds  are  then  thrown  out ;  the  softened  kernel  is  reduced  to  paste  and  boiled 
with  ghee.  The  measure  of  the  ghee  should  be  four  times  that  of  the  pulv  of  the  myrobalans. 
As  regards  the  second  ghee ,  it  is  boiled  with  the  paste  of  the  three  acrids  whose  measure 
.  is  a  fourth  of  that  of  the  ghee.  The  measure  of  the  juice  of  pomegranate  fruits  should,  as 
'  stated  in  the  text  itself,  be  twice  as  that  of  the  ghee. 

'  As  regards  ‘Yavakshara-ghrita,’  the  measure  of  ‘Yavakshara’  or  the  ashes  of  green  barley 
:  shoots,  should  be  an  eighth  of  that  of  the  ghee,  while  that  of  water  should  be  four  times 
that  of  the  ghee. 

As  regards  the  fourth^,  the  united  measure  of  Piper  longum  and  treacle  should  be 
■  one-fourth  of  that  of  the  ghee  ;  while  that  of  goat’s  milk  should  be  four  times  that  of  ghee.—T. 


CHA  RA  KA-SA  MB  IT  A. 


*534 

This  paste,  adding  six  palas  of  old  treacle,  should  again  be  boiled 
in  the  decoction  of  barley  seeds  (kept  in  the  vessel). 

When  this  second  boiling  is  about  to  be  completed,  the  following 
should  be  thrown  into  the  vessel,  viz.,  a  ‘karsha’  (equal  to  2  tolas)  of 
Manahjila  (realgar),  and  half  a  ‘karsha’  of  Rasftnjana  (galena),  and 
half  a  ‘ku^ava’  (equal  to  2  palas)  of  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper 
longum ). 

These  constitute  a  linctus  which  is  curative  of  asthma  and 
cough.*  167-168 

The  quills  of  the  porcupine  reduced  to  ashes,  mixed  with  ghee, 
honey,  and  sugar, 

Or,  the  legs  of  the  peacock  reduced  to  ashes  and  mixed  with  ghee 
and  honey, 

Or,  the  ashes  of  the  leaves  of  Eranda  (. Ricinus  communis ),  mixed 
with  (an  equal  measure  of)  the  pulv  of  the  three  acrids,  and  treacle 
and  (sesame)  oil, 

Should  be  licked.  Every  one  of  these  linctuses  is  curative  of 
asthma  and  cough. 

Mixing  the  ashes,  in  the  same  way,  of  the  leaves  of  Surasa  {Oci- 
mum  sanctum)  and  of  Eranda  ( Ricinus  communis ),  that  is,  with  the 
pulv  of  the  three  acrids,  treacle,  and  oil,  a  linctus  should  be  made. 
This  linctus  also  is  curative  of  asthma  and  cough.f  169170 

One  may  also  lick  the  pulv  of  Vfirtaku  (fruits  of  Solanum  Melon- 
gena ),  Pippali  {Piper  lofigum ),  DrakshS  (grapes)  and  Padmaka  (a 
fragrant  wood  brought  from  central  India),  mixed  with  honey  and 
ghee. 

Or,  one  may  lick  the  pulv  of  Tryushana  (the  three  acrids)  mixed 
with  old  treacle  and  ghee.  l7l 

Or,  one  may  lick  the  pulv  of  the  following,  viz.,  Chitraka  {Plum¬ 
bago  Zeylanicd \  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  Ajaji  (the  seeds  of 


*  ‘Qvabidha’,  otherwise  called  ‘gallaki,’  is  the  large  porcupine.  The  word  may  mean 
also  a  dog.  Here,  however,  the  porcupine  is  meant. 

t  By  ‘etena  vidhina’  in  the  second  line  of  170,  is  meant  that  the  ashes  of ‘Surasa’ 
•Eranda’  are  to  he  mixed  with  the  pulv  of  ‘Vyosha’,  and  treacle,  and  oil.— T 


UIARAKA-SAMHI7A. 


*535 

Nigclla  sativa),  Karkata  {Rhus  suceedanea ),  Trikatu  (the  three  acrids), 
and  Draksha  (grapes),  mixed  with  honey  and  ghee. 

Or,  one  may  eat  this  preparation,  mixing  it  with  treacle. 

Jivanti  {Ccelogyne  ovalis),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Pstha  {CissampeloS 
hernandifolia),  Tvak-kshiri  ( Bambu  manna),  TriphalS  (the  three  my- 
robalans),  £ati  ( Curcuma  Zerumbet ),  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotun¬ 
das),  Ela  (the  seeds  of  Elettaria  cardamomum),  Pippali  (the  fruits  of 
Piper  longuni),  Draksha  (grapes),  the  two  Vrihatis  {viz.,  Solanum 
Xanthocarpum,  and  Solanum  Indicum),  VitUnnaka  (otherwise  called 
DhSnyaka  or  coriander  seeds),  Sariva  {Echites  frutescens),  PaUshkara- 
mula  (a  root  which  not  being  available  is  substituted  by  that  of  Aplo- 
taxis  auriczdata ',  Karkata  {Rhus  suceedanea ),  Rasanjana  (galena), 
PunarnavS  {Boerhavia  diffusa ),  Loha-rajas  (the  pulv  of  iron),  Traya- 
mana  {Ficus  heterophylla),  Yamanika  (the  seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan), 
BhSrgi  {Siphonanthus  Indica ),  TSmalaki  {Phyllanthus  Niruri),  Ridhi 
(not  being  available,  Bala  or  Sida  cordifolia  is  used  instead),  Vidanga 
Embelia  Ribes),  Dhanwayasaka  (otherwise  called  Duralabha,  i.  e., 
Hedysarum  Alhagi ),  Kshara  (the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots), 
Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica),  Chavya  {Piper  Chaba)  AmlavetSsa 
(otherwise  called  Chukra,  i.  e.,  Rumex  vesicarius),  Vyosha  (the  three 
acrids),  and  Daru  {Pinus  deodara) : 

Reduce  each  of  these  to  pulv,  and  take  a  pala  of  each.  Mixing  the 
pulvs  with  honey  and  ghee ,  a  linctus  is  formed  which  one  may  lick 
with  beneficial  results. 

The  measure  of  a  dose  is  a  ‘panitala’  (equal  to  2  tolas)  This 
preparation  cures  all  the  five  varieties  of  cough.  173-176 

Padmaka  (a  root  brought  from  Central  India),  Triphala  (the  three 
myrobalans),  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids),  Viclanga  {Embelia  Ribes), 
Devadaru  {Pinus  deodara),  Bala  {Sida  cordifolia ),  and  Rasna  (  Vanda 
Roxburgii) : 

Reduce  these  to  fine  pulvs,  and  take  equal  measures  of  these. 

Add  honey,  ghee,  and  sugar,  the  measure  of  each  being  equal  to 
the  united  measure  of  the  pulvs. 

Mixing  all  these  together  by  pounding  them  in  a  mortar,  make 
a  linctus. 


194 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SA  MH1TA . 


1536 

This  linctus  is  highly  beneficial  and  cures  all  varieties  6 f 
cough.177'i7'S 

Or,  one  may  lick  the  pulv  of  Maricha  (black  pepper),  mixing  it 
with  ghee ,  honey,  and  sugar. 

This  preparation  is  the  foremost  of  all  linctuses,  that  a  person 
afflicted  with  cough  should  use.  *79 

The  paste  of  the  leaves  of  Vadari  (jujubes),  fried  in  ghee ,  and 
mixed  with  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  forms  a  linctus  which  should  be  pres¬ 
cribed  in  hoarseness  of  voice  and  cough.  180 

The  leaves  of  Tilvaka  (otherwise  called  Lodhra,  i.  e.,  Syniplocos 
racemosa),  reduced  to  paste,  fried  in  ghee,  and  mixed  with  sugar, 
forms  a  ‘peya’  (drink),  or  ‘utkfirika.’ 

Either  of  these  cures  vomiting,  thirst,  cough,  and  diarrhoea  charac¬ 
terised  by  evacuations  of  undigested  food.*  1S1 

Take  white  Sarshapa  (mustard  seeds),  Gandira  (otherwise  called 
£amatha — a  variety  of  pot-herb  growing  in  aquatic  regions),  Vidanga 
( Embelia  Ribes),  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids),  Chitraka  ( Plumbago 
Zeylanica),  and  Abhaya  (chebulic  myrobalans) 

Boil  these  in  water. 

With  the  decoction  so  obtained,  prepare  gruel  of  barley. 

This  gruel,  mixed  with  ghee  and  salt,  is  beneficial  in  cough,  hiccup, 
asthma,  inflammation  of  the  Schneiderian  membrane,  chlorosis,  con¬ 
sumption,  or  waste,  dropsical  swellings,  and  otalgia.f  182-183 

The  soup  of  Mudga  (the  seeds  of  Phaseolus  Mungo )  prepared  with 
the  decoction  of  Kantakari  ( Solannm  Xanthocarpum ),  dressed  with 
ghee  and  the  pulv  of  black  pepper,  and  rendered  slightly  sour  by 


*  ‘Utkarika’  is  like  the  preparation  called ‘haluwH’  or  ‘Mohanbhoga.’  It  is  a  sort  of 
solid  frumenty. — T. 

+  Gangadhara  explains  that  the  measure  of  white  mustard  seeds  and  the  rest  should  be 
a  ‘karshika’  (equal  to  2  tolas)  of  each.;  that  of  the  water  in  which  these  should  be  boiled- 
being  a  ‘pr5sthika’  (equal  to  2  seers).  In  practice,  double  the  measure,  or  4  seers,  of  waies 
are  taken.  This  quantity  is  boiled  down  to  2  seers.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA 


*53  7 


adding  Gaura  (white  variety  of  mnstard  seeds)  and  Amalaka  (the 
fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblicd),  is  very  successful  in  all  varieties  of 
cough.  i84 

The  decoction  of  such  drugs  as  are  alleviative  of  excited  wind,, 
milk,  soups  of  pulses,  and  meat-juice  prepared  with  the  flesh  of 
‘Vishkiras’  (domestic  fowl  and  other  birds  which  employ  their  feet 
for  searching  out  their  food),  and  ‘Pratudas’  (birds  which  employ 
their  beaks  for  finding  and  taking  their  food),  &c.,  should  be  given  to 
one  afflicted  with  waste-born  cough.* * * §  lSS 

Those  varieties  of  smoke,  with  the  prescribed  regulations,  that 
have  been  laid  down  (as  beneficial)  in  sore-born  cough,  should  be 
administered  in  waste-born  cough  as  well.f 

Medicines  that  are  ‘dipana’  (capable  of  kindling  the  digestive  fire), 
that  are  ‘vringhana’  (capable  of  promoting  nutrition  and  corpulency), 
that  are  capable  of  cleansing  the  ducts,  and  that  promote  strength, 
are  all  beneficial  to  persons  afflicted  with  waste-born  cough,  if  admi¬ 
nistered  in  proper  measure  agreeably  to  the  faults  excited.^  l8? 

Waste-born  cough,  which  is  a  dreadful  ailment,  arises  from  excite¬ 
ment  of  all  the  three  faults.  Hence,  such  treatment  should  be 
adopted  as  is  beneficial  in  excitement  of  all  the  faults.^  188 

The  strength  or  weakness  of  waste-born  cough  is  determined  by 
the  predominance  or  otherwise  of  the  excited  faults.d 


*  Gangadhara  notes  that  the  use  of  ‘adi’  after  ‘Pratuda,’  implies  beasts  of  prey 
as  well. — T. 

-j-  Gangadhara  reads  ‘Dhumah  Sanusthanah’  in  the  first  line.  The  Calcutta  and  the 
Bombay  editions  read  ‘Dhumah  Sanupanah.’  The  sense  is  almost  identical. — T. 

$  What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  ‘Dipanas,’  &c.,  are  beneficial  in  waste-born  cough,  if 
administered  according  to  the  particular  fault  or  faults  excited.  In  some  cases,  ‘dipanas,’ 
in  some  ‘vringhanas,’  in  some  ‘valyas,’  are  to  be  administered.  ‘Vatyas5t’  is  explained 
by  Gangadhara  as  meaning  ‘dosha- viparyayat,’  i.  e.,  ‘contrary  to  the  fault  or  faults 
excited.’ — T. 

§  In  waste-born  cough,  it  will  not  do  to  allay  this  or  that  particular  fault.  As  the 
disease  is  due  to  the  excitement  of  all  the  faults,  no  treatment  can  be  successful  that  is  hot 
alleviative  of  all  the  faults  simultaneously.— T. 

II  Waste-born  cough  arises  from  excitement  of  all  the  three  faults.  Its  strength  or  other¬ 
wise  is  determined  by  the  degree  in  which  the  faults  have  been  excited  as  also  by  the 


CHAR  AKA  -  SAM  HIT  A, 


31538 

As  regards,  again,  the  several  varieties  of  cough,  it  should  be 
noted  that  each  succeeding  one  is  more  dangerous  than  the  preced¬ 
ing  one.  i89 

( Here  are  two  verses  containing  a  summary }. 

Edibles,  drinks,  ghees  (and  oils),  linctuses,  Tanakas’  (after  drinks), 
milks,  ghees  mixed  with  treacle,-  smokes,  medicines  beneficial  to 
coughs  in  general,  the  different  varieties  of  coughs,  their  originating 
causes,  symptoms,  curability  and  incurability,  medicines  prescribable 
in  each  variety  of  cough,  and  the  degree  of  danger  attaching  to  each 
variety  have  been  laid  down  in  this  Lesson.  190091 

Thus  ends  Lesson  XVIII,  in  the  Division  called  ‘Chikitsa’,  of  the 
treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised  by  Charaka.* 


accompaniments  of  the  excited  faults.  ‘Anuvala-yoga’  is  explained  by  GangS  dhara  as  equi¬ 
valent  te  ‘anuvandha.yoga  ?  The  varieties  of  cough  noticed  in  this  Lesson  are  five,  viz., 
I.  wind-born,  2.  bile-born,  3.  phlegm-born,  4.  sore-born,  and  5.  waste-born.  Each  succeed¬ 
ing  one  is  more  dangerous  than  each  preceding  one. — T. 

*  The  commentators  say  that  the  general  form,  ‘Charaka-pratijodhite’,  is  retained 
although  these  Lessons,  it  is  well  known,  were  revised  by  Dridhavala.  ‘Charaka-proti 
qodhite,’  they  contend,  means  ‘Charaka-pratisansluite  aprSpte  tu  Dridhavala-pratisanskrite.’ 
This  is  ingenious. — T. 


LESSON  XIX. 


TREATMENT  OF  ATISARA, 

OR, 

DIARRHOEA. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  treatment  of  ‘Atisara’  or  Diarrhoea. 
Thus  said  the  illustrious  one  of  Atri’s  race.  1 

Unto  the  illustrious  one  of  Atri’s  race,  seated  on  the  northern 
breast  of  Himavat,  in  the  midst  of  a  conclave  of  Rishis,  after  having 
finished  his  morning  duties  and  completed  his  libations  on  the  Homa 
fire,  Agnivega  said,  approaching  with  humility  and  saluting  with 
reverence.  2 

It  behooveth  thee,  O  illustrious  one,  to  expound,  through  kindness 
for  all  creatures,  what  the  first  origin,  premonitory  indications,  the 
symptoms,  and  the  alleviatives  are  of  Diarrhoea.* 

The  illustrious  Punarvasu  of  Atri’s  race,  having  heard  these  words 
of  Agnivega,  said,  4 

Listen  to  me,  O  Agnivega,  as  I  expound  the  subject  in  full !  5 

In  ancient  times,  in  sacrifices  (performed  in  honour  of  the  deities), 
animals  were  only  dedicated  (with  the  aid  of  proper  mantras). 

They  were  not  actually  killed.  6 

Until  long  after  the  sacrifice  performed  by  Daksha,  in  the  sacrl* 
fices  (for  example)  of  Manu’s  sons,  viz.,  Marishyan,  NabhSga,  Ikshaku, 
Vigaga,  Yati,  and  others,  the  animals,  with  their  own  consent, 
suffered  themselves  to  be  dedicated  (with  mantras).  7-8 

After  these  times,  (a  monarch  of  the  name  of)  Prithadra  per¬ 
formed  a  sacrifice  extending  for  many  long  years. 

In  this  sacrifice,  animals  becoming  scarce,  the  practice  was  inau¬ 
gurated  of  sacrificing  (actually  killing)  kine.  All  creatures  were 
moved  at  the  sight.  9 

From  eating  the  flesh  of  the  kine  thus  killed  in  Prithadra’s  sacri: 
fice,  through  its  heaviness,  heating  virtues,  unassimilability,  unsuit-- 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1540 

ability  of  character  as  food,  and  disrelish,  people  suffered  injury  to 
their  digestive  fires,  and  loss  of  mental  cheerfulness  as  well. 

Diarrhoea  first  arose  among  those  men.*  i° 

Again,  in  course  of  time,  it  was  found  that  of  one  in  whose  con¬ 
stitution  the  wind  predominates,  who  exposes  himself  to  wind  and 
sun,  who  indulges  in  excessive  physical  exercise,  who  takes  food  that 
is  dry,  insufficient,  and  of  limited  measure,  who  habitually  indulges 
also  in  strong  wines  and  sexual  congress,  and  who  suppresses  the 
urgings  of  nature,  the  wind  becomes  provoked. 

In  consequence  of  this,  the  digestive  fire  becomes  weakened.  ” 

The  wind  becoming  provoked,  and  upon  the  digestive  fire  becom¬ 
ing  weakened,  the  wind  drives  the  urine  and  sweat  into  the  region 
of  the  stools.  Causing  the  stools  to  be  liquefied  by  means  of  the 
urine  and  the  sweat,  it  then  generates  diarrhcea.f  12 

The  symptoms  of  this  disease  are  as  follow  : 

The  person  afflicted  with  this  ailment  repeatedly  (or  copiously) 
evacuates  stools  that  are  slimy,  tinged  with  mucus,  depressing  in  their 
effects,  dry,  liquid,  accompanied  by  pains,  possessed  of  the  scent  of 
fish  or  meat,  and  characterised  by  slight  noise,  and  that  obstruct  the 
passing  of  the  urine.j  *3 


*  From  those  verses  it  would  appear  that  in  ancient  times,  sacrifices  were  performed 
without  actually  killing  the  animals  devoted  with  the  aid  of  mantras.  The  ‘Mah3bhSrata’ 
affords  evidence  of  only  corn  or  seeds  having  been  in  remote  times  offered  in  sacrifices  per¬ 
formed  in  honour  of  the  deties.  Goats  and  sheep  then  came  to  be  killed.  When  these 
become  scarce,  kine  were  substituted. 

This  opinion  does  not  tally  with  that  of  Western  scholars  who  think  the  Hindus  were  a 
beef-eating  race  from  the  beginning  of  history,  their  scythian  ancestors  also  having  been  so. 

That  beef  as  food  is  heavy  and  the  source  of  diverse  disease  became  apparent  to  the 
Hindus  in  the  hot  plains  of  India.  Hence  the  Rishis  declare  it  to  be  unclean  and  pros¬ 
cribed  its  use.  At  any  rate,  that  diarrhoea  and  other  ailments  of  the  kind  are  due  to  heavy 
food,  was  understood  by  the  Rishis. — T. 

t  By  ‘purishalayam’  is  meant  the  intestines  or  the  region  of  stools.  Diarrhoea  is,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  Rishi,  caused  by  the  liquefying  of  the  stools  through  the  action  of  the  urine 
and  the  sweat  propelled  by  the  provoked  wind. — T. 

X  The  reading  of  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  differs  slightly  from  that  of 
Gangadhara  which  we  adopt.  At  the  outset,  the  former  have  ‘Vit-jalam.’  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  correct  reading  is  ‘Vijjalam’  which,  as  explained  by  Gangadhara  means 


CHARAKA-SAMH1TA. 


1541 

The  provoked  wind  courses  transversely  as  also  in  an  obstructed 
manner,  causing  both  sound  and  pain,  within  the  stomach. 

When  this  is  so,  the  disease  is  called  ‘AmatisSra’  born  of  wind.*  14 

Or,  in  consequence  of  the  provocation  of  the  wind,  one  frequently 
evacuates  mature  and  hard  stools,  in  small  quantities,  with  noise, 
griping  pain  in  the  intestines,  froth,  slime,  and  cutting  pains  in  the 
rectum. 

The  other  symptoms  are  horripilation,  frequent  and  hard  breath¬ 
ing,  dryness  of  mouth,  pains  in  the  waist,  thighs,  the  lower  part  of 
the  spine,  knees,  back,  and  sides.  There  is  also  prolapsus  ant.  (This 
is  called  ‘PakkStisara.’) 

In  consequence  of  the  stools  being  rendered  hard  by  the  wind, 
some  name  this  disease  as  ‘Anugrathita/f  15 

Of  one  in  whose  constitution  the  bile  predominates,  who  indulges 
largely  in  food  that  is  sour,  saline,  pungent,  alkaline,  of  heating 
virtues,  and  keen,  who  constantly  exposes  himself  to  the  heat  of  fire 
or  the  sun,  or  the  hot  winds,  and  who  nurses  anger  and  malice  in  a 
predominant  measure,  the  bile  becomes  provoked.j  ,6 

In  consequence  of  its  liquidity,  the  (provoked)  bile,  quenches  the 
digestive  fire,  and  reaching  the  region  of  stools,  liquefies  the  stools 
owing  to  its  owa  liquid  character,  its  heating  virtues,  and  its  mobility, 
and  causes  diarrhoea. §  r7 

The  symptoms  of  this  disease  are  as  follow  : 

The  person  afflicted  evacuates  stools  that  are  yellow  in  colour. 


‘pichcehilam’  or  slimy.  Instead  of  ‘Isachcchavdam,’  meaning  ‘acompanied  by  slight 
noise,’  the  former  read  ‘sasavdamsavdam  va,’  meaning  ‘accompanied  or  unaccompanied 
by  noise.’  Gangadhara  gives  some  more  adjectives  than  the  Bombay  and  the  Calcutta 
editions. — T. 

*  ‘Antah-koshte’  is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  ‘Koshtavyantare,’  i.  e.,  ‘within  the 
stomach. — T. 

t  Gangadhara  reads  ‘Pakkam  v5.’  The  particle  ‘vH’  is  omitted  in  the  other  editions. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  ‘va,1  meaning  ‘or,’  is  correct. — T. 

X  ‘Praitatah’  means  constantly.  This  verse  sets  forth  the  causes  which  usually  provoke 
the  bile,  Indulgence  in  food  and  drink  of  the  kind  stated,  exposure  to  heat,  and  giving  way 
to  wrath  and  malice,  provoke  the  bile  of  one  who  is  constitutionally  billious. — T. 

§  The  region  of  stools  is,  probably,  the  ‘pakkagaya.’ — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1542 

or  green,  or  blue,  or  dark,  tinged  with  blood-bile,  and  of  exceedingly 
foetid  smell.. 

Thirst,  burning  of  the  skin,  perspiration,  swoons,  ‘£ula’  pains, 
abscesses,  and  inflammation  and  suppuration  of  the  rectum,  are 
manifested. 

Even  these  are  the  indications  of  diarrhoea  born  of  (excited) 
bile.  18-19 

Of  one  in  whose  constitution  the  phlegm  predominates,  who 
indulges  in  food  that  is  heavy,  sweet,  cooling,  and  oily,  who  stuffs  his 
stomach  with  liquid  diet,  and  who  passes  a  life  of  mental  inactivity, 
sleep  at  daytime,  and  idleness,  the  phlegm  becomes  provoked.  20 

The  phlegm  thus  provoked,  in  consequence  of  its  own  nature, 
extinguishes  the  digestive  of  the  person  who  indulges  in  food  that  is 
heavy,  sweet,  cooling,  and  oily,  and  reaching  the  region  of  stools 
owing  to  its  aquatic  character,  drenches  the  stools  and  causes 
diarrhoea.!  21 

The  symptoms  of  this  disease  are  as  follow  : 

The  person  afflicted  frequently  evacuates  stools  that  are  oily, 
white  in  colour,  slimy,  thready,  consisting  of  mucus,  heavy,  of  foetid 
smell,  characterised  by  ‘Cula’  pains,  and  of  small  measures.  22 

While  evacuating,  the  person  has  to  strain  excessively.  He  feels 
heaviness  in  the  stomach,  the  rectum,  the  pubic  region,  and  the 
groins.  As  regards  the  stools,  they  are  sometimes  hard  and  some¬ 
times  otherwise. 

He  feels  nausea,  and  overcome  by  drowsiness  and  incapacity  for 
physical  efforts. 

His  hair  stands  on  end.  He  becomes  cheerless,  and  entertains 
an  aversion  for  food. 

Even  these  are  the  indications  of  diarrhoea  born  of  phlegm.  23 


§  The  language  of  these  verses  wants  the  usual  terseness  and  brevity  of  Charaka’s  style. 
‘Saumya-swabhSva’  means  ‘lunar  character,’  i.  e.,  the  character  of  water  which  always 
travels  downward.— T, 


CHAR  A  K A-S AM HIT A. 


*5« 


In  consequence  of  taking  food  that  is  exceedingly  cool,  oily, 
'dry,  heating,  heavy,  pungent,  hard,  discoloured,  irregular  (in  respect 
of  time),  consisting  of  hostile  ingredients,  and  nnassimilable, 
or,  of  total  abstention  from  food, 

or,  of  taking  food  after  the  usual  hour  has  passed  away,  24 
or,  of  talking  food  that  is  insufficient  in  measure, 

■or,  of  drinking  wines  and  other  drinks  that  are  vitiated, 

■or,  of  drinking  wines  and  other  drinks  in  excessive  measures, 
or,  of  not  taking  correctives  (i.  e.,  emetics  and  purgatives),  when 
they  are  necessary,  2S 
■or,  of  deviations  in  treatment, 
or,  of  absence  of  treatment,  (or  of  proper  nursing)), 
or,  of  excessive  exposure  to  fire,  or  sun,  or  wind,  or  water, 
i  or,  of  total  abstention  from  sleep.,  or  of  excessive  sleep, 

-or,  of  suppression  of  the  urgings  of  nature, 

■or,  of  contrarieties  of  season  (such  as  presence  of  summer  in  the 
season  of  winter,  ©r  of  cold  in  the  season  of  heat,  &c.,),  26 
-or,  of  improper  exertion  of  strength  («.  <?.,  attempting  feats  for 
which  one’s  strength  is  unequal), 

•or,  of  excessive  accession  of  fear,  or  grief,  or  anxiety  of  mind, 
r  or,  of  the  digestive  fire  having  been  weakened  by  excessive  afflic¬ 
tion  of  such  ailments  as  intestinal  worms,  dropsical  swellings, 
fever,  and  piles, 

the  three  faults  ( viz .,  wind,  bile,  and  phlegm)  become  provoked, 
and  entering  the  stomach  extinguish  the  digestive  fire,  and  generate 
diarrhoea  characterised  by  the  indications  of  every  one  of  the 
faults.*2? 

Further,  the  three  faults  (provoked  simultaneously),  vitiating  the 
already  vitiated  ‘dhstus’  such  as  blood  and  the  rest,  show  in  the 

*  Gangadhara  reads  ‘vigada’  between  ‘kathina’  and  ‘vishama’ in  aphorism  .24.  I  take 
■it  in  the  sense  of  ‘discoloured.’  ‘Khara’  in  the  same  line  means  pungent.  In  aphorism  25, 
^occurs  ‘madyapRniya.’  This  means  ‘wines  and  other  drinks.’ 

-  In  aphorism  26,  ‘pratikarmanam  vishamagamanat’  means  ‘deviations  in  treatment that 
is,  errors  in  treatment. .  The  administration  of  wreng. remedies,  &cJ,  is-  implied.  — X.  - 

m 


*544 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


evacuations  the  colours  caused  by  their  own  nature  as  well  as  the 
nature  of ‘dhfitus.’*  2S 

In  this  connection  (it  should  be  said  that)  upon  the  blood  and  the 
other  ‘dhatus’  becoming  vitiated,  the  person  evacuates  stools  that  are 
yellow,  green,  blue,  reddish  like  the  decoction  of  Manjishta  (Rubia 
cordifolia),  of  the  colour  of  the  water  in  which  meat  has  been  washed, 
red,  dark,  white,  and  of  the  hue  of  porcine  adeps. 

The  evacuations  are  accompanied  by  pain  or  painlessness. 

The  colours  named  above  may  be  presented  together  or 
separately.!  29 

If  the  stools  (in  diarrhoea  born  of  three  faults  excited  together) 
be  copious,  hard  (/.  e.,  consisting  of  scybalse),  and  raw  (consisting  of 
undigested  matter),  or  copious,  hard,  and  ripe  (consisting  of  digested 
matter), 

and  if  the  patient  be  not  excessively  weakened  in  flesh,  blood 
and  strength,  and  if  his  mouth  has  become  tasteless  through  loss  or 
weakness  of  the  digestive  fire,  the  physician  should  then  regard  him 
as  curable  though  the  cure  is  to  be  effected  with  difficulty.j3Q 

One  who  evacuates  stools  of  such  colours,  accompanied  by  such 
supervening  symptoms  as  are  laid  down  below,  should  be  regarded 
as  incurable.  31 

The  colours  and  supervening  symptoms  (to  which  reference  is 
made  above)  are  these : 

The  colour  of  decoctions,  or  of  blood,  or  of  the  fleshy  ball 
Called  the  liver  (V.  e.,  dark-red  as  explained  by  the  commentators), 
or  of  water  in  which  meat  has  been  washed,  or  of  curds  or  ghee 


*  ‘Caused  by  their  own  nature,’  i.  e.,  the  nature  of  the  faults  themselves.  The  faults 
have  colour  ;  the  ‘dhatus’  also  have  colour.  These  colours  appear  in  the  evacuations. — T. 

f  That  is,  a  few  of  the  colours,  or  all,  or  only  one  of  them,  may  appear  in  the  evacua¬ 
tions.— T. 

X  ‘Mahat’  is  explained  as  ‘copious’  in  quantity.  ‘Granthila’  is  hard  or  consisting  of 
scybalse.  ‘Amam  va’  and  ‘pakkam  va’  mean  whether  raw  or  ripe  ;  that  is,  ‘consisting  of 
undigested  or  digested  food.’ 

Some  texts  take  ‘mandagni’  as  separate  from  ‘vihatamukharasa.’  Gangadhara  takes  it 
as  compounded  with  ‘vihatSmukharasa.’  Hence,  he  explains  it  as  ‘become  tasteless  through 
loss  or  weakness  of  the  digestive  fire  and  not  through  any  other  cause.’— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMUH  A. 


*545 

or  marrow  or  oil  or  milk  or  fat  or  ‘vesavara’  (/.  e.,  meat  divested 
of  bones  and  boiled  and  reduced  to  paste  and  mixed  with  treacle 
and  ghee)f 

or  the  colour  which  is  deep  blue,  or  that  which  is  deep  red,  or  that 
which  is  deep  black,  or  that  which  is  as  limpid  as  clear  water,  or  that 
which  is  dark  blue  'resembling  the  hue  of  the  breast  of  a  Khanjana 
or  Motacilla  alba\  or  that  of  matter  which  is  excessively  oily,  or  that 
which  is  greenish,  or  that  which  is  as  brown  as  that  of  the  leaves  of 
Indigofera  tinctoria ,  or  that  which  is  variegated  (i.  e.,  consisting  of 
diverse  pus) ;  32 

or,  that  which  is  muddy,  or  that  which, is  slimy. 

The  stools  are  thready  (seem  to  consist  of  threads).  On  them 
appear  eyes  like  those  that  are  on  the  plumes  of  the  peacock. 

They  have  the  smell  of  a  corpse,  or  of  putrified  matter,  or  of  pus,* 
or  of  raw  fish. 

Flies  are  seen  to  cover  them  within  a  short  time. 

The  stools  appear  also  to  be  the  liquefied  form  of  many  ‘dhStus’ 
mixed  together  (such  as  blood,  food-juice,  flesh  &c.). 

The  quantity  varies,  for  sometimes  it  is  scanty  and  sometimes 
it  is  copious.  33 

'  The  supervening  ailments  are  thirst,  burning,  fever,  vertigo,  the 
sight  of  darkness  all  around,  hiccup,  and  asthma. 

•  The  evacuations  are  accompanied  by  pain  or  painlessness. 

Inconsequence  of  constant  evacuations,  the  rectum  falls  out  or 
becomes  inflamed  and  suppurates. 

The  rectum  having  fallen  out  becomes  incapable  of  being  reduced, 
(or  restored  to  its  usual  position). 

The  mouth  of  the  rectum  remains  unclosed  (or  open). 

The  strength,  the  flesh,  and  the  blood  of  the  patient  all  become 
exceedingly  weakened  and  reduced. 

All  the  joints  and  bones  become  afflicted  with  pain. 

The  patient  manifests  disgust  for  food,  and  cheerlessness  in 
general  (br  dislike  for  everything). 


CHAR  A  K A-  S  AM  FT  IT A. 


®54^ 

Delirium  and  swoons  manifest  themselves. 

The  patient  suddenly  looks  like  one  that  has  no  ailment's.' 

Diarrhoea  with  such  supervening,  symptoms  should  be  regarded  as' 
Incapable  of  treatment  or  cure.  3% 

Even  these  are  the  indications  of  Diarrhoea  born  of  the  simulta.- 
iieous  excitement  of  all  the  faults. 

Diarrhoea  born  of  all  the  faults-  excited  together  should'  be  .known! 
as  incurable. 

As  long,  however,,  as-  it  does  not  become  incurable,  it  should  be 
treated.* 

The  treatment  should  be  based  upon  an  examination^  of  ‘Hetuf 
(cause),  ‘Upagaya’  (diagnosis  by  experimental  administration  of 
medicines  and  diet),  and  the  fault  or  faults  excited,  the  symptoms, 
that  may  be  regarded  as  principal  being  taken  up  first.  35. 

There  are  two  other  varieties  of  Diarrhoea  (besides  the  four  men¬ 
tioned  above).  These  are  regarded  as  Accidental.  Both  of  them- 
arise  from  mental  causes.  They  are  Fear-born  and  Grief-born. 

The  characteristics  of  both  are  similar  to  that  of  the  variety  which 
is  wind-born-  3& 

The  wind  becomes  quickly  provoked1  by  fear  and  grief. 

Hence,  the  treatment  of  diarrhoea  born  of  fear  as  also  of  grief 
should  be  such  as  is  alleviative  of  the  wind. 

The  patient  should  be  sought  to  be  made  cheerful,,  and;  consola¬ 
tions  should  be  offered  to  him.  37 

Thus  having  explained  the  six  varieties  of  diarrhoea,  I  shall  speak 
of  the  treatment  of  these  which  are  curable,  in  due  order.  Listen,  to 
what  I  say  1  3s 

Of  him  whose  accumulated  faults,  provoked  by  food  which  causes 
.a  burning  sensation,  generate  diarrhoea,  the  faults,  should  be  expelled 
by  administering  purgatives.  39 


*  That  is,  as  long  as  all  or  many  of  the  symptoms  do  not  manifest  themselves,  this  variety 
ef  diarrhoea  should  not  be  regarded  as  incurable.  Hence,'  its  treatment  should  be  taken  up- 
ws  Continued  while  there  is  hope  of  cure. — T.  • 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


*54/ 


[The  commentators  explain  that'  if  the  bowels  of  such  a  person 
are  moved  of  themselves,  nothing  should  be  done  to  check  the  evacu*- 
ations.  Purgatives  should  be  administered  only  to  them  whose 
bowels  are  not  moved.] 

Unto  one  afflicted  with  diarrhoea  in  which  the  evacuations  are 
mixed  with  undigested  food,  such  medicines  should  not  be  admi¬ 
nistered  at  the  outset  which  operate  to  stop  the  evacutions,  since  the 
(evacuation  of  the  accummulated)  faults,  checked  at  the  outset, 
generates  many  ailments.  4° 

[What  is  said  here  is  this  :  when  the  accumulated  faults  begin  to 
be  evacuated,  in  acute  diarrhoea,  the  evacuation  should  never  be 
checked,  since  by  checking  them  at  the  outset  many  other  ailments 
are  brought  about.] 

These  are  dropsical  swellings,  the  disease  called  chlorosis,  enlarge¬ 
ment  of  the  spleen,  leucoderma  (and  other  skin  diseases),  abdominal 
tumours,  abdominal  dropsy  and  other  ailments,  fever,  tetanus,  tym¬ 
panites,  flatulence  of  the  stomach,  lienterie  dysentery,  and  piles. 

Hence,  when  the  stools,  without  becoming  adherent,  begin  to  be 
evacuated  of  their  own  motion,  they  should  be  allowed  to  do  so  (with- 
out-check). 

When,  however,  they  come  out  in  small  quantities,  the  paste  of 
Abhaya  (chebulic  myrobalans)  which  has  purgative  virtues,  should  be 
administered. 

if  the  faults  are  thus  expelled,  the  stomachic  ailment  becomes 
alleviated. 

The  body  becomes  light,  and  the  digestive  fire  becomes  en¬ 
kindled.  4i-43 

[Th  is  is  only  a  repitition  of  what  has  been  said  before.  When  the 
faults  are  evacuated  of  themselves,  constipatives  should  not  be  given, 
only  when  the  stools  come  out  in  small  measure,  the  mildest  of 
purgatives,  viz.,  chebulic  myrobalans,  should  be  given.] 

Unto  those  whose  faults  have  been  excited  in  a  middling  degree; 
such  ‘Dipanas’  and  ‘Pachanas’  as  are  called  ‘Pramathya’  should  be 
administered,  .  * 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1548 

For  those  persons  afflicted  with  diarrhoea  whose  faults  have  been 
excited  slightly,  ‘Langhana’  is  beneficial.  44 

[‘Dipanas’  are  medicines  which  enkindle  the  digestive  fire ; 
‘Pfichanas’  are  those  which  digest  the  faults.  Some  ‘Dipanas’  and 
‘PSchanas’  are  called  ‘Pramathya.’  These  are  mentioned  below.] 

Pippali  (fruits  of  Piper  longum ),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  DhSnya 
(coriander  seeds),  Bhutika  (otherwise  called  Yamani,  i.  e.,  the  seeds 
of  Ptychotis  Ajowari),  AbhayS  (chebulic  myrobalans),  and  Vacha 
( Acorus  Calamus ). 

Hrivera  (otherwise  called  Bala,  i.  e.,  Pavonia  odorata ),  Bhadra- 
musta  (the  tubers  of  Cypenis  rotundas  of  the  large  variety),  Vilwa  (raw 
fruits,  dried,  of  AEgle  marmelos ),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  and  Dhanyaka 
(coriander  seeds) ; 

Prijniparni  ( Doodia  lagopodioides ),  £wadangshtra  ( Tribulus  lanu- 
ginosus ),  SamangS  (otherwise  called  Manjishtha,  i.  e.,  Rubia  cordi- 
folia),  and  Kantakarika  ( Solanum  X anthocarpuni) ; 

The  three  groups  of  drugs  mentioned  in  the  foregoing  three  half 
couplets,  are  the  three  ‘Pramathyas’  prescribable  in  the  varieties  of 
Diarrhoea  mentioned.  45-46 

[The  commentators  notice  that  the  name  ‘Pramathya’  is  first 
mentioned  in  verse  44.  It  is  explained  in  verses  45  and  46.] 

Unto  one  afflicted  with  diarrhoea,  if  he  be  thirsty,  water  boiled  with 
Vacha  ( Acorus  Calamus )  and  Ativisha  ( Aconitum  heterophyllum ), 

or  with  Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundas )  and  Parpataka 
(Oldenlandia  biflora ), 

or  with  Hrivera  ( Pavonia  odorata)  and  £ringavera  (dry  ginger), 
should  be  given.  47 

If  one  afflicted  with  diarrhoea  becomes  weak  through  hunger,  light 
food  should  be  given  to  him  to  eat  at  the  proper  time  for  eating. 

By  this  he  soon  regains  relish  for  food,  as  also  strength  of  the 
digestive  fire.*  48 


•  ‘Yukte  annakSle’  means  ‘at  the  proper  time  for  eating.’ — T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


*54£ 


He!  should  also  be  treated  with  whey,  or  ‘Avantisoma’  (kSnji),  or 
gruel  of  barley  (and  other  grains)  or  ‘Tarpana’  (cooling  draughts  made 
with  .the  flour  of  fried  barley),  or  wines,  or  honey,  the  selection  as  also 
the  measure  depending  upon  the  patient's  power  of  assimilation.  49 

[By  ‘Tarpana’  is  meant  various  preparations,  that  are  cooling,  of 
the  flour  of  fried  barley.] 

The  treatment,  after  this,  should  be  by  administering  gruel  of 
barley,  ‘Vilepi’  (gruel  of  rice),  ‘Khada-yusha’  (butter-milk  boiled  with 
vegetables  and  spices),  and  boiled  rice  mixed  with  meat-juice,  in  due 
order  (z.  e„  one  after  another). 

These,  however,  should  be  mixed  with  such  medicines  as  enkindle 
the  digestive  fire  and  as  are  constipitatives.  5° 

[Gangadhara  points  out  that  the  ‘Khaclayusha’  here  spoken  of 
should  not  contain  any  acid  element.  The  difference  between 
‘Yavagu’  and  ’Vilepi’  is  that  the  former  is  thinner  than  the  latter.] 

£alaparni  {Hedysarum  Gangeticum),  Pricniparni  ( Doodia  lagopo » 
dioides \  Vrihati  ( Solanum  Indicum),  Kantakarika  ( Solarium  Xantho - 
carpum ),  Bala  {Sida  cordifolia),  (^wadangshtra  ( Tributus  lanuginosus), 
Vilwa  (fruits  of  Aigle  marmelos),  Patha  ( Cissampelos  hernandifolia), 
N&gara  (dry  ginger',  Dhfinyaka  (coriander  seeds),  £ati  ( Curcuma 
Zermnbet),  Palana  \Butea  frondosa),  Hapusha  (black  aromatic  stalks 
like  those  of  black  pepper),  Vacha  (A corns  Calamus),  Jiraka  (cumin 
seeds),  Pippali  (fruits  of  Piper  longum\  YamSni  (seeds  of  Ptychotis 
Ajowan),  Pippalimula  (the  roots  of  Piper  longuni),  Chitraka  {Plum¬ 
bago  Zeylanica ),  Hasti-pippali  {Pathos  officinalis ),  Vrikshfimla  {Tani- 
arindus  Indica),  Da^imamla  (sour  pomegranates),  Hingu  (assafcetida), 
‘Vit’  salt,  and  ‘Saindhava'  salt,  52 

all  these,  duly  mixed  with  food  and  drink,  should  be  adminis¬ 
tered.  5i-S3 

This  group  (of  drugs)  is  alleviative  of  wind  and  phlegm.  It  is, 
besides,  capable  of  enkindling  the  digestive  fire.  It  is  also  a 
‘pachana,’  i.  e.,  capable  of  digesting  the  faults. 

It  possesses  also  constipative  virtues.  It  imparts  strength,  being 
a  tonic.  It  adds  relish  to  food  and  creates  a  desire  for  it. 


<55® 


CHAR  A  K A- SAM  HIT  A. 


For  these  virtues  it  is,,, beneficial  to  persons  afflicted  with 
•diarrhoea.  54 

When  by  this  treatment  one’s  mucus  has  been  cured  and  one 
begins  to  evacuate  constipated  and  slimy  stools  accompanied  by 
pains,  and  frequently  in  small  measure  at  a  time,  the  patient  straining 
the  while,  the  following  should  be  administered  to  him  : 

viz.,  boiled  rice  mixed  with  the  soup  of  Mudga  ( Phaseolus  Mungo) 
imd  other  pulses  boiled  with  Mulaka  (radishes)  or  with  Vadara 
(jujubes) : 

or  boiled  rice  along  with  these  potherbs,  viz.,  Upodika  {Basella. 
frubra),  Kshirini  ( Oxystelma  esculentum ),  Yamani  ( Ptychotis  Ajowan \ 
Vastuka  ( Chenopodium  album),  Suvarchala.  ( Cleome-  viscosa ),  Chanchu 
■{ Ricinus  communis),  Avalguja  ( Vernonia  antkelmintica),  £ati  (Cur¬ 
cuma  Zerumbet),  Karkaruka  {Cucumis  Melo'',  Jivanti  (Ccelogyne  ovalis), 
Chirbhita  (a  large  variety  of  Cucumis  Melo),  Lonika  ''otherwise  called 
Changeri,  i.  e.,  Oxalis  corniculata),  Patha  ( Cissampelos  Jkernandifolia) 
and  ^ushkagaka  (jute). 

Each  of  these  potherbs  (the  leaves  of  the  plants  being  taken) 
•should  be  boiled  in  curds  and  the  expressed  juice  of  sour  pomegra¬ 
nates,  and  then  fried  in  copious  measures  of  ghee  and  oil.*  55-58 

‘Khada-juice’  prepared  with  the  kernel  of  raw  fruits  of  Vilwa 
\Aigle  marmelos),  and  the  paste  of  sesame  seeds  (properly  divested  of 
busk\  and  the  cream  of  curds,  richly  mixed  with  the  juice  [of  sour 
pomegranates  and  other  fruits  as  also  with  ghee  and  oil,  conquers 
■straining.  59 


■  *  By  ‘Vusa-  is  meant  the  soup  of  the  pulses. 

‘Kshirini’  is  otherwise  called  ‘Dugdhilca.’  Gangadhara  takes  it  as  ‘Vatadi,’  i.  e.,  the 
leaves  of  the  banian  and  other  trees  that  yield  a  milky  juice. 

‘Suvarchala’  is  otherwise  called  ‘Suryabhakta’  or  ‘Adityabhakta.’  The  flowers  of  this 
plant  always  turn  towards  the  sun. 

{  tChanchu’  Is- explained  by  GangSdbara  as  ‘Panchangula  Erandaj’  i.  e.~,  that  variety  <5f 
Eranda  ( Ricinus  Communis)  the  leaves  of  which  have  five  finger  like  edges. 

‘Karkaruka’  is  explained  as  a  variety  of  ‘Karkkati’  or  ‘Kankur.’ 
r  ‘ChirbhitS’ is  explained  by  Gangadhara  as  ‘Goraksha  Karkkati,’- i.  e.,  a  large  variety  off 
Karkkati. 

‘LonikS’  is  ‘Amlaloriika’  or  Changeri,  i.  Oxalis  corniculata. — T.  ......  S- 


CHAR  A  KA'-SA  MHIT'A. ' 


*■55*' 


If  in  consequence  of  excessive  evacuation  of  stools  the  face  of  the 
patient  (afflicted  with  diarrhoea)  becomes  dry,  the  physicihn  should 
give  him  boiled  £ali  rice  with  the  soup,  slightly  sour,  of  barley,  (the 
seeds  of)  Mudga  ( Phaseolus  Mungo)  Masha  (the  seeds  of  Phaseolus. 
radiatus ),  £ali  (rice  of  that  variety),  Tila  (sesame  seeds),  Kola  (jujubes), 
and  Valavilwa  (raw  fruits  of  AEgle  marmelos).  This  soup  should  be 
boiled  with  curds  and  the  expressed  juice  of  pomegranates,  and  theri 
fried  in  ghee  and  oil.*  60  61 

Or,  the  cream  of  curds,  mixed  with  treacle  and  the  pulv  of  dry 
ginger,  and  fried  in  ghee  and  oil, 

or  wine  fried  in  ghee  and  oil,  may.be  given  as  curry  (wherewith 
the  patient  should  take  boiled  rice.)  6s 

PhalSmla  (tamarind-kernel)  fried  in  ghee  and  oil,  or  the  juice  of 
Grinjanaka  (turnips),  Or  the  meat-juice  of  Lopaka  (fox  of  the  small 
variety)  rendered  sour  by  the  usual  juices  of  sour  fruits,  or  the  meat- 
juice  of  tortoise-flesh  rendered  sour  and  fried  in  ghee  and  oil,  or  the 
meat-juice  of  the  flesh  of  such  birds  as  the  peacock,  the  francoline 
partridge,  the  hen,  and  the  quail,  or  boiled  £ali  rice  hot  and  mixed 
with  ghee ,  may  be  given  inasmuch  as  these  are,  the  foremost  of  all 
remedies  for  curing  the  ailments  brought  about  by  the  excessive 
evacuation  of  stools.  63-64 

Take  the  midle  portion  of  a  sheep,  and  prepare  a  meat-juice  of  the 
flesh.  Strain  the  juice  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth.. 

Boil  this  meat-juice  with  the  blood  of  the  same  animal. 

When  tl>e  boiling  is  nearly  complete,  throw  into  it  the  expressed 
juice  of  pomegranate  seeds,  the  pulv  of  dhSnyaka  (coriander  seeds), 
and  that  of  N&gara  (dry  ginger),  and  add  ghee  to  it. 

The  patient  should  take  boiled  £ali  rice  with  the  juice  thus 
prepared  ;  and  he  should  also  drink  the  same  as  after-drink. 

By  these  means  one  becomes  freed  from  the  ailments  caused  by 
the  excessive  evacuation  of  stools. f  65-66 


*  The  soup  should  be  first  prepared.  It  should  then  be  boiled  with  curds  and  the  juice 
of  pomegranates,  and  then  fried  in  ghee  and  oil.  Thus  prepared,  it  becomes  fit  to  be  given 
with  boiled  £ali  rice.: — T. 

t  The  word  ‘Antaradhi’  is  explained  as  meaning  the  middle  portion  of  an  animal,  that  isj 
the  trunk  divested  of  the  head,  the  fore-feet,  and  the  hind-feet  with  the  tail. 

196 


>552 


CH ARAKA- S' A M HI TA . 


r  In  Prolapsus  ani,  accompanied  by  ‘£ula’  pains,  the  drinking  of  ghee 
boiled  with  sour  juices,  is  beneficial. 

If  {in  prolapsus  ani)  there  is  no  mucus  (In  the  evacuations),  the 
administration  of  *anuvasanav  (oily  enemeta)  is  beneficial.  67 

[The  method  of  preparing  ghee  with  sour  juices  is  explained 
below. 

The  commentators  add  ‘pravahanena’  before  ‘gudanihsarana,’  that 
Is,  in  prolapsus  ani  caused  by  straining.] 

CHANGERI  GHRITA. 

Ghee  boiled  with  ChSngeri  ( Oxalis  corniculatci.  Kola  (jujubes), 
'Dadhyamla  (sour  curds),  Nfigara  (the  pulv  of  dry  ginger),  and  Kshara 
(the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots)  should  be  drunk. 

This  ghee  cures  the  ailment  called  prolapsus  ani.  68 

CHAVYADI  GHRITA. 

Another  ghee  that  cures  prolapsus  ani  is  thus  prepared  : 

Chavya  {Piper  Chaba),  Pippalimula  (the  roots  of  Piper  longuni), 
Vyosha  (the  three  acrids),  Guda  (treacle\  Dfidima  (the  juice  of  pome¬ 
granates^,  Ajaji  (the  seeds  of  Nigella  sativci,  Dhfinya  (coriander 
seeds),  and  Nfigara  (the  pulv  of  dry  ginger),  enter  into  the  prepara¬ 
tion  of  this  ghee. 

This  ghee,  rendered  sour,  should  be  drunk,  the  measure  depending 
upon  the  discretion  of  the  physician.  69 

[The  ghee  is  first  boiled  with  Chavya  and  the  rest ;  the  pulvs  of 
Ajaji  and  the  rest  are  thrown  into  it  when  the  boiling  is  almost 
'complete. 

The  Calcutta  edition  reads  ‘Vid-dadimam’  instead  of  ‘Gudadadi- 
mam.’  In  the  second  line  also,  the  Calcutta  edition  reads  ‘Ajajir 
chitrakam’  for  ‘AjajidhSnyanfigaram.’] 


‘Dadimasaramlam’  is  used  for  the  first  time.  Of  course,  it  means'  the  sour  juice  of 
pomegranate  seeds,’  'Sara  meaning  seeds.  The  juice  is  obtained  from  the  seeds  within  the 
fruit.-— T, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


Oily  enemata  administered  in  prolapsus  ani  are  thus  prepared  :  ■ 
Ghee  boiled  with  the  kernel  of  the  raw  fruits  of  Vilwa  {Aigle 
marmelos,  and  the  decoction  of  the  group  of  the  ten  roots  or 

Ghee  boiled  with  £ati  ( Curcuma  Zeruinbet ),  Catahwa  (otherwise 
called  MisreyS,  that  is,  dill  seeds),  and  Kushtha*  (Aplotaxis  auricii- 
laia ),  or 

Ghee  boiled  with  Vacha  {Acorns  Calamus ),  or 
Ghee  boiled  with  Chitraka  'Plumbago  Zeylanica), 
is  beneficial  in  prolapsus  ani.  7° 

In  prolapsus  ani,  if  it  cannot  be  reduced,  oils  and  fomentation- 
should  be  first  applied. 

When  these  have  been  well-applied  and  the  displaced  rectum  has 
become  soft,  it  should  be  reduced  with  a  soft  stick  of  cotton  or 
cloth.f  7i  -  , 

If  the  wind  and  the  stools  become  constipated,  if  ‘^ula’  pains  and 
straining  .be  manifest,  and  if  the  evacuti.ons  be  slimy  and  mixed  with 
blood,  and  if  the  patient  feels  thirsty,  he  should  be  given  milk  to 
drink  in  measure  capable  of  producing  gratification.  72 

Or,  he  should  be  given  ‘Yamaka’  (food  consisting  of  rice  boiled 
with  such  pulses  as  Phaseolus  Mungo  and  the  rest). 

After  taking  such  food,  he  should  take  (as  after-drink)  milk  hot 
from  the  udders. 

Or,  he  should  be  given  milk  boiled  with  the  roots  of  Eranda 
{Ricinus  communis ),  or  with  the  kernel  of  the  raw  fruits  of  Vilwa 
{AEgle  marmelos).  73 

By  administering  milk  in  this  way,  the  discharge  of  blood  (with 
the  evacuations),  as  also  the  sliminess  of  the  evacuations,  is  cured. 
The  ‘9ula’  pains,  the  straining,  and  the  constipation  (of  wind  and 
stools),  are  all  relieved.  74 

[Having  explained  the  treatment  in  general  of  diarrhoea,  the 


*  Kushtha  is  Gungadhara’s  reading.  The  Bengal  and  Bombay  editions  read  ‘Vilwa’ 
(JE-gle  marmelos). 

f  ‘Pichu’is  a  soft  stick  of  cotton  or  cloth,— T. 


t*5,5rf 


OHARA  KA-SA  31  HI  7  A. 


Rishi  proceeds  to  lay  down  treatment  of  diarrheea  born  of  excited 
.bile  and  the  rest.] 

When  the  physicians  has  ascertained,  by  the  ‘nrdSna’  and  ‘upagaya’ 
.and  symptoms,  the  presence  of  mucus  in  diarrheea  bom  of  bile,  he 
should  treat  the  disease  by  prescribing  fasts,  and  light .  food  and 
administering  ‘pSchanas,’  agreeably  to  the  strength  of  the  patients.  75 

[‘Nidana’  means  the  causes  of  disease.  By  ‘upagaya’  is  meant 
experimental  treatment,  i.  e.,  ascertainment  of  disease  by  administer¬ 
ing  both  medicine  and  diet  in  an  experimental  way.  The  presence 
of  mucus,  when  it  has  not  as  yet  appeared  in  the  evacuations,  is 
directed  to  be  ascertained  by  enquiry  into  the  ‘nidsna,’  as  also  by 
‘upagaya’  and  those  symptoms  which  have  actually  been  manifested.] 

If  the  patient  feels  thirsty,  he  should  be  given  the  decoction  of 
Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  Parpataka  ( Oldenlandia  corym- 
Rosa),  Ushira  (the  roots  of  Andropogon  muricatus),  (^'ariva  {Ichnocarpus 
ftuiescens),  Chandana  {Pterocarpus  santalinus),  Kiratatiktaka  (Aga- 
thotes  Cherayta),  and  Udichya  (otherwise  called  Bala,  t.  <?.,  Pavonia 
odorata).  7§ 

After  the  patient  has  fasted  ;  when  the  time  comes  for  eatings 
gruels  of  barley  and  other  grains,  and  ‘Tarpanas’  (cooling  draughts), 
boiled  with  the  decoction  Bala  {Si da  cordi/olia),  Atibalfi  {Si da  rhom- 
iifolia ),  Surpya  (otherwise  called  Mudgaparni,  i.  e.,  Phaseolus  trilobus 
the  two  Parnis  {viz.,  £alapami,  i.  e.,  Hedysarum  gangeticum,  and 
Prisniparni,  i.  e.,  Doodia  lagopodioides ),  Vrihati  ( Solatium  Iadicum \ 
Kantakarika  {Solatium  xanthocarpum),  £atfivari  (otherwise  called 
(jlatamuli,  i.  e..  Asparagus  racemosus),  and  £wadangshtra  ( Tribulus 
lanuginosus ),  should  one  after  another,  be  given,  the  measure  being 
determined  by  the  consideration  of  assimilability.*  77 

After  this,  the  patient’s  digestive  fire  should  be  gradually  en« 
kindled  by  giving  him  the  soups  of  Mudga  (the  seeds  of  Phaseolus 
Mungo),  Harenu  {Piper  aurantiacum),  Masura  (the  seeds  of  Cicer  lens), 
Makushtaka  (the  seeds  of.  Phaseolus  aconitifolius),  and  Adh.aki  (the 
seeds  of  Cajanus  Indicus)  ;  or 


f  By  ‘Niryuha’  is  meant  decoction. 

'  ‘Niryaha-prayuktena’  is  explained  as  ‘boiled  with  the  Niryuha  pi  decoction. 
‘Tar pans’  is  a  cooling  drink. — T. 


CHA  RAKA -SAM HI  7  A. 


*555 


the  meat- juice  prepared  with  the  flesh  of  quails,  francoline  par¬ 
tridges,  hare,  and  those  varieties  of  deer  which  go  by  the  names  of 
‘Harina,’  ‘Ena,’  and  ‘Kalapuchccha.’ 

The  meat-juice  may  be  made  sour  with  the  usual  juices,  or  not 
made  so,  78 

If  supervening  ailments  do  not  disappear,  medicines  that  are 
‘Dipaniya’  (Capable  of  promoting  the  appetite),  that  are  ‘Pachaniya’ 
(capable  of  digesting  the  faults),  that  are  ‘Upagamaniya’  (alleviatives), 
and  that  are  ‘Samgrahaniya’  (inspissants  which  dry  the  fluids  of  the 
body),  should  be  administered.  79 

{Here  are  some  verses.) 

Honey  and  Ativisha  {Aconitum  heterophyllum),  the  seeds  of  Vatr 
saka  {Holarrhena  antidysenterica),  and  the  bark  of  the  same,  and 
water  in  which  {atapa)  rice  has  been  washed  : 

These  should  be  pounded  together  into  a  drink. 

This  drink  is  curative  of  diarrhoea  born  of  (excited)  bile,  80 

.  Kiratatiktaka  ( Agathotes  Cherayta),  Musta  (tubers  of  Cyperus 
rotundas'',  Vatsaka  (the  seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica),  and 
Rasanjana  (galena)  ; 

Vilwa  (raw  fruits  of  AEgle  marmelos),  DSruharidrS  (Berberis 
Asiatica ),  Twak  (bark  of  Cinnamomum  zeylanicum ),  Hrivera  ( Pavonia 
odorata),  and  Duralabha  {Hedysarum  Alhagi) ; 

Chandana  (red  sandal  wood  or  Pterocarpus  santalinus),  Mrin5la 
(lotus  stalks),  NSgara  (dry  ginger),  Lodhra  {Symplocos  racemosa ), 
Utpala  {Nymphosa  stellata), 

Tila  (sesame  seeds),  Mocharasa  (the  exudation  of  Bombax  Mala- 
baricum),  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racemosa),  Samanga  (otherwise  called 
Lajjalu,  i.  e.,  Mimosa  pudica),  Kamala  (lotus),  and  Utpala  ( Nympkcea 
stellata)  ;  82 

Utpala  (. Nympkcea  stellata),  the  flowers  of  Dhataki  ( Wood/ordia 
fieribunda),  and  the  bark  of  Dadima  {Punica  granatum),  Nfigara 
(dry  ginger)  ; 


charAka-samhitA , 


*5$6 

Katphala  (Myrica  sapidd ,  Nagara  (dry  ginger',  Paths  ( Cissampelos 
hernandifolid),  the  seeds  of  Jambu  ( Eugenia  j ambolana)  the  seeds  of 
Amra  {Mangifera  Indica ),  and  DuralabhSL  ( Hedysarunt  Alhdgi) ;  83 

These  are  six  groups  of  drugs.  ‘Peyas’  (cooling  drinks)  should  be 
made  with  each  of  these,  adding  honey  and  water  in  which  (fitapa) 
rice  has  been  washed. 

These  drinks,  the  ingredients  of  which  have  been  laid  down  ih 
each  half-verse,  are  alleviative  of  bile-born  diarrhoea.  ®4 

Unto  those  who  (having  taken  .these  drinks)  have  digested  them', 
old  (boiled)  ‘£ali’  rice  of  the  red  variety, with  such  meat-juices  as  are 
constipative  and  as  are  prepared  with  ingredients  that  may  be  suit¬ 
able  to  the  patients,  is  regarded  as  beneficial  diet.  8S 

Of  one  whose  digestive  fire  has  been  enkindled  (in  the  above 
vvay),'  bile-born  diarrhoea  is  soon  alleviated  by  administration  of 
goat’s  milk  which  increases  also  the  patient’s  strength  and  improves 
his  complexion.  86 

If  the  bile-born  diarrhoea  does  not  continue,  of  one  who  is  afflicted 
with  many  supervening  ailments,  whose  digestive  fire  has  been 
enkindled,  and  whose  strength  remains  undiminished  (or,  has  been  in¬ 
creased),  he  should  then  be  purged  by  administering  milk  unto  him.  87 

[Gangadhara  explains  this  verse  differently.  He  takes  the  words 
‘na  tishthati’  in  the  sense  of  ‘gatinivrittim&n  na  bhavati,’  i.  e.,  ‘if  its 
course  is  not  stopped.’  It  is  difficult  to  understand  how  the  words 
ffia  tishthati,’  which  evidently  mean  ‘does  not  remain  or  continue,’ 
can  be  so  construed.  Then,  again,  purging  by  means  of  milk  when 
diarrhoea  continues,  can  hardly  be  a  safe  treatment.  On  the  other 
hand,  if  the  verse  be  taken  to  mean  that  if  diarrhoea  does  not  remain 
or  continue, — that  is,  if  it  ceases,  (while  all  the  supervening  ailments 
are  not  conquered),  then  the  patient  should  be  purged.  The  Bengali 
translators  have  followed  Gangadhara.  Besides  milk,  the  other  pur¬ 
gatives  that  may  be  administered  are  laid  down  in  the  following 
verses.] 

The  decoction  of  the  fruits  of  Pala?a  ( Butea  frondosa ),  mixed  with 
milk,  forms  a  purgative  which  the  patient  may  take. 

.  He.should  then  tak.e,  as  an  after-drink,  lukewarm  milk  (unmixed 
with  anything),  the  measure  depending  upon  his  strength.  88  ... 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


?  557 


When,. by  this  means,  the  (constipated),  stools  are  evacuated,  the 
diarrhoea  ceases. 

t)r,  another  corrective  (purgative)  composed  of  the  decoction  of 
TrayamanS  ( Ficus  heterophylla ),  mixed  with  milk,  may  be  adminis¬ 
tered  after  the  manner  of  the  decoction  of  Palaja  ( Butea  frondosa).  s9 

[What  is  stated  here  is  that  the  decoction  of  ‘TrayamanS’  shoulcj 
be  taken  in  the  same  way  as  that  of ‘Palsga’  ;  i.  e.,  it  should  be  mixed 
vvith  milk,  and  then  milk  should  be  taken  as  after-drink.] 

If  after  the  last  adherent  stools  have  been  purged  (by  the  above 
means). 

*£ul a’ .  pains  appear,  oily  enemata  should  soon  be  administered 
unto  the  patient  whose  faults  have  already  been  expelled.  9° 

[We  follow  Gangadhara  in  rendering  this  verse.  He  reads  ‘hriya- 
manfiyam’ .instead  of ‘kriyamanayam.’  Then  again,  he  takes  ‘sfim- 
sargySm’  as  implying  ‘ceshamalasamsarga,’  that  is,  the  last  adherent 
stools. 

The  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  ‘kriyamanayam.’ 
According  to  the  Bengali  translators,  the  verse  means — ‘If  ‘£ula* 
pains  follow  the  treatment  by  ‘samsarga,’  that  is,  the  administration 
of  cooling  draughts  or  gruels  such  as  ‘peya,’  ‘vilepi,’  &c.,  oily  enemeta 
should  be  administered  for  curing  such  pains.] 

The  oily  enemeta  to  be  administered  consists  of  £atapusbpa  (dilj 
seed — Pucedanum  Sozva\  and  Vari  (otherwise  called  £atavari,  i.  e., 
Asparagus  racetnosus),  boiled  with,  milk  and  liquorice,  and  ghee ,  and 
oil  (of  sesame)  the  measure  of  which  should  be  one-fourth  of  .ghee, 
and  also  raw  fruits  of  Vihva  {AEgle  marmelos ).  9* 

[All  the  ingredients  are  boiled  together.] 

If  after  the  administration  of  the  enemata  (whose  composition  is 
explained  above)  and  of  the  ‘Samsarjjana’  (z.  e.,  cooling  draughts  in 
the  form  of  ‘Peya,’  ‘Vilepi,’  &c.),  the  diarrhoea  still  lingers,  then  soft 
and  oiled  sticks  should  be  inserted  into  the  rectum.  92 

The  composition  of  the  sticks  (called  Pichcch&vasti)  is  explained 
below. 

Take  some  raw  stalks  (divested -of  flowers)  of  £almali  {Bomba* 
dfylcfbaricum).. .  .....  .  .  I 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SA  M HI  TA . 


1558 

Wrap  them  round  with  raw  Kuja  blades  (Poa  cynosuroides). 

Lave  the  bundle  with  black  earth,  and  roast  it  in  a  fire  made  of 
dried  cow-dung  (collected  from  the  fields). 

When  the  covering  of  earth  has  become  burnt,  the  (roasted)  stalks 
of  Bombax  Malabaricum  should  be  taken  out  and  pounded  (into  a 
paste)  in  a  large  mortar  (made  of  wood)  and  pestle. 

Taking  a  portion  of  the  paste,  of  the  measure  of  a  ‘Mushti’  (i.  e., 
one  pala),  it  should  be  dissolved  in  a  ‘prastha’  (equal  to  2  seers— in 
practice  double  the  measure,  or  4  seers,  are  taken)  of  boiled  milk. 

It  should  then  be  strained  through  a  piece  of  clean  cloth. 

The  liquid  portion  that  is  strained  out  should  then  be  mixed  with 
a  proper  measure  of  ghee  and  oil. 

The  paste  of  Madhuka  (liquorice)  should  then  be  added,  of  proper 
measure. 

t  Sticks  (for  use  as  enemeta)  should  be  made  of  the  product. 

\  The  enemata  should  be  administered  to  the  patient  after  having 
rubbed  his  body  with  oil. 

When  the  enemata  comes  out,  the  patient  should  take  a  bath  (in 
cold  water),  and  eat  (boiled)  rice,  with  meat-juice  of  the  flesh  of  wild 
animals,  or  with  milk.  93-96 

[The  word  ‘ardra,’  literally  ‘wet’  or  ‘drenched  in  water,’  is  used 
here  in  the  sense  of  raw  or  green.  Raw  ‘ku$a’  blades  are  needed. 
Similarly,  raw  stalks  of  the  flowers  of  Bombax  Malabaricum  are 
required.  ‘Krishna-mrittikS’  is  the  well-known  black  earth  called 
(in  Bengal)  ‘Entel.’  A  ‘mushti’  is  equal  to  one  pala.  Literally,  it  is 
•a  handful/  The  construction  is  ‘grite  payasi  prasthe.’  The  first 
two  words  belong  to  the  second  line  of  verse  94  ;  the  last  to  the  first 
line  of  verse  95.  The  reader  should  note  that  the  solid  portion  of  the 
preparation  is  to  be  rejected.  It  is  only  the  strained  milk  that  is 
Used  for  making  the  enemata.] 

The  enemata  (called  Pichccha-vasti),  and  also  the  dry  enemeta 
and  oily  enemata  possessing  purgative  virtues  in  especial,  speedily 
conquer  the  following  ailments  even  when  they  have  been  exceedingly 


J allies  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland  U.  S.  A.: — You  have  undertaken 
:  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
:  taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

Williaui  Emmecte  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California': —  . As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent . 

there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  ate  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise. '  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management— will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  one-of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Ghas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Ohio,  U.  S.  A.  : — The  wOrk  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  df  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  wich  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  alsd  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge : — A  cafeful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York-. — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  American  fournal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila- . 
delphia  : — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq.,— Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  Completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  oites  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  op  Cashmere  : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-Western 
University,  Sect  clary  to  the  Congress  of  the  Woolds  Columbian  Exposition  I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L,  E,  Sayei',  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  .-—Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  ig.  East  38th  Street,  New  York  : — Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Tralse,  Dramstctdt :— The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  B.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist: — I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  and 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere,  tfp,  Boulevatse,  Saint  German  : — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  But  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  New  York  Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philddehphii >  As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  of 
Charaka  I  always  arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians  of  the  pre¬ 
sent  day  would  drop  from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and 
treat  their  patients  according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the 
undertakers,  and  fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to 
the  completion  of  the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street,  Calcutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya. — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellenCwork.  Writing  again,  sometime  after. — 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note  . . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia : — I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Myrnensing ; — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E. ,  Magistrate  and  Collector : — Your  patriotic 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  H.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  : — I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Gya  It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  Wales  The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those,  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  : — Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every, 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is’ 
a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji, — The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to 
the  physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as 
well.  Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support.  I  wish  you  all  success. 


PART  L, 


47357 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 

(TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH ), 


PUBLISHED  BY 

PARESHNATH  SARMA, 

SON  OF  LATE 

KAVIRAJ  AVINASH  CHANDRA  KAVIRATNA, 

EDITOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF  SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  (in  original)  WITH  COMMENT¬ 
ARIES  ;  BENGALI  AND  HINDI  TRANSLATOR  OF  CHARAKA-SAMHITA  AND  OF 
SUSRUTA-SAMHITA  ;  EDITOR  OF  CHIKITSA-SAMMILANI  (Medical 
journal  in  Bengali) ;  practitioner  of  the  HINDU 
SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  &C,,  &C,,  &C. 


CALCUTTA : 

200,  Cornwallis  Street, 


PRINTED  BY  B.  N.  NANDI  AT  THE  KAVIRATNA  PRESS, 
12,  SIMLA  STREET,  BYE-LANE. 

1908. 


(  The  right  of  reproduction  is  reserved. ) 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  front  their  Letters .) 

Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla  ■ 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  yort 

in  any  way  ypu  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — . I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention 

.  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

in  it. 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  : — I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Charaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhold  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office— .  Your 

excellent  translation  . -a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . 

1  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 
.„  ...  ...  Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 
your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  York ,  £7.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgk,  Sweden-.—  I  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say  that  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College ,  New  York,  V.  S.  A. — I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing.  .  Be 
assured.  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  of  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris  .—I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  yon 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
Journal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany : — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 
I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsbweh,  Germany  : — English  translation  of 
Charaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  important 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal : — I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man  shall  not  do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life, 
cannot  be  other  than  valuable. 


CHAR  A  K A-S AM HIT A. 


*'559 


^aggravated,  vis.,  bile-born  diarrhoea,  fever,  dropsical  swellings,* 
abdominal  tumours,  indigestion,  diarrhoea,  and  diseases  of  the 
‘Grahani.’  97 

If  that  person  who  is  afflicted  with  bile-born  diarrhoea,  neglects  to 
■adopt  the  course  of  treatment  laid  down  above,  and  indulges  in  food 
and  drink  that  are  provocative  of  the  bile,  then  his  bile  becomes 
■exceedingly  provoked,  98 

and,  speedily  vitiating  the  blood,  causes  diarrhoea  characterised  by 
bloody  evacuations. 

It  also  generates  thirst,  burning  of  the  skin,  ‘£ula’  pains,  and 
violent  inflammation  of  the  rectum  (followed  by  suppuration).  99 

[What  is  stated  here  is  that  one  afflicted  with  bile-born  diarrhoea 
should  lose  no  time  in  adopting  the  modes  of  treatment  laid  down 
above.  If,  instead  of  doing  this,  one  indulges  in  such  food  and 
drink  as  are  provocative  of  the  bile,  one’s  evacuations  soon  become 
bloody.  This  is  a  bad  disease  the  treatment  of  which  is  laid  down 
below.] 

In  diarrhoea  characterised  by  discharge  of  blood,  goat’s  milk, 
rendered  cool  after  having  been  boiled,  and  mixed  with  honey  and 
sugar,  should  be  used  for  drink,  and  curry  (with  boiled  rice),  and  also 
for  washing  the  rectum.f  i°° 

As  regards  the  diet  of  such  a  patient,  he  should  be  given  red 
‘£ali’  rice  (boiled),  with  goat’s  milk,  or  with  meat-juice  prepared  from 
the  flesh  of  pigeons  and  birds  of  similar  species.  Such  meat-juice, 
however,  should  be  fried  in  ghee  and  mixed  with  sugar.  101 

[Sugar  should  be  added  to  goat’s  milk  when  it  is  taken  with 
boiled  rice.] 

Meat-juice  prepared  from  the  flesh,  possessing  cooling  virtues,  of 
the  hare  or  the  rabbit,  or  of  animals  and  birds  residing  in  marshy 


*  Gangadhara  reads  ‘(Josha,’  meaning  waste  or  drying  up  of  the  body.— T. 
t  The  drink  alleviates  thirst ;  used  as  curry,  it  helps  digestion  and  exercises  a  curative 
■effect  on  the  discharge  of  blood  ;  lastly,  it  is  directed  to  be  used  fpr  washing  the  rectum 
when  inflammation  has  s.et  in. — T, 

197 


:56b 


'CHAR  AKA- SAM -HIT A, 


regions,  without  adding  any  sour  juice  fried  in  ghee ,  and  adding  sugar, 
should  be  given- to  such. a  patient.  102 

[The  reading  of  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  is  slightly 
different.  The  sense,  however,  is  almost  the  same.  ‘^itanSm’  is 
explained  by  Gangadhara  as  implying  the  possession  of  cooling 
virtues.] 

The  blood  of  the  deer  or  of  the  goat,  fried  in  ghee ,  is  highly 
spoken  of. 

.  The  decoction  of  the  fruits  of  Kacmaryya  (otherwise  called  Gam- 
bhari,  i.  e.,  Gmelina  arborea),  rendered  slightly  sour  (with  the  usual 
juices),  and  with  the  addition  of  sugar,  is  similarly  beneficial.  i°3 

The  pulvs  of  Nilotpala  (flowers  of  Nymphoea  stellata),  Mocharasa 
(the  exudation  of  Bombax  Malabaricum),  Samanga  ( Mimosa  pudica), 
and  Padmakegara  (the  filaments  of  the  lotus),  mixed  with  goat’s  milk, 
should  be  given  to  the  patient ;  after  this  is  digested,  (boiled)  rice 
mixed  with  milk  should  be  given.  I04 

If  one  afflicted  with  bloody  diarrhoea  be  very  weak,  then  (boiled) 
rice  with  milk  should  be  given  to  him  immediately  after  the  ad¬ 
ministration  of  the  pulvs  mentioned  above. 

Or,  before  (boiled)  rice  with  milk  be  given  to  him,  (fresh)  cheese 
with  honey  and  sugar,  should  be  given  to  him.  1Q5 

[In  case  of  weakness  brought  about  by  repeated  discharges  of 
blood  with  the  stools,  boiled  rice  with  milk  should  be  given  without 
waiting  for  the  digestion  of  the  pulvs.  Or,  cheese  mixed  with  honey 
and  sugar,  should  be  given  before  boiled  rice  and  milk  are  given. 
The  maintenance  of  the  strength  of  the  patient  should  be  the  aim  of 
the  physician.] 

If  one,  having  drunk  ghee  raised  from  (vaccine)  milk,  takes  meat- 
juice  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  francoline  partridges,  one  is  cured  in 
three  days. 

The  same  result  follows  if  one  takes  (boiled)  rice  with  milk  (after 
having  drunk  fresh  ghee) ;  or  if  one  takes  (boiled  rice)  with  milk 
(without  having  drunk  fresh  ghee).*  I06 


*  We  follow  Gangadhara  in  rendering  this  verse.  He  takes  ‘payasa’  (in  the  second  line) 
as  implying  boiled  rice  with  milk,  ‘having  drunk  ghee'  being  understood  before  it.  ‘Kshira- 


CH A  RAKA-  SA  MHITA. 


1561 

Having  drunk  the  paste  of  £atfivari  ( Asparagus  racemosus )  boiled 
with  milk,  and  then  taking  milk  (as  after-drink),  'one  conquers 
diarrhoea  characterised  by  bloody  evacuations. 

The  same  result  follows  if  one  drinks  ghee  boiled  with  the  paste. 
of  (^atavari  (Asparagus  racemosus)  and  takes  milk  (as  an  after¬ 
drink).  107 

[Gangfidhara  notes  that  the  paste  of  Asparagus  racemosus  should 
first  be  boiled  in  water  of  four  times  its  measure,  and  then  boiled 
with  ghee.  It  appears  that  milk  is  to  be  taken  only  as  an  after-drink, 
and  not  with  boiled  riee.] 

For  curing  the  discharge  of  blood  in  diarrhoea  one  may  take  ghee 
boiled  with  the  seeds  of  Kutaja  ( Holarrhena  antidysenterica ),  and 
mixed  with  the  gruel  or  ‘manda’  of  barley. 

Having  drunk  this  ghee,  one  should  take  ‘peya’  as  after-drink.  108 

[The  ‘peya’  should  be  of  barley.  •  The  distinction  between  'peya,' 
‘manda,’  ‘vilepi,’  &c.,  depends  on  the  degree  of  thinness  or  thickness 
of  the  preparation.]  * 

The  seeds  of  Vatsaka  ( Holarrhena  antidy sent erica] ,  the  bark  of 
DSrbbi  (otherwise  called  Daruharidrg,  i.  e.,  Berberis  Asiatica ),  Pippali 
(the  fruits  of  Piper  longum ),  £ringavera  (dry  ginger),  lac,  and  Katu- 
karohini  (Picr.orrhiza  Kurroa ) :  *°9 

Ghee  boiled  with  these  six,  and  mixed  with  the  ‘peya’  or  the 
‘manda’  (of  barley  and  other  grain),  speedily  conquers  even  violent' 
diarrhoea  characterised  by  the  excitement  of  all  the  three  faults,  no  : 

[The' six  drugs  named  should  first  be  reduced  to  paste  and  boiled 
in  water  of  four  times  their  measure,  and  then  cooked  with  ghee. 
The  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  the  first  line  of  verse  109 
differently.  The  sense,  however,  remains  unaltered.  In  the  second 
line  of  that  verse,  they  read  ‘draksha’  for  ‘laksha’  which  occurs  in 
Gang&dhara’s  edition.] 

Black  earth,  liquorice,  conch  shells,  Rudhira  (red  ochre  or  saffron), 
and  water  in  which  (atapa)  rice  has  been  washed,  drunk  together, 


bhuk’  he  takes  as  implying  ‘c 
%hee  before  .’ — T. 


.vlio  eats  boilod  rice  with  milk,  without  having  drunk fresh 


CHARAKA-  SAM  HIT  A. 


*562' 

along-  with  honey  proves  to  be  one  of  the  foremost  re  med'ies  for 
curing  the  discharge  of  blood*  111 

The  paste1  of  Priyangu  ( Aglaia  Roxburghiana),  with  honey  and 
water  in  which  (atapa)  rice  has  been  washed,  drunk,  speedily  conquers 
the  discharge  of  blood-  in  diarrhoea,  if  one  takes  (after  it)  meat-juice 
prepared  from  the  flesh  of  such  animals  and  birds  as-  reside  in  marshy 
regions.  112 

The  paste  of  black  sesame  seeds,  mixed  with  sugar  the  measure 
of  which  should  be  five  times  that  of  the  paste,  and  dissolved  in 
goat’s  milk,  drunk,  conquers  the  discharge  of  blood  in  diarrhcea,  the 
very  day  it  is  taken.  ”3 

[GangSdhara  notes  that  the  sesame  seeds  should  all  be  divested 
of  husk  before  their  paste  is  taken.  He  notices  also  that  some  texts 
read  ‘^arkarabh&gasamyutah.’  in  which  case  the  measure  of  sugar 
should  be  equal  to  that  of  the  sasame  paste.] 

That  patient  who  drinks  the  decoction  of  a  pala  of  the  seeds  of 
Vatsaka  ( Holarrhena  antidysenterica )  and  then  takes  meat-juice; 
speedily  conquers  bile-born  diarrhoea.  I1[4 

[A  pala  of  the  seeds  should  be  boiled  in  water  of  eight  times  their 
measure  down  to  half  of  that  measure.] 

By  drinking  the  paste  of  Chandana  ( Pterocarpus  Santalinus) 
dissolved  in  water  in  which  (atapa)  rice  has  been  washed,  mixed  with 
sugar  and  honey,  one  becomes  freed  from  thirst,  burning  of  the  skin,, 
gonorrhoea,  and  the  discharge  of  blood  (in  diarrhcea),  115 

When  one’s  rectum  has  been,  through  excited  bile,  inffam’ed 
(followed  by  suppuration)  in  consequence  of  repeated  acts  of  evacua¬ 
tion,  the  rectum  should  be  sprinkled  over  with  the  cooled  decoc¬ 
tion  of  the  leaves  of  Patola  ( Trichosanthes  dioica )  and  Madhuka 
(liquorice).f  1*6 


*  Black  earth,  liquorice,  and  conch  shells,  should  each  be  reduced  to  pulv,  and  then 
dissolved  in  Water  of  the  kind  mentioned. 

The  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  ‘Sakshaudram’  (meaning  ‘mixed  with  honey’)' 
for  ‘SamyuktSm’  which  occurs  in  Gangadhara. — T. 

f  ‘Utthana’  is  explained  as  meaning  ‘Varam  Varam  Vidvisarga,’  that  is,  repeated  acts 
of  evacuation  of  stools.— T. 


CHAR  A  K AS  AM  HIT  A, 


*563 

Or,  It  may  be  sprinkled  over  with  the  decoction  of  the  five  barks 
and  that  of  Madhuka  (the  flowers  of  Bassia  latifolia ). 

[The  five  barks  are  those  of  Mangi/era  Indica,  Eugenia  Jambolana, 
Feronia  elephantum ,  Citrus  acida  of  the  variety  called  T&bS,  and 
AEgle  marmelos ]  ; 

or,  with  the  expressed  juice  of  Ikshu  (sugarcane)  - 

or,  with  ghee  raised  from  vaccine  milk,  mixed  with  sugar  and 
honey  ; 

or,  with  ghee  raised  from  goat's  milk,  with  sugar  and  honey  added 
to  it ; 

or,  with  the  milk  of  the  cow  or  of  the  goat,  with  sugar  and  honey 
added  to  it ;  “7 

or,  the  inflamed  rectum  may  be  plastered  over  with  the  paste  of 
the  drugs  mentioned  above  {viz.,  the  leaves  of  Trichosanthes 
dioica ,  liquorice,  the  five  barks,  the  flowers  of  Bassia  latifolia , 
and  sugarcane),  adding  ghee  thereto  ; 

or,  the  inflamed  restum  may  be  laved  over  with  the  pulvs  rendered 
as  fine  as  possible,  of  the  drugs  mentioned.  “8 

Thus  laved  over  with  the  pulvs,  the  rectum  ceases  to  discharge 
blood. 

By  this  treatment,  the  inflamation  is  alleviated,  and  the  pain  also 
disappears.  “9 

[The  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read,  after  verse  118,  the 
following  :  “or,  the  rectum  may  be  laved  over  with  the  pulvs  of 
Dhataki  ( Woodfordia  fioribunda )  and  Lodhra  ( Syniplocos  racemosa ), 
taken  in  equal  measures.”  Gangfidhara  omits  this.] 

If  the  discharge  of  blood  continues  copiously  notwithstanding  the 
sprinkling  of  the  rectum  with  the  cooled  decoction  of  the  drugs 
already  mentioned,  then  the  rectum,  groins,  the  waist,  and  the  thighs, 
should  first  be  rubbed  with  ghee  and  the  sprinkling  should  go  on 
afterwards. 

Or,  the  rectum,  the  groins,  and  the  other  parts  named,  may  be 
laved  over  with  ‘Chandanadi  oil,’  or  with  ghee  washed  a  hundred 
times,  using  a  soft  wick  of  cotton  for  applying  it. 


1564 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


[The  composition  of  ‘Chandanadi  oil’  has  been  explained  in  the 
lesson  on  the  treatment  of  fevers,  ante.  In  applying  the  oil  or  the-. 
ghee  that-  has  been  washed  a  hundred  times,  neither  the  hands  nor 
the  fingers  should  be  used.  A  soft  wick  made  of  cotton,  dipped 
into  the  oil  or  the  ghee ,  should  be  the  instrument  for  applying  it.] 

If  in  diarrhoea  characterised  by  discharge  of  blood,  the  discharge 
of  blood  takes  place  frequently,  the  measure  each  time  being  small, 
and  if  ‘£ula’  pains  are  present, 

or,  if  the  wind,  being  constipated,  moves  with  difficulty  (in  The 
intestines,  the  stomach,  and  the  rest),  or  does  not  move  at  all, 
then  the  appliance  called  ‘Pichccha-vasti’  should  be  applied 
agreeably  to  the  method  already  laid  down. 

Or,  ghee  boiled  with  Prapaundarika  (the  root-stock  of  Nymphce 
lotus),  should  be  applied  as  enemata.  122-123 

[As  regards  the  composition  and  application  of  the  ‘Pichccha- 
vasti,’  vide  verses  93  to  96,  ante,  of  this  lesson. 

‘AlpSlpam’  has  reference  to  measure  ;  while  ‘vahugah’  has  refer¬ 
ence  to  frequency.] 

Very  generally  the  rectum  of  those  persons  that  suffer  from, 
diarrhoea  for  a  long  while,  becomes  very  weak.  Hence,  oils  and 
ghees  should  be  constantly  applied' to  their  rectum.  124 

The  wind  (of  one  who  suffers  from  such  diarrhoea)  becomes  strong 
in  its  own  seats.  The  bile  also  of  such  a  person  becomes  provoked 
and  unites  with  the  wind  (for  afflicting  pain).  For  .the  conquest  of 
the  excited  wind  and  bile,  the  administration  of  enemata  is  bene¬ 
ficial  :  I25 

Unto  that  person  who  discharges  blood  either  with  or  before  or 
after  the  evacuation  of  stools  (in  diarrhoea),  the  physician  should 
prescribe  ‘(^atavari-ghrita.’  as  a  linctus  for  him.  126 

[The  composition  of  ‘£atavari-ghrita’  has  been  explained,  ante,  in; 
this  lesson.] 

Of  a  patient  who  confines  himself  to  beneficial  diet,  this  disease 
(viz.,  the  discharge  of  blood  either  with  before  or  after  the  evacuation 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SAM  HIT  A. 


1565 

of  stools)  is  quickly  conquered  by  a  linctus  made  of  newly  raised 
cheese  mixed  with  sugar  of  half  its  measure  and  honey  of  a  fourth 
part  of  its  measure.  I27 

[‘Hitaginah’  is  ‘of  one  who  confines  himself  to  beneficial  diet. 
What  is  stated  here  is  that  the  linctus  described  does  great  good  if 
the  patient’s  diet  be  proper.] 

Take  the  sprouts  of  Nyagrodha  ( Ficus  Bengalensis )  Udumvara 
[Ficus  glomerata),  and  Acwattha  ( Ficus  religiosa) :  pound  them  to¬ 
gether  and  drench  them  iirhot  water  for  a  day  and  night.  Boil  ghee 
with  this  water.  128 

Adding  (to  the  boiled  ghee)  sugar  of  half  its  measure,  and  also 
honey  of  a  fourth  of  its  measure,  make  a  linctus  which  a  patient  who 
suffers  from  both  a  downward  and  an  upward  discharge  of  blood  is 
to  lick.  I29 

[The  measure  of  water  in  which  the  sprouts  are  to  be  drenched 
should  be  four  times  that  of  the  sprouts.  The  measure  of  the  in- 
-  fusion  also  should  be  four  times  that  of  the  ghee  which  is  to  be  boiled 
in  it.] 

If  one  who  has  become  weakened  (by  discharges  of  blood)  in¬ 
dulges,  from  ignorance,  in  such  articles  of  food  and  drink  as  are 
provocative  of  bile,  death  overtakes  him  soon  in  consequence  of 
violent  inflammation  (followed  by  suppuration)  of  the  rectum.  130 

[What  is  stated  here  is  this  :  violent  inflammation  of  the  rectum 
sets  in  owing  to  indulgence  in  bile-provoking  food  and  drink.  This 
inflammation  soon  carries  off  the  patient.] 

In  diarrhoea  bom  of  (excited)  phlegm,  fasts  and  the  administration 
of  ‘pachanas’  at  the  outset  are  beneficial. 

The  administration  (after  this)  of  drugs  included  in  the  group 
called  ‘Dipana’  which  are,  as  already  laid  down,  curative  of  diar¬ 
rhoea  characterised  by  the  discharge  of  mucus  with  the  stools,  is 
prescribable.  J3i 

[‘Langhana’  means  fast,  as  also  the  taking  of  very  light  food 
.  sparingly.  ‘Dipana’  are  medicines  which  kindle  the  digestive  fire 
and  increase  the  appetite.  ‘As  already  laid  down’  refers  to  verses 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SA  MH1 TA. 


1566 

45  and  46  ante  of  this  lesson.  Amongst  ‘Dipana’  drugs  are  Piper 
Zongum ,  dry  ginger,  coriander  seeds,  &c.] 

If  the  phlegm-born  diarrhoea  does  not  abate  of  a  person  who  has 
been  made  to  observe  fasts  and  take  ‘pachanas’  and  who  has  been 
treated  with  ‘dipanas,’  agreeably  to  the  order  laid  down,  he  should  be 
treated  with  such  medicines  as  are  alleviative  of  phlegm.  132 

Vilwa  (raw  fruits  of  AEgle  marmelos ),  Karkataka  (otherwise  called 
Karkatagringi,  i.  e.,  Rhus  succedatiea ),  Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus 
■rotundas')  Abhaya  (chebulic  myrobalans),  and  Vigwabhesaja  (dry 
:ginger) ; 

Vacha  {Acorns  Calamus ),  Vidanga  {Embelia  Ribes\  Bhutika  (other¬ 
wise  called  Yamani,  i.  e,,  the  seeds  of  Ptychotis  Ajowan),  DhSnyaka 
(coriander  seeds),  and  Siaradaru  {Pinus  deodara)  ;  '33 

Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis  auriculata ),  AtivishS  {Aconitum  heterophyllum\ 
Paths  (otherwise  called  Akanadi,  i.  e.,  Cissampelos  hernandifolia ), 
Chavya  ( Piper  Chaba )  and  Katurohini  {Picrorrhiza  Kurroa) ; 

Fippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum ),  Pippali-mula  (the  roots  of 
Piper  longum ),  Chitraka  {Plumbago  Zeylamm\  and  Hastipippali 
{Pothos  officinalis) ;  >34 

These  four  combinations  of  drugs  laid  down  in  the  four  half- 
verses  above,  should  be  administered  in  phlegm-born  diarrhoea.  Their 
decoctions  are  to  be  taken. 

They  are  capable  of  enkindling  the  digestive  fire.  J3S 

Black  Ajaji  (otherwise  called  Krishnajiraka,  i.  e.,  the  seeds  of 
Nigella  sativa),  Pstha  {Cissampelos  hernandifolia ),  Nagara  (dry 
ginger),  and  Maricha  (black  pepper),  the  measure  of  each  being  equal, 
with  DhStaki  {Woodfordia  floribunda)  of  twice  the  measure  : 

Reduce  these  to  pulv  and  dissolve  the  pulv  in  the  expressed 
juice  of  Matulunga  {Citrus  medico).  The  patient  should  drink  the 
preparation.  *3$ 

RasSnjana  (galena),  Ativisha  {Aconitum  heterophyllum),  the  fruits 
of  Kutaja  {Holarrhena  antidysenterica ),  each  of  equal  measure,  and 
DhStaki  {Woodfordia  floribunda )  of  twice  the  measure  ; 


CHARAKA-SAMH1 TA , 


1567 

Reduce  these  to  pulv,  and  dissolve  the  pulv  in  honey,  adding  the 
ipulv  of  Nagara  (dry  ginger). 

The  patient  should  be  given  this  preparation  to  drink.  J37 

Dhataki  ( Woodfordia  floribunda ),  NSgara  (dry  ginger),  Vilwa 
(raw  fruits  of  AEgle  marmelos  dried).  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racemosa ),  and 
Padraakegara  (the  filaments  of  Nelumbium  speciosum ) ; 

The  bark  of  Jambu  {Eugenia  Jambolana),  Nagara  (dry  ginger), 
Dhanya  (coriander  seeds),  Patha  {Cissampelos  hernandifolia),  Mocha- 
rasa  (the  exudation  of  Bombax  Malabaricum ),  and  BalS  (Sida 
cordifolid) ; 

SamangS  (otherwise  called  VarahakrantS,  i.  e.,  Mimosa  pudica ), 
Dhataki  {Woodfordia  floribunda ),  the  kernel  of  Vilwa  (raw  fruits 
JEgle  marmelos'),  the  bark  of  Jambu  {Eugenia  Jambolana)  and  that  of 
Amra  {Mangifera  Indica)  \ 

■Kapittha  (the  fruits  of  Feronia  elephantum ),  Vidanga  {Embelia 
■Ribes),  Nagara  (dry  ginger),  and  Maricha  (black  pepper) ; 

‘Khada’  made  of  each  of  these  four  groups  of  drugs  occurring  in 
the  four  half  verses  above,  rendered  sour  by  adding  the  juice  of 
Changeri  {Oxdlis  corniculata),  that  of  Kola  (jujubes),  and  whey,  with 
-oil  and  ghee  and  salt,  is  prescribable  in  diarrhoea  characterised  by 
^predominance  of  (excited)  .phlegm.  J4° 

[‘Khada’  means  a  sour  preparation.  ‘Khada’  made  of  any  of 
•these  groups,  with  the  additions  mentioned,  is  prescribable.] 

The  kernel  of  Kapittha  {Feronia  elephantum),  mixed  with  the  pulv 
•of  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids),  honey,  and  sugar, 

or,  Katphala  {Myrica  sctpidd)  with  .honey,  makes  a  linctus  'which 
-cures  diarrhoea  born  of  (excited)  phlegm.  *4* 

By  licking  KanS  (the  pulv  of  the  fruits  of  Piper  longuni)  mixed 
with  honey,  by  drinking  whey  mixed  with  the  pulv  of  the  roots  of 
Chitraka  {Plumbago  Zeylanica),  and  by  eating  the  kernel  (burnt) 
of  raw  (fruit  of)  Vilwa  {AEgle  marmelos),  one  becomes  freed  from 
diarrhoea  born  of  (excited)  phlegm.  *4* 

The  kernel  of  Vala-Vihva  (raw  fruits  of  AEgle  marmelos),  with 
treacle  and  oil  (of  sesame),  Pippali  (pulv  of  the  fruits  of  Piper  Ion - 
198 


1568 


CHAR  AKA -SAMHITA , 


gum),  and  Vifwabhesaja  (dry  ginger),  makes  a  linctus  that  should  be 
licked  by  one  afflfcted  with  phlegm-born  diarrhoea  accompanied  by 
‘£ula’  pain  in  the  rectum  and  straining  (while  stools  are  passed) 
in  consequence  of  the  wind  moving  in  a  contrary  direction.  *43 

[When  the  wind  moves  in  a  contrary  course,  that  is,  when  it 
becomes  vitiated,  it  is  then  only  that  this  medicine  should  be  taken. 
It  is,  again,  prescribable  in  phlegm-born  diarrhoea  accompanied  by 
pain  and  straining.] 

By  one  who  is  afflicted  with  phlegm-born  diarrhoea  accompanied 
by  pain  and  straining,  boiled  rice  should  be  eaten,  with  the  soup  of 
dried  Mulaka  (radishes) ;  or  with  such  accompaniments  (curries  and 
curds  and  whey,  &c.),  as  are  alleviative  of  the  wind  ;  or  with  such 
soups  of  pulses,  or  such  meat-juices,  or  such  ‘Khadas,’  as  have  been 
laid  down  for  diarrhoea  born  of  excited  wind.  !44 

[The  soups  laid  down  for  wind-born  diarrhoea  are  those  of  Mudga 
(seeds  of  Phaseolus  Mungo),  Masha  (the  seeds  of  Phaseolus  radiatus), 
and  other  pulses.  The  meat-juices  are  those  of  the  flesh  of  Lopaka 
(a  variety  of  small  jackal,  &c.)  The  ‘Khadas’  referred  to  in  this 
verse  are  those  made  of  the  kernel  of  raw  fruits  of  AEgle  marmclos 
and  the  rest.  Vide  the  verses  in  this  Lesson,  ante,  which  prescribe 
the  treatment  of  wind-born  diarrhoea.] 

Or,  ghees  mixed  with  sour  juices  as  laid  down  above,  or  the  ghee 
called  ‘shatpala,’  or  old  ghee  mixed  with  the  ‘manda’  of  barley,  the 
measures  depending  upon  the  strength  of  the  patient,  may  be  given 
to  one  afflicted  with  phlegm-born  diarrhcea  accompanied  by  pain  and 
straining.  145 

[Ghee  mixed  with  sour  juices,  such  as  ‘Changed  Grita’  ( vide  verse 
140  ante)]. 

In  constipation  of  wind  and  phlegm,  in  copious  discharge  of 
phlegm,  in  the  presence  of  pain  and  straining,  soft  sticks  of  cotton 
(prepared  in  the  way  already  laid  down)  should  be  inserted  into  the 
rectum.*  146 


*  The  word  used  is  ‘Pichccha-vasti-’  It's  composition  has  been  explained  in  verses  93, 
94,  and  95,  ante,  of  this  Lesson. — T. 


CHA  RAKA-SAMHI7  A. 


1 569 

The  cotton-sticks  mentioned  above  should  be  imbued  with  the 
paste  of  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  long-urn),  Vilvva  (raw  fruits  of 
ALgle  rnarmelos),  Kushtha  ( Aplotaxis  auriculata ),  (^atahva  (otherwise 
called  £alupha,  i.  e.,  dill  seeds),  and  VachS  ( Acorus  Calamus ),  as  also 
with  salt.  Sticks  so  made  should  be  inserted  into  the  rectum.  H7 

When  the  stick  comes  out  and  the  person  feels  ease,  he  should 
then  bathe  and  take  his  meals. 

After  this,  towards  the  close  of  day,  the  physician  possessed  of 
intelligence  should  administer  oily  enemata  consisting  of  the  oil, 
agreeably  warm,  of  the  fruits  of  ALgle  rnarmelos.  148 

[‘Vilwa-taila’  is  oil  manufactured  from  the  kernel  of  raw  fruits  of 
ALgle  rnarmelos. ] 

Or,  boiling  (sesame)  oil  with  the  paste  of  the  drugs  ending  with 
Vacha  ( Acorus  Calamus ),  (oily)  enemata  should  be  administered 
frequently. 

[‘VachSntaih,’  i.  e.,  ‘with  drugs  ending  with  Vacha,’  that  is,  those 
drugs  that  have  been  mentioned  in  the  first  half  of  verse  147,  ante, 
of  this  Lesson.] 

One  afflicted  with  diarrhoea  characterised  by  predominance  of 
phlegm  and  wind,  obtains  ease.  H9 

[The  treatment  is  now  being  laid  down  of  diarrhoea  born  of  all  the 
three  faults  excited  simultaneously]. 

In  . diarrhoea  born  of  the  three  faults,  the  wind  becomes  predomi¬ 
nantly  excited  in  its  own  place  through  the  attenuation  of  phlegm. 

Thus  excited,  the  wind  suddenly  kills  the  patient.  Hence,  the 
physician  should,  without  losing  time,  seek  to  subjugate  the  wind.  ‘5° 

[If  in  diarrhoea  born  of  the  simultaneous  excitement  of  all  the 
three  faults,  the  phlegm  becomes  attenuated  through  any  cause  con¬ 
nected  or  otherwise  with  treatment,  the  consequence  of  such  attenua¬ 
tion  is  violent  excitement  of  the  wind,  in  its  own  place,  that  is,  the 
stomach  where  digestion  goes  on.  The  effect  of  such  viotent  excite¬ 
ment  of  the  wind  is  dissolution.  Hence,  the  physician,  in  treating 
the  disease,  should  first  seek  to  subjugate  the  wind.] 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1570 

In  diarrhoea  born  of  the  simultaneous  excitement  of  the  three- 
faults,  the  physician  should,  seek  to  subjugate  the  wind  first.  After 
subjugation  of  the  wind,  the  bile  should  be  subjugated  ;  and  after  the: 
bile,  the  phlegm  should  be  subjugated. 

Generally  speaking,  in  the  treatment  of  such  diarrhoea  that  fault 
should  be  first  subjugated  which  happens  to  be  more  excited  than, 
the  others.,  *51 

( Here  is  a  verse  containing  a  summary ). 

The  premonitory  indications,  the  causes,  the  symptoms,  con¬ 
siderations  of  curability  and  otherwise,  and  successful  treatment 
under  differing  circumstances,  with  respect  to  persons  afflicted  with, 
diarrhoea,  have  all  been  laid  down  in  this  Lesson. 

Thus  ends  Lesson  XIX,  called  Treatment  of  Diarrhoea,  in  the- 
division  named  ‘Chikitsa,’  of  the  treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised  by 
Charaka,. 


LESSON  XX. 

THE  TREATMENT  OF  VOMITING. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  Lesson  on  the  treatment  of  vomiting. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  scion  of  Atri’s  race.  * 

Possessed  of  fame,  blazing  with  ascetic  puissance  based  on  (know¬ 
ledge  of  the)  Vedas,  as  also  with  great  intelligence,  of  splendour 
resembling  that  of  fire  or  the  sun,  and  devoted  to  the  good  of  alf 
creatures,  Punarvasu,  born  in  Atri’s  race,  was  questioned  (as  follows) 
by  his  disciple,  Agnivega.  2 

O  thou  that  art  the  foremost  of  all  that  are  conversant  with- 
disease  and  its  treatment,  do  thou  duly  expound,  for  the  benefit  of 
human  beings,  the  treatment,  with  the  causes  and  the  symptoms,  of 
those  five  varieties  of  Vomiting  of  which  mention  was  made  by  thee, 
in  course  of  the  enumeration  of  diseases.*  3 

Hearing  these  words  of  Agnivega,  (Punarvasu),  that  foremost  of 
all  persons  conversant  with  disease  and  its  treatment,  being  highly- 
gratified,  spoke  thus  : 

Listen  now  to  me  as  I  expound  in  detail  the  five  varieties  of 
vomiting  mentioned  by  me  before.  4 

Three  of  these  varieties  arise  from  the  excitement  of  the  three 
faults  (singly).  The  fourth  arises  from  the  simultaneous  excitement 
of  the  three  faults.  The  fifth  arises  from  connection  (of  the  mind) 
with  abominable:  objects  of  sense. 

The  premonitory  symptoms  (of  all  those  varieties)  are  nausea  in 
the  cardiac  region,  discharge  of  phlegmonous  matter  (from  the  mouth), 
and  disgust  for  food.  5 

Of  one  who  has  been  exceedingly  afflicted  by  (undue)  physical' 
excercise,  or  medicines  possessed  of  keen  virtues,  or  grief,  or  disease, 


*  The  five  varieties  of  vomiting,  viz.,  i.  that  born  of  disgust  or  abomination,  2.  that 
born  of  the  wind,  3.  that  born  of  the  bile,  4.  that  born  of  the  phlegm,  and  5.  that  born  of  all 
the  three  faults,  have  been  mentioned  in  Less°n  XIX,  called  ‘Ashtodariya,’  in  Sutrasthana, 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


*572 

or  fear,  or  fasts,  and  other  causes  of  a  similar  kind,  the  wind,  be¬ 
coming  aggravated  (exceedingly  provoked)  in  the  great  duct  (viz., 
that  which  connects  the  throat  and  the  stomach),  afflicts  the  (two 
other)  faults,  and  seeking  to  force  them  out  and  oppressing  the  vital 
districts  (viz.,  the  cardiac  and  other  regions),  originates  vomiting 
which  arises  from  an  upward  motion  imparted  to  the  stomach,  and 
which  is  accompanied  by  pains  in  the  chest  and  sides,  dryness  of  the 
mouth,  pains  in  the  head  and  the  navel,  coughing,  hoarseness  of  the 
voice,  and  pains  (in  other  districts  of  the  body)  resembling  those 
caused  by  pricking  with  needles.  6-7 

[The  following  are  the  symptoms  of  wind-born  vomiting.] 

One  afflicted  by  the  (provoked)  wind,  vomits  with  such  accom¬ 
paniments  as  loud-sounding  eructations,  froth  (in  the  matter  ejected), 
the  urging  frequently  interrupted,  darkness  of  hue  in  the  ejected 
matter,  watery  character  of  the  same,  astringency  of  taste  in  the 
mouth,  difficulty  experienced  in  bringing  out  the  matter,  smallness 
of  quantity  (of  the  matter  ejected  at  each  urging)  and  violence  of 
urging. 

The  person  experiences  great  affliction  in  consequences  of  these.  8 

[The  ‘nidSna’  of  vomiting  due  to  excited  phlegm  is  now  explained.] 

Through  indulgence  in  things  that  are  raw  (or  not  boiled  properly 
and  therefore  undigestible),  things  that  are  pungent,  or  that  are  sour, 
or  that  cause  a  burning  sensation  (in  the  stomach^,  and  that  are  hot, 
the  bile  is  provoked  in  the  ‘Amagaya’  (that  part  of  the  stomach  where 
food  goes  after  deglutition). 

The  provoked  bile  becomes  scattered  through  those  cJucts  that 
bear  the  food-juice  (i.  e.,  the  juice  which  arises  from  food  before 
digestion). 

It  then  afflicts  the  vital  districts  of  the  body,  and  coursing 
upwards,  causes  vomiting.*  9 

[The  symptoms  of  bile-born  vomiting  are  the  following  :] 

Afflicted  with  swoons,  thirst,  dryness  of  the  mouth,  burning  of  the 

*  ‘Udirna-vegam’  implies  ‘with  excited  force  of  intensity.’  What  is  stated  here  is  that 
in  consequence  of  indulgence  in  the  kinds  of  food  mentioned,  the  force  or  intensity  of  the 
bile  is  excited  ;  in  other  words,  it  is  provoked.— T. 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MU  IT  A. 


1 573 


head,  the  palate,  and  the  eyes,  sight  of  darkness,  and  vertigo,  one 
suffering  from  bile-born  vomiting,  ejects  matter  that  is  billious, 
yellow,  exceedingly  hot,  bitter  in  taste,  or  smoky  in  colour  accom¬ 
panied  with  a  burning  sensation  (in  the  throat).  i° 

[The  ‘Nidana’  is  then  set  set  forth  of  phlegm-born  vomiting]  : 

Through  indulgence  in  food  that  is  exceedingly  oily,  or  exceed¬ 
ingly  heavy,  or  raw,  or  capable  of  causing  a  buring  sensation  in  the 
stomach,  or  through  excessive  slumber  and  the  like  causes,  the 
phlegm,  becoming  exceedingly  aggravated,  covering  the  chest,  the 
head,  the  vital  region  (vie.,  the  region  about  the  heart),  and  the  juice¬ 
bearing  ducts,  causes  vomiting.  11 

In  phlegm-born  vomiting,  one  presents  such  symptoms  as  langour, 
sweetness  of  taste  in  the  mouth,  expectoration  of  phlegmonous 
matter,  a  feeling  of  satiety,*  sleep,  disgust  for  food,  and  heaviness 
of  the  body. 

The  matter  he  ejects  is  oily,  thick,  sweet  in  taste,  phlegmonous, 
and  white  in  colour. 

Horripilation  sets  in  while  he  ejects  ;  the  pain  also  that  he  feels 
is  not  much.  12 

[Th.e  ‘Nidana’  is  set  forth  of  vomiting  generated  by  the  simulta¬ 
neous  excitement  of  the  three  faults]. 

"Through  vitiation  of  the  food  in  the  stomach  and  inharmonious 
condition  of  season,  the  three  faults  of  one  who  continuously  takes 
food  and  drink  of  all  sorts  of  tastes  (that  are  beneficial  and  baneful, 
without  making  any  distinction),  becoming  excited,  generate  vomiting 
born  of  the  three  faults. f 

The  following  are  the  symptoms  of  vomiting  born  of  the  three 
faults. 

‘£ula’  pains,  indigestion,  disgust  for  food,  a  burning  sensation1, 
thirst,  asthmatic  breathing,  and  swoons,  all  in  excess,  characterise 


*  The  use  of  ‘Santosha,’  in  the  sense  of  satiety,  is  rare.— T. 

•j-  The  final  statement  is  a  syntactical  pleonasm.  ‘Samagnatah’  is  explained  as  ‘Sama- 
ganam  kurvatah.’  By  ‘Samagana’  is  meant  the  taking  of  ‘pathySpathyam  ekatram,’  i.  e., 
•ating  beneficial  food  and  food  that  is  baneful  together. 


CHA  R  A  KA  -  SA  M'HITA. 


the  continuous  vomiting  born  of  three  faults,  of  persons  that  eject 
matter  which  is  saline,  sour,  thick,  hot,  and  blue  or  red  in  colour.  14 

[What  is  stated  here  is  that  ‘(^ula’  pains,  &c.,  are  the  symptoms 
presented  of  vomiting  born  of  the  excitement  of  the  three  faults 
together.  The  character,  again,  of  the  ejected  matter  is  of  the  kind 
stated.  The  language  of  Driclhavala  is  not  so  neat  as  that  of 
Charaka.] 

When  the  wind,  obstructing  the  ducts  which  bear  the  stools,  the 
sweat,  the  urine,  and  water,  courses  upwards,  then  bearing  up  from 
his  stomach  the  accumulated  faults  of  the  person  in  whom  the  three 
faults  have  been  excited,  it  causes  the  continuous  ejection,  with  great 
force,  of  those  viatited  faults  which  resemble  stools  and  urine  in  smell 
and  colour,  the  ejection  being  accompanied  by  thirst,  hard  breathing, 
hiccup,  and  pain. 

Afflicted  with  such  vomiting,  the  person  soon  meets  with  des¬ 
truction.  15-16 

[The  language  of  these  two  verses  is  very  slovenly.  The  construc¬ 
tion  is, — ‘Yada  vitswedamutravahani  grotangsi  samrudhya,  vayuh 
urddham  eti,  tada  (sa  vSyu)  utsannadoshasya  narasya  koshthat  tarn 

achitam  dosham  samuddhyuya,  (tarn)  dushtam,  vinmutrayoh . 

yutam,  ativegat  prachcchardayet.’ 

[By  ‘utsannadosha’  here  is  meant  ‘one  in  whom  the  (three)  faults 
have  been  excited].’ 

Instead  of  ‘ativegat’  the  accusative  or  the  instrumental  would*have 
been  better. 

The  reading,  ‘bhayardditah’  in  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay 
•editions  is  incorrect.  It  should  be  ‘taySrdditah.’] 

[The  ‘nidsna’  is  now  set  forth  of  that  vomiting  which  is  born  of 
contact  with  abominable  objects  of  sense]. 

That  vomiting  of  an  excited  person  which  arises  from  smelling  or 
•eating  or  seeing  objects  that  are  abominable,  unbearable,  impure, 
foetid,  unclean,  disgusting,  and  disagreeable,  is  regarded  as  ‘born  of 
contact  with  abominable  objects  of  sense.’f  17 

‘Prasaktam’  is  ‘nirantaram,’  that  is  continuously  or  habitually. — T. 

*  ‘Dishta’  is  abominable  ;  ‘Pratipa’  is  explained  as  something  that  one  can  not  bear  or 
■endure  ;  ‘Manoghna’  is  something  that  wounds  the  mind  ;  hence,  disagreeable  ;  ‘Taptamana’ 
•is  one  whose  mind  has  been  heated,  i.  e.,  excited. — T. 


'CHAR  A  KA-SA  MHITA. 


J57S 

That  vomiting  of  a  weakened  person  which  is  continuous  and 
•copious,  accompanied  by  supervening  ailments,  consisting  of  blood 
and  pus,  and  of  variegated  aspect  (like  the  hues  on  the  plumes  of  a 
peacock),  should  be  pronounced  to  be  incurable. 

That  vomiting,  however,  which  is  unaccompanied  by  supervening 
ailments,  is  regarded  as  curable  and  should,  therefore,  be  taken  up 
for  treatment.  18 

All  varieties  of  vomiting  are  regarded  as  arising  from  nausea  of 
the  ‘am&caya’  (i.  e.,  that  part  of  the  stomach  where  the  food  first  goes 
after  deglutition).  Hence  fast  (or  food  that  is  very  light  and  small 
in  measure)  is  prescribable  at  the  outset. 

As  regards,  again,  all  other  varieties  save  that  born  of  wind,  they 
should  be  treated  with  such  correctives  (z.  e.,  purgatives,  emetics,  &c.), 
as  are  alleviative  of  bile  and  phlegm.  *9 

[The  'amSjaya’  is  the  seat  of  the  phlegm.  ‘Utklega’  means  an 
upward  tendency.’  Practically,  it  implies  nausea.] 

[The  correctives  to  be  administered  are  as  follow  :] 

The  pulv  of  Abhaya’  (chebulic  myrobalans),  mixed  with  honey, 
should  be  licked- 

Those  purgatives,  which  are  agreeable,  should  be  taken  with 
wines  or  milk,  agreeably  to  considerations  of  measure  and  time. 

The  excited  faults  having  an  upward  tendency  will  then  be  given 
a  downward  course.  20 

[Only  such  purgatives  should  be  taken  as  are  alleviative  of  bile 
and  phlegm.  The  treatment  here  laid  down  is  for  all  varieties  of 
vomiting  save  that  born  of  wind.] 

As  regards  emetics,  one  should  take  those  which  are  prepared 
with  Valli-phala,  i.  en  bitter  gourds  and  the  like. 

If  one  has  become  weakened,  one  should  be  treated  with  medi¬ 
cines  that  are  called  ‘^amanas,’  i.  en  alleviatives* 


‘t^amanas’  are  not  emetics.  They  cure  nausea  and  vomiting. — T. 


199 


CMARAKA-SAMHITA. 


n?$ 

He  should  be  treated  with  such  ‘(^amanas,’  for  example,  as  light 
and  agreeable  meat- juices,  light  and  dry  food  (such  as  ‘laddus’),  and 
also  diverse  kinds  of  light  food  with  similar  drinks.*  2t 

(The  meat-juices  referred  to  above  are  specially  indicated  in  the 
following  verse). 

Meat-juices  prepared  with  the  flesh  of  francoline  partidges,  pea¬ 
cocks,  and  quails  (a  variety  of  Perdix  ckinensis ),  well-dressed  (z.  e., 
fried  in  ghee  and  spiced  with  black  pepper,  cumin  seeds,  &c.),  cures 
vomiting  born  of  (excited)  wind. 

So  the  soup  also  of  Kola  (jujubes),  Kulattha  (the  seeds  of 
Dolichos  biflorus ),  DhSnya  (corriander  seeds),  the  roots  of  Vilwa  and 
the  rest  i.  e.,  the  group  of  five  roots  beginning  with  those  of  {JEgle 
marmelos ),  and  barley,  rendered  sour  (by  the  addition  of  ‘Kanji’), 
cures  the  vomiting  born  of  (excited)  wind.  22 

If  in  wind-born  vomiting,  the  person  be  afflicted  with  palpitation 
of  the  heart,  and  cough,  he  should  drink  ghee  (boiled  in  water  of  four 
times  its  measure)  mixed  with  ‘Saindhava’  salt  ; 

or,  ghee  boiled  with  Nagara  (dry  ginger)  and  DhSnyaka  (corrian¬ 
der  seeds),  and  curds  (of  four  times  its  measure)  ; 

or,  ghee  boiled  with  the  expressed  juice  of  pomegranate  seeds. 

Or,  the  physician  may  give  him  the  same  measure  of  ghee  (boiled 
with  the  expressed  juice  of  pomegranate  seeds),  mixed  with 
the  pulv  of  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids),  and  the  three  salts 
{viz.,  ‘Sauvarchala,’  ‘Saindhava,’  and  ‘Vit’) ; 

or,  the  physician  may  give  him  diverse  kinds  of  food  that  are  oily 
and  agreeable,  mixed  with  meat-juices  and  soups  (of  the  usual 
pulses)  and  such  sour  articles  as  curds  and  the  expressed  juice 
of  pomegranate  seeds.-]-  23-24 


*  Having  said  that  one  who  has  become  very  weak  should  be  treated  with  ‘Qamanas,’ 
the  author  specifies  the  varieties  of  ‘Qamanas’  in  the  second  line  of  the  verse.  The  adjective 
‘laghubhih’  qualifies  ‘rasaih,’  ‘bhakshaih’,  and  ‘sabhojaih  panaih.’ — T. 

~j-  ‘Hriddyani’,  i.  e.,  agreeable,  is  explained  as  implying  boiled  with  agreeable  ‘mandas’ 
and  ‘peyfis.’  The  kinds  of  food  prescribed  should  all  be  such  as  to  be  alleviative  of  the 
wind. — T. 


CHAR  AKA  -  SA  MH1TA. 


IS  11 


In  vomiting  born  of  (excited)  bile,  the  pulv  of  Trivrit  ( Convolvulus 
Turpethnni),  mixed  with  the  expressed  juice  of  Draksha  (grapes),  or 
with  that  of  Vidari  (Batatus paniculatus),  or  with  that  of  Ikshu  (sugar¬ 
cane),  has  the  virtue  of  restoring  the  bile  to  its  normal  course. 

As  regards  bile  that  has  been  exceedingly  provoked  in  the  seat 
of  phlegm  (i.  e.,  in  the  stomach),  the  physician  should  seek  to  expel 
it  upwards  by  emetics  that  are  agreeable  to  the  taste.  25 

Unto  one  (afflicted  with  bile-born  vomiting)  that  has  been  thus 
treated  with  correctives,  the  physician  should,  in  proper  time  (/.  e., 
when  his  appetite  has  been  excited),  give  ‘mantha’  or  ‘peya’  made 
of  the  pulverised  product  of  ‘fried  paddy,  mixed  with  honey  and 
sugar ; 

or,  (boiled)  £&Ii’  rice,  with  the  soup  of  Mudga  (the  seeds  of 
Pkaseolus  Mungo )  ; 

or,  boiled  £ali’  rice,  with  meat-juice  prepared  with  the  flesh  of 
of  animals  having  their  habitat  in  the  wildernes.  26 

[Paddy  fried  produces  ‘Lsja,’  called  ‘khai’  in  Bengali.  When  hot,, 
it  is  capable  of  being  pulverised.} 

The  flour  of  (fried)  Kulmasha  (or  Chanaka,  i.  e.,  gram  or  chick¬ 
pea)  and  fried  paddy  and  Yava  (barley),  and  the  pulv  of  Grinjana 
(carrots),  mixed  with  the  pulv  of  Pippali  (the  fruits  of  Piper  longum) 
and  white  (purified)  sugar  and  honey,  may  be  given  as  a  linctus  ; 

or,  the  soft  substance  obtained  from  the  head  of  a  date-tree, 
mixed  with  the  pulv  of  Piper  longum ,  white  sugar  and  honey, 

or,  the  pulv  of  Narikela  (cocoa-nuts),  mixed  with  the  pulv  of 
Piper  loAgum ,  white  sugar  and  honey  ; 

or,  grapes  reduced  to  paste  and  mixed  with  the  same  ingredients 
as  above ; 

or,  Vadara  (jujubes),  reduced  to  paste  (taking  only  their  kernel, 
excluding  the  seeds)  and  mixed  with  the  same  ingredients 
as  above  ; 

may  be  given  as  a  linctus  to  the  person  for  licking.  27 


CHARAKA-SAMHTTA, 


Or,  the  person  may  lick  the  pul  vs  (mixed,  together)  of  £rotojat 
(otherwise  called  RasSnjana,  i.  e.,  galena),  Laja  (fried  paddy),. 
Utpala  (the  flowers  of  Nymphcea  lotus),  and  the  Majj&  (kernel)1 
of  Kola  (jujubes),  with  honey  ; 

or,  the  pulv  of  Abhaya  (chebulie  myrobalans),  mixed  with  honey 

or,  the  soft  substance  occuring  within  the  seeds  of  Kola  (jujubes),. 
Anjana  (galena),  Makshikavit  (the  dung  of  the  bee),  Laja  (fried: 
paddy),  Sita  (white  sugar),  and  the  grains  of  Maghadhika. 
( Piper  longiim),.,  reduced  to  pulv  and  mixed  with  honey, 

may  be  licked.*  28 

Or,  the  person  may  drink  the  decoction  of  DrakshS  (grapes),  cooled;: 

or,  the  water,  cooled,  in  which  has  been  soaked  a  lump  of  earth 
fried  in  ghee- ; 

or,  the  decoction  of  the  (new)  leaves  of  Jambu  {Eugenia  Jambo- 
lana)  and  those  of  Amra  (mangoes),,  cooled,  and  mixed  with. 

.  honey.  29 

Or,  he  may  drink  the  infusion,  prepared  by  exposure  in  the  night,, 
of  Mudga  (the  seeds  of  Phaseolus  Mungo),  and.  Krishna  (the 
fruits  of  Piper  longum ) ; 

or,  the  infusion,  obtained  by  the  same  process,  of  Ushira  (the; 
roots  of  Andropogon  muricatus),  and  Dhanya  (coriander  seeds), 
and  Chanaka  (gram  or  chick  pea)  ;. 

or,  the  infusion,  obtained  by  the  same  process,  of  the  roots  of 
Gavedhuka  (a  variety  of  wheat,  called  Coix  Barbata ) ; 

or,  the  infusion,  obtained  by  the  same  process,  of  Guduchi  ( Tinos- 
pora  cordifolid) 

or,  the  expressed  juice:  of  Ikshu  (sugarcane)  ;. 

or,  milk.f  3° 


*  ‘Magadhika-kana’  means  the  grains  occuring  within  the  fruits  of  Piper  longum. — T. 
t  Gangadhara  takes  ‘Ikshurasam  payo  va’  as  implying  the  juice  of  sugarcane  or  milk,, 
and  not  the  two  together.— T; 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


1579 


Or,  one  may  drink  the  pulv  of  Sevya  (otherwise  called  Ushira, 
i.  e.,  the  roots  of  Andropogon  muricatus),  dissolved  in  water 
In  which  (atapa)  rice  has  been  washed  ; 

or,  the  pulv  of  KSnchana-gairika  (otherwise  called  Swarnagairika, 
i.  e.y  golden  ochre)  and  Bfilaka  ( Pavonia  odorata)  dissolved  in 
similar  water ; 

Or,  one  may  ’take  the  paste  of  Chandana  (red  sandal  wood), 
Sevya  ('roots  of  Andropogon  muricatus),  Mangsi  ( Nardostachys 
Jatamansi),  DrSksha  (grapes),  Uttama  (otherwise  called 
Priyangu,  i.  e.,  Aglaia  Roxburghiana),  Balaka  ( Pavonia  odorata) 
and  Gairika  (Swarnagairika,  i.  e.,  red  ochre),  dissolved  in  water 
in  which  (atapa)  rice  has  been  washed.  3* 

Or,  one  may  take  the  pulv  of  Gairika  (red  ochre)  and  that  of 
‘^ali’  rice,  dissolved  in  co-id  water  ; 

Or,  the  pulv  of  Murva  ( Sanseviera  zeylanica)  dissolved  in  water 
in  which  (atapa)  rice  has  been  washed  ; 

or,  .the  paste  of  white  sandal  dissolved  in  the  expressed  juice  of 
Dhatri  (the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica). 

Each  of  these  should  be  mixed  with  honey.  Every  one  of  these 
preparations  is  alleviative  of  vo  miting  and  thirst.  32 

(The  treatment  is  now  laid  down  of  vomiting  characterised  by 
excited  phlegm). 

In  vomiting  characterised  by  excited  phlegm,  the  administration 
is  beneficial  of  the  following  emetic,  for  correcting  the  seat  of  phlegm 
and  the  ‘Smafaya’  (/.  e.,  that  part  of  the  stomach  into  which  the  food 
swallowed  goes  first) : 

the  paste  of  Pinditaka  (otherwise  called  ‘Madana  phala,’  i.  e.,  the 
fruits  of  Randia  dumetorum),  with  ‘Saindhava’  salt,  dissolved  in  the 
decoction  of  Pippali  (Piper  longum),  Sharshapa  (mustard  seeds),  and 
Nimba  ( Melia  Azadirachtci).  33 

[‘Vamyam,  kaphatmikayam,’  i.  e.,  in  that  variety  of  vomiting 
which  is  characterised  by  excited  phlegm.  Gang&dhara  reads 
‘Ccharddyam.’  Only  in  such  case  should  emetic  be  administered.] 


CHA  RAKA  -  SAM  HIT  A. 


1580 

The  patient  should  take  as  diet  old  wheat,  or  old  ‘£ali’  rice,  or 
old  barley,  with  the  soup  of  Patola  ('leaves  of  Trichosanthes  dioica ), 
Amrita  (otherwise  called  Guduchi,  L  e.,  Tinospora  cordifolia),  and 
Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica )  ; 

Or,  with  the  soup  of  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids)  boiled  with  whey  ; 

or,  with  the  soup  of  the  bark  of  Nimba  ( Melia  Azadirachta )  ; 

or,  with  the  juice  of  Phalamla  (sour  fruits  *such  as  tamarind,, 
jujubes,  pomegranates,  &c.) ; 

or,  with  soups  of  pungent  substances.*  34 

Or,  one  may  take  meat-juices  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  wild 
animals,  or  the  flesh  of  such  animals  roasted  in  a  spit, 

or,  old  ‘Madhu,’  ‘Sidhu,’  and  ‘arishtas’  (vinous  spirits)  ; 

or,  ‘Ragas’  and  ‘Shadavas,’  and  ‘PSnakas,’  prepared  with  ‘Draksha 
(grapes),  Kapittha  (the  fruits  of  Feronia  Elephantuni ),  and 
Phalapuraka  (that  variety  of  Citrus  acida  which  is  called 
‘Taba).’  35 

[‘Madhu’  implies  a  kind  of  sweet  wine,  distilled  from  flowers  ; 
‘Sidhu’  is  an  agreeable  wine,  distilled  from  molasses  ;  ‘Arishtas’  are 
•vinous  spirits. 

Ragas,’  ‘Shsdavas,’  and  ‘Panakas’  are  different  kinds  of  drink 
whose  preparation  has  been  explained  ante.] 

Or,  one  may  lick  such  pulses  as  the  seeds  of  Mudga  [Phaseolus 
Mungo),  Masura  (the  seeds  of  Cicer  lens),  and  Chanaka  (gram 
or  chick  pea),  fried  and  mixed  with  the  pulv  of  dry  ginger 
and  honey  ; 

or,  the  pulv  of  Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans)  and  Vidanga 
\Embelia  ribes)  with  the  pulv  of  dry  ginger  and  honey  ; 

or,  the  juice  (decoction)  of  Vidanga  {Embelia  Ribes)  and  Plava 
(otherwise  called  Kaivarta-mustaka,  i.  e.,  the  tubers  of  Cyperus 
pertenuis),  36 


*  Gangadhara  takes  ‘takrasiddhaih  as  connected  with  ‘Vyoshasya  Nimbasya  cha 
yushaih.’  So  that  ‘phalamlaih’  and  ‘katubhih’  have  no  qualifying  words.— T. 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SAM  HIT  A. 


.58] 


or,  the  pulv  of  the  seeds  of  Jamvu  ( Eugenia  Jambalana )  with  that 
that  of  Vadara  (jujubes),  mixed  with  honey  ; 

or,  the  pulv  of  Karkata?ringi  ( Rhus  succedanea)  with  that  of  Musta 
(the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  mixed  with  honey  ; 

or,  the  pulv  of  Duralabha  ( Hedysarum  Alhagi),  mixed  with  honey. 

All  these  conquer  vomiting  characterised  by  (excited)  phlegm.  37 

One  conquers  even  violent  vomiting  by  licking  the  following  : 

The  pulv  of  Manah?ila  (realgar),  with  the  juice  of  Phalapuraka 
(1 Citrus  acida  of  the  variety  called  ‘Taba’)  ; 

or,  the  pulv  of  the  same  with  the  juice  of  Kapittha  (fruits  of 
Feronia  elephanturri) ; 

or,  the  pulv  of  Pippali  {Piper  longum)  and  that  of  Maricha  (black 
pepper),  with  honey.  38 

The  treatment  of  vomiting  characterised  by  excitement  of  all  the 
three  faults  is  now  indicated  : 

The  courses  of  treatment  laid  down  above  for  the  simple  varieties 
of  the  disease  (that  is,  those  born  of  each  of  the  faults  singly)  should 
be  combined  by  a  physician  conversant  with  (medical)  science  and 
and  heedful  (of  its  requirements),  after  intelligent  ascertainment  and 
careful  observation  of  the  disease,  the  season  (of  its  occurrence),  the 
measure  in  which  each  of  the  three  faults  has  been  excited,  and  the 
strength  (or  otherwise)  of  the  patient’s  digestive  fire.  39 

The  treatment  is  now  laid  down  of  vomiting  induced  by  contact 
with  abominable  objects  of  sense  : 

In  vomititing  caused  by  mental  shock,  agreeable  discourses,  con¬ 
soling  and  cheering  speeches,  well-known  stories  based  on  tradition, 
•(delightful)  companies,  beneficial  diversions  capable  of  exciting  the 
sentiment  of  love  :  4° 

Diverse  kinds  of  scents  agreeable  to  the  mind,  of  mangoe  and 
other  fruits  united  with  flowers  and  earth,*  agreeable  pot-herbs, 


*  The  expression  ‘Mritpushpamraphaladinam’  is,  rather,  doubtful.  Gangadhara  m  akes 
a  mess  of  it  in  his  commentary.  Taking  the  words  in  their  natural  sense,  the  meaning 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA . 


S582 

agreeable  kinds  of  food  and  drink,  well-dressed  ‘Shadavas’,  ‘Ragas:, 
linctuses,  4* 

agreeable  soups,  meat-juices,  ‘KSmvalikas’,  ‘Khadas’,  diverse  kinds 
of  meat  and  grain,  that  are  edible,  as  also  diverse  kinds  of 
fruits  and  roots  endued  with  (agreeable)  scent,  colour,  and  taste, 
conquer  the  disease.  42 

Scents,  tastes,  objects  of  touch,  or  sounds,  or  sights,  that  may  be 
agreeable  to  the  person  though  unassimilable,  should  be  placed  before 
him  for  alleviating  his  ailment ; 

These  easily  conquer  cases  of  vomiting  arising  from  contact  with 
abominable  objects  of  sense.f  43 

The  treatment  should  first  be  made  of  the  supervening  ailments 
arising  in  vomiting,  guided  by  what  has  been  laid  down  in  the  lessons 
respectively  devoted  to  them.  If  vomiting  sets  in  with  excessive 
violence,  that  treatment  should  be  followed  which  has  been  laid  down 
In  the  case  of  the  excessive  administration  of  purgatives.  44 

In  consequence  of  constant  vomiting,  as  also  of  the  waste  of 
■‘dhatus’,  the  wind  as  a  matter  of  course,  becomes  aggravated.  Hence, 
In  vomiting  that  has  continued  for  a  long  period,  the  cause  of  treat¬ 
ment  should  be  such  as  is  alleviative  of  the  wind,  that  is,  medicines 
that  are  ‘upasthambhana’s  and  ‘vringhanas’  should  be  administered. f45 
The  preparation  called  ‘Sarpiguda’  {ghee  and  treacle),  the  course 
of  treatment  called  ‘kshiravidhi’  (the  regulations  under  which  milk  is 
to  be  taken),  ‘Kalyanaka-Ghrita,’  ‘Tryushana-Ghrita,’  ‘Jivana-Ghrita,’ 
such  meat-juices  as  have  aphrodisiac  virtues,  and  the  linctuses  laid 
down,  alleviate  vomiting  that  has  continued  for  a  loug  time.  46 


ieems  to  be  ‘of  mangoes  and  other  fruits  united  with  flowers  and  earth.’  Certain  kinds  of 
■earth  yield  a  very  agreeable  scent.  ‘Atar’  (otto)  of  earth  is  a  fine  scent.  It  would  seem 
that  vessels  filled  with  mangoes  and  fruits  citrus  acida,  and  flowers  and  earth  of  agreeable 
smell  are  directed  to  he  placed  before  the  patient. 

‘Kamvalika’  is  prepared  with  cream  of  curds  and  sour  soups. — T. 

*  In  the  second  line,  the  reading  of  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  is  ‘pragamaya 
tasyS.’  Gangadhara’s  reading— ‘pragamo  hi  tasya’  is  not  so  happy.  He  takes  the  particle 
*hi’  as  equivalent  to  ‘yasmat’  or  ‘since.’  As  a  matter  of  fact,  objects  that  are  agrroeable 
though  they  be  unassimilable  often  cure  nausea. — T. 

t  ‘Upashtambhanas’  are  medicines  that  prevent  waste.  ‘Vringhanas’  are  medicines  that 
provoke  nutrition  and  increase  corpulency. — T. 


ttiAkA  RA -SAM HIT  A. 


15^3 

[As  regards  ‘Sarpiguda,’  its  composition  has  been  explained  in 
the  Lesson  ‘Kshata-kshina,’  numbered  XI  in  this  Division.  Kalyfin- 
Ghrita’  is  explained  in  Lesson  IX  on  Insanity  in  this  Division. 
Tryushana-Ghrita’  occurs  in  Lesson  V  on  Abdominal  tumours. 
‘Kshiravidhi’  occurs  in  Lesson  II  ;  ‘meat-juices’  and  linctuses  having 
aphrodisiac  virtues  occur  in  the  same  Lesson.  ‘Jivana’  or  ‘Jivaniya1 
Ghrita  is  ghee  boiled  with  the  group  of  drugs  called  ‘Jivaniya.’] 

The  several  varieties  (of  vomiting),  their  causes,  their  symptoms,' 
the  supervening  ailments,  considerations  of  curability,  the  combina¬ 
tions  of  drugs  that  are  capable  of  causing  cures,  and  the  treatment 
to  be  adopted  for  the  cure  or  alleviation  of  the  several  varieties  of 
vomiting,  have  been  laid  down  (in  this  Lesson)  by  the  foremost  of 
ascetics  {viz.,  Punarvasu  of  Atri’s  race). 

Thus  ends  Lesson  XX,  in  the  Division  called  ‘ChikitsS,’  of  the 
treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised  by  Charaka.* 


*  It  is  needless  to  mention  that  this  Lesson,  like  its  predecessors  XVIII,  and  XIX,  is 
the  work  of  Dridavala,  and  not  of  Charaka.— T. 


200 


LESSON  XXL 

THE  TREATMENT  OF  ERYSIPELOS. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  treatment  of  Erysipelos. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  one  of  Atri’s  race,  i 

Unto  his  preceptor  of  Atri’s  race,  having'soul  under  perfect  control, 
adored  by  Rishis,  surrounded  by  a  conclave  of  great  ascetics, 
possessed  of  immense  power,  devoted  to  the  good  of  all  creatures,* 
and  engaged  in  delightful  occupations  on  the  breast  of  (the  mountain) 
KailSsa  teeming  with  Kinnaras,  and  endued  with  many  springs  of 
pure  water  and  many  herbs,  and  adorned  with  a  variety  of  trees  that 
are  solacing  (to  the  eye)  and  are  always  possessed  of  a  wealth  of 
flowers,  and  scatter  on  all  sides  sweet  odours,  Agnivega,  at  the 
proper  time,  and  with  humility,  said  as  follows  :  2-4 

O  illustrious  one  I  see  a  dreadful  disease  that  spreads  all  over  the 
limbs  of  embodied  creatures,  like  the  poison  of  venomous  snakes.  5 

Attacked  with  this  disease  of  rapid  progress,  men  speedily  meet 
with  destruction,  if  treatment  is  not  begun  promptly.f  6 

As  regards  this  malady  I  have  the  (following  points  of)  serious 
doubt. 

By  what  name  should  it  be  known  ? 

For  what  reasons  should  that  name  be  conferred  on  it  ? 

How  many  varieties  are  there  of  this  disease  ? 

How  many  ‘dh&tus’  are  affected  by  it  ? 

What  "are  the  causes  from  which  this  disease  arises  and  what  are 
Its  seats  ? 

How  and  by  what  symptoms  should  it  be  known  to  be  curable 
with  ease,  or  curable  with  difficulty,  or  incurable  ? 

What,  again,  O  illustrious  one,  is  the  remedy  (for  this  disease)  ?  8 


*  ‘Vahadbhirmadhuran  gandhan’  implies  breezes  bearing  fragrant  odours. 
‘Viharantam’  means  engaged  in  delightful  occupations.— T. 
t  Anupkrantam’  may  mean  ‘without  time  being  obtained  for  treatment.1 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


*59* 

Having  heard  these  words  of  Agniveca,  that  foremost  of  ascetics,. 
viz,,  Punarvasu  of  Atri’s  race,  duly  answered  them  all,  ? 

Since  it  spreads  over  diverse  limbs  of  the  body,  it  is  for  that 
reason  called  ‘Visharpa.’ 

Or,  it  is  known  by  the  name  of  ‘Parisarpa’  in  consequence  of  the 
fact  of  of  Its  spreading  all  over  the  body.*  10 

It  should  be  known  as  of  seven  varieties,  agreeably  to  the  fault  or 
faults  that  are  excited. 

It  should  also  be  known  as  arising  from  the  vitiation  of  the  seven 
‘dhatus’  (ingredients  of  the  body). 

Verily,  ‘Visharpa’  is  born  of  each  of  the  three  faults  individually, 
of  all  the  three  faults  together,  as  also  of  combinations  of  two  of 
the  faults  at  a  time.  ** 

Thus  it  is  i.  wind-born,  or  2.  bile-bom,  or  3.  phlegm-born,  or 
4.  born  of  all  the  three  faults  excited  together. 

These  are  the  four  varieties  of  the  disease. 

The  three  ethers  that  are  born  of  combinations  of  two  of  the 
faults  are  laid  down  below.  12 

That  born  of  wind’ and  bile  is  called  ‘Agneya’  (fiery) ;  that  born 
of  phlegm  and  wind  is  called  ‘-Granthi’ ;  that  born  of  bile  and  phlegm 
is  called  ‘Karddama’ ;  .the  last  is  dreadful,  rj 

Blood,  ‘Lasika’,  skin,  and  flesh,  that  are  susceptible  to  .vitiation,, 
and  the  three  faults  (viz,,  wind1,  bile,  and  phlegm),  'which  are  impu¬ 
rities — these  are  the  seven  ‘dhatus’,  which,  when  vitiated,  should  be 
known  to'  be  the  causes  from  which  the  several  varieties  of  Visharpa 
(Erysipelos)  arise.f  J4 


*  ‘Visarpa’  is  from  affix  ‘vi’  and  the  root  ‘srip.’  The  affix  means  diverse  or  many,  andi 
the  ro»t  means  to  move  or  spread. 

‘Parisarpa’  is  from  the  affix  ‘Pari’Jmeaning  around  or  all  around,  and  the  same  root,  i.  e. 
‘srip.’  There  is  no  etymological  distinction  between  the  two  words.  The  English  equivalent) 
for  ‘visarpa’  is.  ‘Erysipelos,’  which  is  derived  from  two  Greek  words  meaning  ‘red’  and  ‘skin’, 
in  consequence  of  the  disease  being  marked  by  a  redness  of  the  skin.—  T. 

f  The  grammar  of  the  first  line  is  difficult  to  understand.  All  the  editions  have  the: 
same  reading.— T. 


[586 


CHARA  KA-SA  MHITA. 


In  consequence  of  excessive  indulgence  iii  articles  that  are  saline 
or  sour,  or  pungent,  or  warm, or  in  £uktSs  ’  (acid  preparations)  made 
with  sour  curds  and  the  cream  of  curds,  or  in  wines  called 
‘Sura,’  or  ‘Sauviraka,’  *5 

or  in  consequence  of  indulgence  in  copious  measures  of  vitiated 
wines,  or  warm  ‘Ragas’,  or  ‘Shadavas,’ 
or  in  consequence  of  indulgence  in  pot-herbs,  green  vegetables, 
or  articles  that  cause  a  burning  sensation,  16 
or,  in  consequence  of  indulgence  in  ‘Kurchikas’  (inspissated  milk), 
and  ‘Kilatas’  (inspissated  whey)  and  ‘Mastuka’,  (cream  of  curds), 
or,  in  consequence  of  eating  Alu  (2.  e.,  Pindfilu  or  Dioscorea  globosa ) 
after  having  drunk  ‘Sandaki’  of  curds  {i.  e.,  a  preparation  of 
curds  with  sugar  and  spices),  r7 

or,  in  consequence  of  eating  cakes  made  of  the  paste  either  of 
the  sesame  seeds,  or  of  those  of  Masha  (Phaseolus  radiatus )  or 
those  of  Kulattha  (. Dolichos  biflorus),  fried  in  oil, 
or,  in  consequence  of  indulgence  in  meat  of  domestic  animals  or 
of  those  that  live  in  watery  regions  or  those  that  are  aquatic, 
or  in  Laguna  (garlics),  18 

or,  in  consequence  of  indulgence  in  rotten  articles,  or  in  those  that 
are  inharmonious  and  pernicious, 
or  in  consequence  of  indulgence  in  excessive  eating,  or  in  sleep  at 
day-time, 

or,  in  consequence  of  eating  undigestible  food,  or  of  eating  before 
the  food  last  taken  has  been  digested,  19 

or,  in  consequence  of  wounds,  or  of  strokes  or  of  the  tight-binding 
(of  particular  parts  of  the  body)  or  of  fall  from  high  places, 
or,  in  consequence  of  excessive  exposure  to  the  heat  of  the  sun, 
or,  in  consequence  of  contact  with  poisons  or  exposure  to  wind 
and  fire, 

the  disease  called  Visharpa  (Erysipelos)  arises.*  20 


t  Differences  of  reading  are  observable  in  sc 
the  text  of  Gang5dhara  has  been  followed _ T. 


of  the  verses.  In  the  above  version,  the 


CHA  RAKA -SAMHITA. 


1587 


The  wind  and  the  rest,  provoked  by  these  causes  separately  or  in 
combination,  and  vitiating  blood  and  the  other  ‘dhatus’  which  are 
‘dushyas’  (so  called  in  consequence  of  their  capacity  to  be  vitiated), 
spread  over  the  bodies  of  those  who  indulge  in  baneful  food  and 
drink.  21 

There  are  three  varieties  of  Erysipelos  :  one  spreads  outwardly  ; 
another,  inwardly  ;  and  a  third  variety,  both  outwardly  and  inwardly. 

The  strength  of  each  succeeding  variety  is  greater  than  that  of 
the  preceding  one.  22  -- 

[Thus  that  which  is  inward  is  stronger  than  that  which  is  out¬ 
ward  ;  and  that  which  is  both  outward  and  inward  is  stronger  than 
that  which  is  inward.'] 

That  variety  of  Erysipelos  which  spreads  outwardly  is  curable  ; 
that  which  spreads  inwardly  is  cured  with  difficulty ;  that  variety 
which  spreads  both  inwardly  and  outwardly  should  be  known  to  be 
dreadful  and  incurable.  23 

When  the  faults  are  provoked  inwards,  they  cause  Erysipelos 
affecting  the  body  inwardly. 

When  the  faults  are  provoked  outwards,  they  cause  Erysipelos 
affecting  the  body  outwardly. 

When  the  faults  are  provoked  both  inwardly  and  outwardly,  they 
cause  Erysipelos  affecting  the  body  both  inwardly  and  outwardly.  *4 

In  consequence  of  wounds  (shocks)  on  the  vital  parts  of  the  body 
(such  as  the  chest,  &c.), 

or,  of  the  obstruction  of  the  outlets  (through  which  stools, 
urine  &c.,  pass  out)  or  of  shocks  received  by  them, 

or,  of  excessive  thirst,  or  the  manifestation  of  irregular  urgings 
(in  respect  of  stools,  and  urine),  25 

or,  of  the  sudden  loss  of  (or  weakening)  of  the  digestive  fire, 

the  Erysipelos  that  sets  in  should  be  known  of  the  inward  variety. 

In  the  absence  of  these,  the  Erysipelos  that  sets  in  should  be 
known  to  be  of  the  outward  variety. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1588 

The  other  (i  e.,  the  third)  variety  of  the  disease  should  be  known, 
by  its  own  symptoms.*  26 

That  variety  in  which  all  the  symptoms  manifest  themselves 
(*'.  e.,  in  which  the  symptoms  of  both  the  first  and  second  varieties 
appear),  and  which  arises  from  puissant  causes,  in  which  painful 
ailments  supervene,  and  which  affects  the  vital  parts  of  the  body, 
brings  about  the  dissolution  of  the  patient.  27 

[The  ‘NidSna’  of  wind-born  Erysipelos  is  now  laid  down.] 

The  vitiated  wind,  provoked  by  stuffing  the  stomach  with  dry  and 
heating  food,  as  also  by  the  presence  of  those  causes  which  have  the 
effect  of  provoking  it,  acquires  force.  It  then  vitiates  the  blood  and 
the  rest,  and  originates  Erysipelos.  Such  Erysipelos  is  regarded  to 
be  of  the  wind-born  variety.  Its  intensity  depends  upon  the  measure 
of  the  provocation  of  the  wind.  28 

[The  following  are  the  symptoms  of  Erysipelos.] 

Swoons,  distress,  thirst,  pain  like  that  -caused  by  pricking  the 
body  with  needles,  ‘^ula’  pains,  langour  of  the  body,  pain  like  that: 
caused  by  striking  the  body  with  heavy  sticks  or  clubs,  tremors,, 
fever,  that  variety  of  asthma  which  is  called  ‘Tamaka’,  cough,  sensa¬ 
tion  of  the  breaking  or  dislocation  of  the  bone-joints,  discolouration 
of  the  body,  vomiting,  disgust  for  food,  turbidness  of  the  eyes  with, 
the  appearance  of  tears  :  29 

A  sensation  -of  ants  creeping  over  the  body,  the  appearance  of 
a  dark  or  red  colour  on  those  districts  of  the  body  on  which  Erysi¬ 
pelos  sets  in,  a  swelling  of  those  districts,  severe  pains  like  those- 
caused  by  prickingrwith  needles,  or  those  like  ‘£ula’,  or  those  that 
arise  from  a  breaking  of  the  bones  on  those  districts,  as  well  as  disten¬ 
tion  or  contraction  of  the  places  affected,  'horripilation,  and  throb¬ 
bing.  The  patient  suffers  much.  30 

If  left  untreated,  the  disease  becomes  aggravated,  with  the  speedy- 
manifestation  of  thinly  spread  pimples  which  are  coloured  red  or 


*  Gangadhara  observes  that  as  regards  the  third  variety,  it  cannot  be  known  by  a  com¬ 
bination  of  both  the  indications  mentioned,  for  the  presence  and  absence  of  those  indications, 
cannat  be  .possible  at  the  same  time.  Hence,  'the  third  variety  should -be  known  -by  its  own. 
symptoms  which  are  laid  down  in  the  following  verses.— T. 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1589 


dark  and  from  which  (watery),  irregular,  copious,  or  scanty  discharge 
(of  foetid  matter),  issues.  Constipation  of  the  (downward)  wind,  urine 
and  stools  also  sets  in.  31 

The  disease  is  not  alleviated  by  (indulgence  in)  those  articles  (of 
food  and  drink)  and  practices  which  have  been  laid  down  in  the 
(enumeration  of  the)  causes  from  which  it  springs.* 

It  is  rather  alleviated  by  indulgence  in  articles  and  practices  that 
are  the  reverse  of  those  laid  down  there. 

Even  these  are  the  indications  of  wind-bonrn  Erysipelos.  32 

(The  causes  and  symptoms  of  bile-born  Erisypelos  are  laid  down 
below.] 

Accumulated  by  (indulgence  in)  practices  that  are  heating,  as  also 
by  articles  of  food  and  drink  that  are  sour  and  that  cause  a  burning 
sensation  (in  the  stomach  or  the  chest),  the  bile  vitiates  the  blood  and 
the  rest,  and  filling  all  the  ducts,  causes  Erysipelos.  33 

[Blood  and  the  rest,  are  called,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  ‘dushya,’ 
i,  e.,  ingredients  that  are  capable  of  being  vitiated.  Those  which 
vitiate  are  called  ‘doshas’  or  vitiations  or  faults.] 

The  symptoms  are  fever,  thirst,  swoons,  delusions,  vomiting,  dis¬ 
gust  Tor  food,  a  sensation  of  the  body  being  broken,  perspiration, 
intense  internal  burning,  delirium,  headache,  turbidness  of  the  eyes, 
insomnia,  fretfulness,  vertigo,  an  excessive  desire  for  cool  breezes 
and  cold  water,  green  eyes,  urine,  and  stools,  and  green  or  yellow 
vision.  34 

That  district,  in  which  Erysipelos  appears,  becomes  coppery,  or 
or  green,  or  yellow,  or  blue,  or  dark,  or  red,  in  hue,  and  continues 
to  swellf 

The  place  in  which  Erysipelos  appears  becomes  elevated. 

A  sensation  of  excessive  burning  and  of  pain  likeunto  what  is 
caused  by  cutting  wounds  also  appears. 


*  ‘NidanoktSni,’  i.  c.,  ‘stated  in  the  Nidana’  of  this  disease,  that  is,  in  verses  15—20, 
and  in  verse  28,  ante,  of  this  Lesson, — T. 

t  Gangadhara  reads  ‘pushyati,’  in  the  sense  of  grows  or  continues  to  swell,  The  Calcutta 
and  the  Bombay  editions  read  ‘pasyati’  which  is  evidently  incorrect.— T. 


CHARA  KASAMHITA. 


1590 

It  is,  again,  filled  with  boils  which  suppurates  soon  and  front 
which  discharges  take  place  of  colour  likeunto.  that  of  the  bile.  35  . 

Indulgence  in  the  articles  (of  food  and  drink)  and  practices  which 
have  been  laid  down  in  the  enumeration  of  the  Nidana  (or.  causes) 
of  the  disease,  aggravates  it ;  indulgence  in  atticles  and  practices 
that  are  the  reverse  of  the  same,  alleviates  it.* 

Even  these  are  the  indications  of  bile-born  Erysipelos.  36  .  . 

[The  causes  and  the  symptoms  of  phlegm-born  Erysipelos  are 
laid  down.]  - 

Accumulated  by  indulgence  in  food  (and  drink)  that  are  sweet,  or 
sour,  or  saline,  or  oily,  or  heavy,  as  also  by  excessive  sleep  (at  day¬ 
time),  the  phlegm,  vitiating  blood  and  the  rest,  causes  Erysipelos  to 
spread  over  the  whole  body.  37 

The  following  are  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  : 

Chillness,  fever  characterised  by  a  sensation  of  cold,  heaviness  of 
the  body,  sleep,  drowsiness,  disgust  for  food,  the  presece  of  a  sweet 
taste  in  the  mouth,  a  sensation  of  stickiness  in  the  mouth,  indigestion, 
constant  expectoration  ;  vomiting  ;  incapacity  for  exertion  ;  a  sensa¬ 
tion,  of  the  whole  being  covered  with  a  wet  blanket ;  weakness  of  the 
digestive  fire,  and  loss  of  strength.  38 

In  that  district  of  the  body  in  which  Erysipelos  appears,  the 
symptoms  that  present  themselves  are  swelling,  paleness  or  reddish¬ 
ness  of  hue,  oiliness  of  aspect,  loss  of  sensation,  stupefaction,  heavi¬ 
ness,  the  presence  of  slight  pain,  delay  in  the  suppuration  of  the 
pimples  or  boils,  thickness  of  the  skin  or  coating  covering  the  boils, 
and  whiteness  or  paleness  of  the  colour  that  characterises  them  ;  39 

When  the  boils  burst,  the  discharge  that  take  place  is  of  a 
white  colour,  slimy,  fibrous  or  full  of  threads,  or  sometimes  solidified, 
oily,  and  of  foetid  odour.  The  upper  surface  of  the  boils  is  studded 
with  small  pimples  that  are  heavy  (in  the  sense  of  solid);  of  oily 
aspect,  and  of  thick  coating  ;  as  if  overspread  like  meshes, 


*  As  regards  the  general  causes,  they  have  been  laid  dow  in  verses  15 — 20,  ante,  in  this 
Lesson.  The  special  causes  occur  in  verse  33,  ante. — T. 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland  U.  S.  A.: — You  hare  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves, the  approbation  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmecte  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco,  California: —  ...  . . As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent.  ...  . 

there  is  much  in  it  both  of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A.  : — You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Ohio,  U.  S.  A.  : — The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  wich  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge : — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat-. 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  New  York  : — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  American  fournal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia  : — Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance.  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia  : — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on,  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  oj  Cashmere : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-  Western 
University,  Sea etary  to  the  Congress  of  the  Woo/d’ s  Columbian  Exposition-. — I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation. '  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A. : — Be  > 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  ajd  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  ig.  East 38th  Street,  New  York : — Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselliofber  Traise,  Dramstadt : — The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what  - 
takes  much  time  comes  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist: — I  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  aud 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  it.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere,  174,  Bonlevatse ,  Saint  German  : — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq.,  Neva  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia : — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  of 
Charaka  I  always  arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians  of  the  pre¬ 
sent  day  would  drop  from  the  Fharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and 
treat  their  patients  according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the 
undertakers,  and  fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to 
the  completion  of  the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street ,  Calcutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaya. — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  X  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  sometime  after. — • 

An  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you.for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession. 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia : — -I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing : — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E Magistrate  and  Collector  \ — Your  patriotic 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  H.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  I  have  read  Charaka-Sambita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Ilyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Gya  : — It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my  name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  Wales  : — The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India. 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  : — Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is 
a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji, — The  work  is  nol  only  of  value  to 
the  physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as 
well.  Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support,  I  wish  you  all  success. 


Subscribed  by  the  Government  of  Indio 


OPINION  OF  EMINENT  MEN. 

( Extracts  from  their  Letters .) 

Professor  Max  Muller  : — I  have  no  doubt  you  ought  to  publish  an  English  transla 
tion  of  Charaka.  The  book  is  of  great  importance.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  help  you 

in  any  way  you  may  wish. — Writing  again  in  November  1893,  he  says, — • . I  am 

surprised  that  your  excellent  and  most  useful  translation  has  not  attracted  more  attention 
...  ...  ...  Our  Regius  Professor  of  Medicine,  Sir  Henry  Edward,  was  much  interested 

Sir  Monier  Williams,  K.  C.  I.  E.  I  have  received  your  kind  gift  of  the  successive 
parts  of  the  Gharaka  and  Susruta  Samhita.  I  regard  them  as  a  valuable  addition  to  my 
library.  No  doubt,  an  English  translation  would  be  very  interesting. 

Dr.  Reinhdld  Rost,  C.  I.  E.  late  Librarian  to  the  India  Office—  .  Your 

excellent  translation  . ...  a  most  valuable  and  praiseworthy  work  which  will  not  fail 

to  make  ancient  Hindu  medicine  better  understood  and  appreciated  in  the  West . . 

I  shall  draw  the  attention  of  Oriental  scholars  to  your  difficult  and  meritorious  work 

. Many  important  additions  to  your  Sanskrit  dictionaries  will  be  gleaned  from 

your  translation. 

Austin  Flint,  Esq.,  New  YorL,  U.  S  A.  : — I  have  read  with  much  pleasure  the  first 
fasciculus  of  your  translation  of  Charaka  Samhita  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  receive  the 
rest  of  the  work,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  profession,  which  will 
be  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

A.  H.  Edgren,  Esq.,  Gothenburgh ,  Sweden:—!  am  deeply  interested  in  anything 
Indian,  and  I  need  not  say 'that  I  shall- Consider  it  as  a  gain  to  obtain  whatever  insight 
I  may  into  the  subject  treated  of  in  your  valuable  translation. 

Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson.,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.  S.  A. — I 
must  congratulate  you,  with  true  appreciation  of  your  efforts.  I  should  very  much  like 
to  make  a  little  note,  in  one  of  our  papers,  of  the  praiseworthy  work  you  are  doing.  Be  • 
assured,  Sir,  of  my  hearty  thanks  and  appreciation  and  of  my  deep  interest  in  India  and 
antique  lore. 

Mons.  A.  Barth.,  Paris  : — Your  efforts  to  place  within  reach  of  the  readers  of  ancient 
literature  a  work  of  so  interesting  a  nature  both  of  the  Oriental  scholars  and  to  the  men 
of  medicine,  are  very  praiseworthy,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  bring  the  work  to  the  notice 
of  the  French  public,  or,  at  least,  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  these  researches. 

Mons.  B.  St.  Hailaire,  Paris  .— I  praise  you  on  your  undertaking  and  wish  you 
all  success.  The  work  is  of  interest  to  all  learned  men  and  to  medical  men,  and  the 
commentaries  written  on  it  prove  its  value  and  utility.  I  will  put  in  a  notice  in  the 
fournal  des  Savants  as  soon  as  I  can  and  shall  be  happy  to  do  you  justice. 

Professor  H.  Jacobi,  Bonn  University,  Germany  : — The  work  you  have  undertaken 
will  interest  Sanskritists  as  well  as  medical  men  who  care  for  the  history  of  their  science. 

I  shall  not  fail  to  draw  the  attention  of  some  eminent  physicians  whom  I  know  personally, 
to  the  ancient  work  of  Charaka. 

Herr.  R.  Garbe,  Prinzenstram  Konigsbureh,  Germany  : — English  trans!  lion  of 
Gharaka  Samhita  is,  perhaps,  at  least  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  the  most  ir,f*ortant 
work  of  the  medical  literature  of  your  country. 

Sir  Alfred  Croft,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bengal: — I  have 
been  greatly  entertained  as  well  as  edified  by  the  examination,  in  part  IV,  of  all  the  things 
which  a  man-shall  not  'do.  A  layman  can  understand  the  precepts  and  such  a  guide  to  life, 
cannot  be  other  than  Valuable. 


WESSON  XXI.] 


CHARAKA-SAMHI7  A. 


*59* 


The  symptoms  that  supervene  are  whiteness  of  the  nails,  eyes, 
face,  skin,  urine,  and  stools.  4° 

Indulgence  in  food  (and  drink)  and  practices  laid  down  in  the 
enumeration  of  the  causes  from  which  the  disease  springs  aggra¬ 
vates  it. 

Indulgence  in  food  and  practices  that  are  the  reverse  of  those 
mentioned,  alleviates  the  disease. 

Even  these  are  the  indications  of  phlegm-born  Erysipelas.  4* 

[The  causes  and  the  symptoms  of  Erysipelas  born  of  wind  and 
bile  are  now  laid  down.] 

Exceedingly  provoked  by  their  respective  causes,  the  wind  and 
the  bile,  gaining  strength  from  each  other,  causing  burning  speedily 
beget  Erysipelas  on  the  body.  42 

The  following  are  the  symptoms  : 

From  the  violence  of  the  burning  which  the  patient  feels,  he  thinks 
that  his  whole  body  is  covered  with  burning  coal. 

He  is,  again,  excessively  afflicted  with  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  swoons, 
burning  of  the  skin,  partial  loss  of  consciousness,  fever,  that  variety 
of  asthma  which  is  called  ‘Tamaka,’  a  sensation  of  fracture  of  all  the 
bone-joints,  thirst,  disgust  for  food,  indigestion,  or  a  sensation  of 
wounds  inflicted  with  heavy  clubs.  43 

Those  districts  of  the  body  which  are  afflicted  by  the  disease, 
present  the  colour  of  a  dead  coal  (z.  <?.,  a  blackness  like  that  of  coal), 
or  excessive  redness  ; 

It  is  also  covered  with  boils  that  present  a  charred  aspect.  44 

In  consequence  of  the  quickness  with  which  it  spreads,  it  affects 
the  vitals  speedily. 

When  the  vitals  are  afflicted,  the  wind,  becoming  exceedingly 
strong,  breaks  down  the  limbs  (z.  e.,  produces  the  sensation  of  the 
limbs  being  broken) 

Thus  provoked,  the  wind  overwhelms  (stupefies)  the  consciousness, 
.  It  causes  also  hiccup  and  asthmatic  breathing, 
sj  It  destroys  sleep.  45 

*°  Without  sleep  and  with  consciousness  almost  stupefied  his  mind 
becomes  pained.  He  does  not  feel  ease  or  comfort  anywhere  or  at 
any  time. 


201 


5  592 


'CHJKITSA  S  THA  NA . 


fVISARFA, 


No  place  or  seat  satisfies  him. 

He  tosses  on  his  bed,  constantly  wishing  to  change  his  situation.* 

When  his  agony  becomes  excessive,  he  speedily  falls  asleep,  and 
'his  slumber  becomes  so  deep  that  he  can  with  difficulty  be  awakened 
from  it.  One  afflicted  with  such  Erysipelas,  which  is  called  fiery 
Erysipelas,  should  be  regarded  as  out  of  treatment.  46 

Provoked  exceedingly  by  their  respective  causes,  phlegm  and  bile, 
cause  Erysipelas  to  spread  locally. 

They  cause  the  affected  district  to  be  drenched  with  foul  matter.  47 

The  symptoms  of  the  disease  are  as  follow  : 

Fever  characterised  by  a  sensation  of  cold,  head-ache,  burning 
of  the  skin,  a  sensation  of  the  body  being  wrapped  round  with  a  wet 
blanket,  langour  of  the  limbs,  sleep  (at  day  time),  drowsiness,  stupe¬ 
faction  of  the  mind,  disgust  for  food,  delirium,  loss  (or  weakness) 
of  the  digestive  fire,  loss  of  strength,  a  sensation  of  the  breaking  of 
the  bone-joints,  swoons,  thirst,  a  sensation  of  obstruction  of  the 
ducts  (such  as  of  the  throat,  the  anal  canal,  &c.),  dulness  of  the 
senses,  the  evacuation  of  undigested  stools,  tossing  of  the  limbs, 
fretfulness  or  dissatisfaction  with  everything,  and  mental  anxiety. 

This  variety  of  Erysipelas  generally  arises  in  the  ‘amagaya’  (that 
is,  that  part  of  the  stomach  where  the  food  eaten  goes  first). 

Another  characteristic  is  that  it  becomes  local  (that  is,  affects  a 
single  part  of  the  body).  48 

In  that  district  of  the  body  where  this  variety  of  Erysipelas 
sets  in,  pimples  appear  that  are  red  or  yellow  or  pale,  or  of  the 
complexion  of  ‘mechaka’  (z.  e.,  smoke,  hence,  dry  and  dark),  filthy, 
oily,  of  great  heat,  heavy  (in  the  sense  of  solid),  slightly  painful,  and 
■swollen. 

These  take  time  in  suppurating  ;  have  no  discharges  ;  and  they 
soon  become  foetid.  49 


*  The  construction  is,  ‘na  sukham  Iabhate  arati-paritah,  sthanSt  asanaccha,’  *.  e.,  filled 
with  a  restless  spirit,  he  does  not  get  comfort  from  any  place  or  spot.  ‘Paritah,’  spelt  with 
the  long  »,  means  ‘endued,’  ‘paritah,’  with  the  short  i,  meaning  ‘on  every  side,  is  a 
■mis-reading. — T. 


LESSON  XXI.] 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


-*593 


They  become  moist  and  foetid  ;  the  flesh  becomes  putrid  ;•  the 
pain  gradually  lessens. 

This  disease  destroys  memory  and  consciousness. 

The  surface  of  the  soles  becomes  cracked. 

The  affected  part  sinks  inwards  like  soft  clay,  if  pressure  be  put. 
upon  it 

Putrid  flesh  comes  off  from  it 

In  consequence  of  the  falling  off  of  the  flesh,  the  arteries  and 
tendons  become  visible. 

It  emits,  again,  the  smell  of  a  corpse. 

One  presenting  such  symptoms  should  be  regarded  as  afflicted 
with  that  variety  of  Erysipelas  which  is  known  by  the  name  of 
‘Karddama-Visarpa.’ 

It  does  not  admit  of  treatment.  5® 

Of  persons  who  indulge  in  articles  of  food  and  drink  that  are 
solid,  heavy,  hard,  sweet,  cold,  oily,  and  constipative, 
or,  of  persons  who  abstain  from  physical  exercise, 
or,  of  those  who  do  not  take  the  required  remedies, 
the  phlegm  and  the  wind  become  provoked.  51  . 

Both  of  them,  becoming  vitiated,  aggravated,  and  possessed  of 
great  strength,  vitiate  the  blood  and  the  rest,  and  engender 
Erysipelas.  52 

Amongst  them,  the  wind,  its  course  obstructed,  divides  the  phlegm 
into  many  portions  and  thus  causes,  in  the  region  of  phlegm,  a  series 
of  knots  which  take  time  to  ripen.*  S3 

Or,  of  one  whose  blood  has  increased,  the  wind  vitiates  the  blood, 
and  engenders  a  series  of  knots  in  the  arteries,  tendons,  flesh,  and 
skin. 

These  knots  are  characterised  by  excruciating  pain,  and  are  either 
large  or  small,  and  long  or  globular  ;  they  are  of  a  red  colour.  54 


*  Gangadhara  omits  ‘vivaddhamargah’  after  vayuh. 

‘Kaphajaya’  is  the  seat  of  phlegm,  i,  e.,  the  region  above  the  navel  and  below  tbs- 
chest. — T. 


JS94 


CM  I  KITS  A  ST H ANA. 


[vis  A  R  Pa. 


From  the  inflammation  of  those  knots,  the  following  supervening 
ailments  manifest  themselves,  viz.,  fever,  diarrhoea,  hiccup,  asthma,, 
cough,  waste  (consumption),  loss  of  consciousness,  loss  of  complexion, 
disgust  for  food,  indigestion,  expectorations  from  the  mouth  of  sali¬ 
vary  and  other  secretions,  vomiting,  swoons,  a  sensation  of  the  limbs 
being  broken,  sleep  (during  daytime),  fretfulness,  and  langour. 

Overwhelmed  by  these  supervening  symptoms,  this  variety  of 
Erysipelas,  called  ‘Granthi-Visarpa.’  transcends  the  pale  of  treatment 
and  is,  therefore,  to  be  avoided  by  the  physician  *  55 

Supervening  ailments  are  ailments  that  manifest  themselves,  after 
the  manifestation  of  the  principal  disease,  and  have  the  principal 
disease  for  their  basis. 

They  may  be  violent  or  mild. 

Because  they  are  born  after  the  principal  disease  has  manifested 
itself,  they  are  called  ‘upadravas.’f  56 

That  which  manifests  itself  the  first  is  regarded  as  the  main 
disease. 

The  supervening  ailments  are  the  attributes  (or  accompaniments) 
of  the  main  disease. 

Generally,  the  main  disease  being  alleviated,  the  supervening  ones 
become  alleviated.  57 

[GangSdhara  notes  that  the  use  of  the  word  ‘generally’  implies 
that  in  rare  cases  the  supervening  ailments,  or  one  or  two  of  them, 
may  be  seen  to  continue  after  the  cure  of  the  main  disease, — a  fact 
that  accords  with  the  experience  of  evep  physician.] 

The  supervening  ailment,  which  arises  after  the  manifestation  of 
the  main  disease,  is  more  painful  in  consequence  of  its  appearance  in 
the  body  that  has  already  been  afflicted  (by  the  main  disease). 


*  ‘Sarvakarmanam?  has  reference  to  treatment.  What  is-  said  here  is  that  this  variety 
of  Erysipelas  does  not  admit  of  any  kind  of  treatment.  It  should  be  avoided  by  the  physi¬ 
cian  because  it  always  proves  fatal.— T, 

•j"  ‘Upadrava’  is  derived  from  the  affix  ‘upa,’  meaning  ‘upon’  or  ‘after,’  and  the  root 
‘dru’  to  run  or  appear.  Hence,  etymologically,  the  word  means  anything  that  runs  or 
appears  after  another.  The  accompanying  ailments  are  called  ‘upadravs’  because  they 
manifest  themselves  after  the  manifestation  of  the  principal  disease  and  are  only  their 
outgrowth,— T. 


LESSON  XXL] 


CHARAKA-SAMH1 TA 


1595 


Hence,  the  supervening  ailment  should  be  quickly  pursued  (for 
subjugation).  58 

[The  causes  and  symptoms  of  Erysipelas  born  of  the  excitements 
of  all  the  three  faults  are  now  being  laid  down.] 

That  variety  of  Erysipelas  which  arises  from  all  those  causes 
(which  have  been  explained  before  with  reference  to  the  origin  of  the 
wind-born,  and  the  bile-born,  the  phlegm-born  varieties), 

which  presents  all  the  symptoms  {viz.,  those  of  each  of  the 
previous  varieties), 
which  pervades  the  whole  body, 

which  affects  all  the  ‘dhatus’  (ingredients)  of  the  body  (and  not 
blood  alone,  or  blood  with  one  or  two  other  ‘dhatus’), 
whose  progress  is  very  quick,  and  which  soon  brings  about 
dissolution, 

should  be  known  as  Erysipelas  born  of  all  the  three  faults. 

Verily,  when  these  indications  present  themselves,  the  disease 
should  be  regarded  as  incurable,  and  its  treatment  should  not  be 
taken  up.  59 

Amongst  the  varieties  of  the  disease,  the  three  that  arise  front 
the  wind,  the  bile,  and  the  phlegm  separately,  are.  curable. 

The  two  varieties,  called  ‘Agni’  and  Karddama’,  if  treated  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  general  methods  (laid  down),  admit  of  alleviation,  provided 
no  supervening  ailments  appear,  provided  the  vital  region  is  un¬ 
affected,  and  provided  also  the  arteries,  tendons,  and  the  flesh  do  not 
putrefy  and  fall  off.*  6° 

If  not  carefully  treated,  either  of  these  varieties  consumes  the 
body  quickly  like  the  poison  of  a  snake  of  violent  venom.  61 

[Gangadhara  has  ‘dahet,’  other  editions  have  ‘hanyat.’  The  sense 
is  the  same  of  course,  what  is  implied  is  dissolution.] 

As  regards  that  variety  of  Erysipelas  which  is  called  ‘Grantin’, 
if  it  has  no  supervening  ailments,  its  treatment  may  be  taken  up. 

If,  however,  supervening  ailments  manifest  themselves,  the  physi¬ 
cian  should  then  avoid  it.  62 

*  ‘Sira . kude’  implies  that  the  ‘sira  and  the  rest  only  become  affected  without 

becoming  putrefied  and  without  falling  off  in  sloughs. — T. 


CHIKITSASTHANA. 


[VISARPA, 


1596 

As  regards  that  variety  of  Erysipelas  which  is  born  of  all  the 
faults  excited  together,  it  should  be  known  to  be  incurable,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  its  affecting  all  the  ‘dhatus’  (or  ingredients  of  the  body), 
of  its  quick  progress,  and  of  incompatability  of  treatment.* 

We  shall  now  lay  down  the  method  of  treatment  of  those  varieties 
of  the  disease  which  are  curable  (or  admit  of  treatment).  63 

In  Erysipelas  which  has  its  seat  in  that  of  the  phlegm,  {viz.,  the 
‘amSgaya’)  and  which  is  accompanied  by  mucus  (in  the  stomach)  the 
observance  of  fasts  and  the  administration  of  emetics  are  beneficial 
as  also  the  use  of  bitters  as  diet. 

Plasters  of  drugs  that  are  dry  and  cold  are  also  prescribable.  64 
[Drugs  that  are  dry  and  cold  are  such  as  the  bark  of  the 
banian,  &c.] 

If  the  disease  affects  the  seat  of  the  bile  and  is  accompanied  by 
mucus  (in  the  stomach),  the  same  treatment  (as  that  laid  down  for  the 
variety  noticed  above)  should  be  adopted. 

The  letting  out  of  blood,  and  the  administration  of  purgatives  are 
especial  methods  that  are  prescribable.  65 

[The  general  method  of  treatment  is  like  that  laid  down  in 
verse  64.  Blood-letting  and  purgatives  are  especial  methods  that 
should  be  adopted  in  particular  cases.] 

If  the  disease  is' engendered  in  the  seat  of  the  wind  {viz.,  the 
‘pakkacaya’,  i.  e.,  that  part  of  the  stomach  where  the  food  taken  is 
digested),  and  if  it  is  accompanied  by  mucus;  as  also  by  (vitiated) 
blood  and  (vitiated)  bile,  the  administration  of  both  drugs  and  diet 
that  are  dry  is  prescribable  ;  since  in  the  presence  of  ‘Sma’  (mucus) 
in  the  stomach,  the  administration  of  drugs  and  diet  that  are  oily 
cannot  be  regarded  as  beneficial.  66 

In  that  variety  of  the  disease  in  which  the  wind  is  predominant 
and  the  bile  is  slightly  excited,  the  bitter  ghee  (laid  down  in  the 
Lesson  on  Leucoderma,  ante),  is  regarded  as  beneficial.  . 


•  ‘Incompatability  of  treatment’  implies  that  if  one  of  the  faults  be  sought  to  he  checked, 
another  becomes  aggravated.  No  remedy  exists  which  can  alleviate  one  of  the  faults  or 
some  of  the  symptoms  without  aggravating  the  others.— T. 


LESSON  XXI.] 


CHARA  KA  -  SA  M HIT A 


1597 


In  that  variety  in  which  the  bile  is  excited  predominantly,  the 
administration  of  purgatives  is  prescribable.  67 

Unto  one  in  whom  the  excited  faults  has  become  exceedingly 
aggravated,  ghee  should  not  be  administered.  Such  a  person  should 
be  treated  with  purgatives. 

Ghee,  administered  to  such  a  person,  stupefies  (obstructs)  the 
accumulated  fault,  which  (in  its  turn)  consumes  the  skin,  the  flesh, 
and  the  blood.*  68 

Hence,  the  administration  of  purgatives  at  the  outset  (to  one  so 
circumstanced)  is  beneficial. 

Purgatives,  therefore,  should  be  administered  (in  such  a  case). 
Blood-letting  also  is  prescribable,  since  the  disease  is  based  upon 
the  vitiation  of  blood.  69 

Thus  has  been  explained,  in  brief,  the  treatment  of  some  of  the 
varieties  of  Erysipelas. 

We  shall  now  expound  all  these  methods  of  treatment  in  detail 
(or,  at  full  length).  7° 

Madana  (the  fruits  of  Randia  dumetoruni),  Madhuka  (liquorice), 
Nimba  {Melia  Azadirachtd),  and  the  fruits  of  Vatsaka  {Holarrhena 
antidysen  te  rica ) . 

These  constitute  an  emetic  which  should  be  administered  in 
Erysipelas  born  of  phlegm  and  bile.  7* 

The  decoction  of  Patola  (the  leaves  of  Ttichosanthes  dioica),  and 
Pichumarda  (otherwise  called  Nimba,  i.  e.,  Melia  Azadirachtd),  with 
the  pulv  of  Madana  (the  fruits  of  Randia  dumetoruni), 

the  decoction  of  Pippali  (fruits  Piper  longum),  with  the  pulv  of 
Madana  (fruits  of  Randia  dumetorum),  and 

the  decoction  of  Indrayava  (the  seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysen~ 
tericci),  with  the  pulv  of  Madana  (the  fruits  of  Randia  dumetoruni), 
form  excellent  emetics  for  administration  in  this  disease.f  72 


*  ‘Vahudoshaya’  does  not  mean  ‘unto  one  in  whom  many  faults  have  accumulated,’  but 
‘one  in  whom  a  particular  fault  has  grearly  accumulated.’ — T. 

•f  The  interpretation  of  Gangadhara  is  reproduced.  He  understands  that  ‘Madana’ 
inters  into  the  composition  of  each  of  the  purgatives.  None  of  the  decoctions  mentioned 
has  any  emetic  virtue.  Hence,  ‘Madana,’  which  is  an  excellent  emetic,  must  be  mixed  with 
every  one  of  the  decoctions. — T. 


1598 


CHI  KITS  A  S  THAN  A. 


[VISARPA. 


Those  combinations  of  which  I  shall  speak  in  the  Division  called 
‘Kalpa’  as  alleviative  of  phlegm  and  bile,  are  prescribable  for  persons 
■afflicted  with  Erysipelas. 

They  are  the  foremost  of  all  remedies  for  alleviating  those  faults.  73 
The  physician  endued  with  intelligence  should  administer  the 
decoction  of  the  tubers  of  Musta  {Cy penis  rotundus),  Nimba  {Melia 
Azadirachta ),  and  the  leaves  of  Patola  {Trichosanth.es  dioica) ;  or 

of  Chandana  (red  sandal  wood)  and  Utpala  {Nymphcea  stellata),  or 
of  SarivS  {Ichnocarpus  frutescens),  the  fruits  of  Amalaka  {Phylldn- 
thus  Emblica ),  Ushira  (the  roots  of  Andropogon  muricatus), 
and  Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus'',. 

These  are  well-tested  remedies  for  conquering  Erysipelas. 

For  the  alleviation  of  Erysipelas,  the  decoction  of  also  the  follow¬ 
ing  drugs  may  be  given  : 

KirStatiktaka  ( Agathotes  cherayta ),  Lodhra  {Symplocos  racemosa), 
Duralabha  ( Hedysarum  Alhagi ),  Chandana  (red  sandal  wood),  Nagara 
(dry  ginger',  Padmakinjalka  (the  filaments  of  the  lotus),  Utpala  (the 
flowers  of  Nymphcea  stellata ),  Vibhitaka  (seeds  of  Terminalia  bellerica), 
Madhuka  (liquorice)  and  Nfigapush'pa  (otherwise  calledNagakecara, 
i.  e.,  Mesua  ferrea ).  74-76 

The  decoction  may  also  be  drunk  of  Prapaundarika  (the  root-stock 
of  Nymphcea  lotus),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Padmakinjalka  (the  fila¬ 
ments  of  the  lotus),  Utpala  (the  flowers  of  Nymphcea  stellata), 
Nagapushpa  (the  flowers  of  Mesua  ferrea ),  and  Lodhra  (Symplocos 
racemosa).*  77 

The  infusion,  by  exposure  to  the  night-air,  of  the  following,  viz., 
DurSlabha  {Hedysarum  Alhagi ),  Parppataka  {Oldenlandia  Corymbosa), 
Gucluchi  {Tinospora  cordifolia),  and  Vigwabhesaja  (dry  ginger), 

should  be  given  for  allaying  the  thirst  of  one  afflicted  with 
Erysipelas.-|-  78 

The  infusion  also,  by  exposure  to  the  night  night-air,  of  the  fol- 
-  lowing,  may  be  given  for  alleviation  of  Erysipelas,  viz., 


*  ‘Tenaiva  vidhinapivef  implies  that  the  decoction  of  these  is  to  be  taken  as  that  of  the 
drugs  mentioned  in  the  previous  verse. — T. 

*j*  For  ‘Duralabha’  some  editions  read  ‘DrSksha,’  meaning  grapes. — T. 


LESSON  XXI.] 


CHA  RAKA-SA  MBIT  A. 


1599 


Patola  (the  leaves  of  Trichosanthes  dioica),  Pichumardda  (otherwise 
called  Nimba,  i.  e.,  Melia  Azadirachta ),  Darbbi  (Berber is  asiaticd ), 
Katukarohini  ( Picrorrhiza  Kurroa ),  Yashti  (liquorice),  and  TrSyamSna 
(the  seeds  of  the  fruits  of  Ficus  heterophylld).  79 

The  infusion  of  Patola  ( Trichosanthes  dioica )  and  the  rest  mentioned 
in  the  verse  above  may  be  given  mixed  with  ghee  and  the  pulv  of 
Trivrit  ( Convolvulus  Turpethum)  ;  or,  it  may  be  given  with  the  pulv 
■of  the  seeds  of  Masura  ( Cicer  lens)  mixed  with  ghee.  80 

One  afflicted  with  Erysipelas  should  be  made  to  drink  the  decoc¬ 
tion  of  the  leaves  of  Patola  (Trichosanthes  dioica)  and  that  of  Mudga 
(the  seeds  of  Phaseolus  Mungo),  mixed  with  ghee,  ox 

the  expressed  juice  of  Amalaka  (the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Em- 
blica ),  mixed  with  ghee.  81 

The  physician,  possessed  of  wisdom,  should  administer,  for  the 
alleviation  of  Erysipelas,  the  ghee  called  ‘Mahaukta’  which  has  been 
laid  down  as  curative  of  leucoderma  born  of  bile.  82 

[The  composition  of  this  ghee  has  been  explained  in  the  Lesson 
VII  on  Leucoderma,  ante,  of  this  Division.] 

For  the  alleviation  of  Erysipelas,  the  physician,  possessed  of  in¬ 
telligence,  should  also  administer  ‘TrayamSna  Ghrita,’  whose  effects 
have  been  well-tested,  and  whose  composition  has  been  explained  in 
the  Lesson  on  Gulma  (abdominal  tumours).*  83 

For  purging  one  afflicted  with  Erysipelas,  the  physician  should 
administer  the  pulv  of  Trivrit  (Convolvulus  Turpethum ),  stirring  the 
same  in  ghee,  or  in  milk,  or  in  hot  water,  or  in  the  expressed  juice  of 
dried  grapes. 

These  are  well-tested  drinks  which  are  curative  of  Erysipelas. 

Or,  the  physician  may  administer  the  decoction  of  Trayamani. 
(the  fruits  of  Ficus  heterophylld),  mixed  with  milk,  as  a  purgative.  84-85 
For  the  alleviation  of  Erysipelas  as  also  of  fever,  the  physician 
should  administer  the  decoction  of  the  three  myrobalans,  mixed  with 
ghee  and  the  pulv  of  Trivrit  (Convolvulus  Turpethuni),  for  purging 
the  patient  86 

Or,  the  expressed  juice  of  Amalaka  (the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus 
' Emblica ),  mixed  with  ghee,  should  be  administered. 


*  Vide  Lesson  V,  1 
202 


e,  of  this  Division. — T. 


'i-6oo 


CHJKITSASTHANA. 


[VISARPA. 


Unto  one  whose  bowels  are  highly  constipated,  the  same  may  be 
administered,  mixed  with  the  pulv  of  Trivrit  {Convolvulus  Turpe- 
stkuin).  This  remedy  proves  highly  beneficial  in  purging  such  a 
person.  87 

If  (in  Erysipelas)  the  fault  or  faults  excited  are  seen  to  be  accu¬ 
mulated  in  the  stomach,  then  this  very  medicine  {viz.,  the  expressed 
juice  of  the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica,  mixed  with  ghee  and  the 
pulv  of  Convolvulus  Turpethuni)  should  be  given.  If  the  blood  be 
vitiated  in  the  branches  (of  the  trunk),  i.  e.,  in  the  arms  and  legs,  the 
vitiated  blood  should  then  be  let  out  at  the  outset.  88 

If  the  blood  has  been  vitiated  by  the  wind,  the  physician  should 
take  it  out  by  means  of  (hollow)  horns  at  the  outset ; 

or,  if  the  blood  has  been  vitiated  by  the  bile,  it  should,  at  the-  out¬ 
set,  be  taken  out  by  applying  leeches  ; 

or,  if  the  blood  has  been  vitiated  by  the  phlegm,  it  should,  at  the 
outset,  be  taken  out  by  means  of  AlSvu  (the  dried  fruits  of  Cucurbita 
lagenaria).  89 

[The  dried  husk  of  the  fruit  of  Cucurbita  lagenaria,  pointed  by 
using  a  knife,  is  employed  for  letting  out  the  vitiated  blood.] 

That  artery  (in  blood-letting)  should  be  pierced  which  is  near  to 
the  region  that  is  affected  by  Erysipelas  ; 

Since  (if  the  vitiated  blood  be  not  let  out),  it  may,  by  its  vitiation, 
vitiate  the  skin,  the  flesh,  and  the  tendons.  9° 

[The  necessity  of  blood-letting  is  explained  in  this  verse.  The 
vitiated  blood,  if  not  let  out,  is  sure  to  vitiate  the  skin  and  the  rest.] 
Of  a  person  whose  faults  have  been  expelled  in  this  way,  if  the 
faults  still  linger  in  the  skin  and  the  flesh,  then  the  outward  treat¬ 
ment  that  should  be  adopted  for  conquering  his  attenuated  faults  is 
first  laid  down  below.  9* 

A  plaster  applied  on  the  affected  part,  consisting  of  the  bark  of 
Udumvara  {Ficus  glomerata ),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  the  filaments  of 
Padma  (flowers  of  the  lotus),  Utpala  (flowers  of  Nymphoea  stellata), 
Nagapushpa  (flowers  of  Mesua-  ferrea)  and  Priyungu  {Aglaia  Rox- 
burghiana),  proves  beneficial.  92 

The  new  roots  of  Nyagrodha  {Ficus  bengalensis ),  the  solid  stem 
of  Kadali  {Musa  sapientum ),  and  the  root-stock  of  the  lotus,  reduced 
to  paste  and  mixed  with  ghee  that  has  been  washed  a  hundred  times, 
form  an  excellent  plaster  for  the  part  effected,  93 


LESSON  XXI.] 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


t6os 


The  wood  called  ‘Kaliya’  (otherwise  called  ‘Pita-chandana’  or 
yellow  sandal),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Hema  (the  flowers  of  Mesua 
f erred),  Valya  (otherwise  called  Amalaki,  i.  e.,  Phyllanthus  Emblica ), 
(red)  sandal  wood,  Padmaka  (otherwise  called  Padmakashta),  Patra 
(the  leaves  of  Cinnamomum  Tamala),  Mrinala  (lotus  stalks),  and . 
Phalini  (otherwise  called  ‘Priyangu’  i.  e.,  Aglaia  Roxburghiand), 
reduced  to  paste  and  mixed  with  ghee ,  form  a  good  plaster.*  94 

£aluka  (the  root-stock  of  Nymphoea  stellata),  Mrinala  (lotus  stalks), 
£ankha  (the  pulv  of  conch-shells),  Chandana  (red  sandal  wood), 
Utpala  (the  flowers  of  Nymphcea  stellata),  and  the  roots  of  Vetasa 
(i Calamus  Rotang),  reduced  to  paste  and  mixed  with  ghee,  form  a  good 
plaster  (for  the  part  affected  with  Erysipelas).]-  95 

£ariva  ( Ichnocarpus  frutescens ),  Padmakinjalka  (the  filaments  of 
lotus  flowers),  Ushira  (the  roots  of  Andropogon  muricatus ),  Nilotpala 
(the  flowers  of  Nymphcea  stellata),  Manjishtha  ( Rubia  cordifolia),. 
Chandana  (red  sandal  wood),  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racemosa),  and 
and  Abhaya  (chebulic  myrobalans),  reduced  to  paste,  form  another 
plaster  for  application  in  Erysipelas.  96 

Nalada  (otherwise  called  ‘Ushira,’  i.  e.,  the  roots  of  Andropogon 
muricatus),  Harenu  ( Piper  aurantiacum ),  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  race- 
mosa ),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Padma  (the  flowers  of  Nelumbium  specio- 
sum ),  Durva  ( Panicum  Dactylon),  and  Sarjjarasa  (the  exudation  of 
Shorea  robusta),  reduced  to  paste  and  mixed  with  ghee,  form  a  good 
plaster  for  application  in  Erysipelas.  97 

The  ‘£aktu’  of  Yava  (z.  e.,  the  pulv  of  fried  barley),  mixed  with 
ghee, 

as  also  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Vira  ( Doodia  logopodioides)  and  the 
pulv  of  fried  barley,  mixed  with  ghee,  should  be  used  as  plaster 
in  Erysipelas.  98 


*  Some  texts  read  ‘Ushira’  for  ‘Phalini.’  The  former  means  the  roots  of  Andropogon 
muricatus.  Calcutta  edition  reads  Ela  (seeds  of  Elletaria  cardamomum )  for  Patra  (leaves 
of  Cinnamomum  Tamala). — T. 

f  For  Qaluka’  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  ‘Cfadwala,’  meaning  the 
blade  of  Panicum  Dactylon.  Gangadhara  takes  ‘Mrinala’  in  this  and  the  previous  verse, 
as  implying  ‘Ushira’  or  the  roots  of  Andropogon  muricatus. 

For  also  ‘GhritSplutah,’  other  texts  reat  ‘Satandulah’  meaning  ‘mixed  with  rice  (reduced 
to  paste).’— T. 


i602 


C HI  KITS  A  S  THANA. 


[vrSARPA. 


Bala  (Sida  cor dif olid),  Utpala  (the  flowers  of  Nymphoea  stellata ), 

.  £aluka  (the  root-stock  of  Nymphoea  stellata ),  Vila  (. Doodia  logopo- 
d'ioides ),  Aguru  ( Aquilaria  Agullochd),  arid'  Chandana  (red  sandal' 
wood),  reduced  to  pujv,  form  a  plaster  for  Erysipelas. 

Mrinala  (lotus  stalks)  and  Visa  (the  small  roots  attached  to  the 
root-stock  of  Nymphoea  stellata),  form  another  plaster  for  application 
in  Erysipelas.  99 

The  flour  of  Yava  (barley),  mixed  with  Madhuka  (honey)  and  ghee, 
form  a  plaster  for  application  in  Erysipelas. 

Harenu  ( Piper  aurantiacum),  Masura  (the  seeds  of  Cicer  lens), 
Mudga  (the  seeds  of  PKaseolus  Mungo),  and  ‘£sli’  rice  of  the  white 
variety,  each  reduced  to  paste  and  mixed  with  ghee ,  forms  a  good 
plaster  in  Erysipelas  ;  or, 

all  of  these,  reduced  to  paste  and  mixed  with  ghee,  make  a  good 
plaster  for  application  in  the  disease. 

The  cold  clay  obtained  from  below  the  root-stock  of  Tadmini 
(lotus-stalks),  or  the  pulv  of  Muktika  (pearls),  or  of  £ankha  (conch- 
shells),  or  of  Pravala  (corals),  or  of  £ukti  (oysters),  or  of  Gairika  (ochre, 
i.  e.,  red  earth  obtained  from  mountains),  each  mixed  with  ghee ,  forms, 
a  good  plaster  for  application  in  Erysipelas.  190-102 

Prapaundarika)(the  root-stock  of  Nymphoea  lotus),  Madhuka  (liquo¬ 
rice),  Bala  {Sida  cordifolia),  £aluka  (the  root-stock  of  Nymphcea 
stellata ),  Utpala  (the  flowers  of  Nymphoea  stellata),  the  leaves  of 
Nyagrodha  ( Ficus  bengalensis),  and  Dugdhika  ( Oxystelma  escidentuni), 
reduced  to  pulv  and  mixed  with  ghee,  form  a  good  plaster  for  appli¬ 
cation  in  Erysipelas.  103. 

Visa  (the  small  roots  attached  to  the  root-stock  of  Nymphoea 
stellata),  Mrin&la  (the  stalk  of  the  same),  and  Kageruka  (the  tubers  of 
Scirpus  Kysoor),  reduced  to  paste  and  mixed  with  ghee  washed  a 
hundred  times,  form  a  plaster  for  application  in  Erysipelas. 

The  bulbous  roots  of  £atavari  ( Asparagus  racemosus)  and  of  VidSri 
( Batatus paniculatus),  reduced  to  paste  and  mixed  with  the  same  kind 
of  ghee,  form  a  good  plaster  for  Erysipelas.  104 

Nyagrodha  ( Ficus  bengalensis),  Udumvara  ( Ficus  glomerata ), 
Agwattha  {Ficus  religiosa),  Vetasa  {Calamus  Rotang),  Plaksha  {Ficus 
infectoria),  and  Jamvava  {Eugenia  Jambolana)  : 

The  barks  of  those,  reduced  to  paste,  and  mixed  v/ith  a  copious, 
measure  of  ghee ,  form  a  cold  plaster  that  is  beneficial  in  Erysipelas,  i°S 


LESSON  XXI.] 


CHAR  A  KA-SAMHITA. 


1603 

£aivala  ( Blyxa  octandra ),  the  roots  of  Nala  ( Arundo  Karka), 
GojihvS  (Elephantopus  scaber ),  Visha-karnikS  (otherwise  called  Sudar- 
ganS  or  Padma-Gulancha,  i.  e.,  a  variety  of  Tinospora  cordifolia ),  and 
the  leaves  of  ‘Indrani’  (otherwise  called  ‘Nisinda’  i.  e.,  Vitex  Nigundo), 
reduced  to  paste  and  mixed  with  ghee,  similarly,  the  bark  of  ^irisha 
(Mimosa  sirissa),  and  Bala  (Sida  cardifolia),  mixed  with  ghee, 
form  plasters  for  alleviation  of  the  burning  sensation  caused  by 
Erysipelas.  106 

All  the  plasters  expounded  above  are  beneficial  in  Erysepelas 
characterised  by  vitiation  of  blood  and  bile. 

I  shall  now  lay  down  some  plasters  that  are  beneficial  in  Erysi¬ 
pelas  born  oPphlegm.  I07 

Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  Padmaka  (a  fragrant  root  of  that 
name),  Ushira  (the  roots  of  Andropogon  '■ muricatus ),  Samanga  (other¬ 
wise  called  ‘ManjishthS’,  i.  e.,  Rubia  cordifolia),  Karaviraka  (the  bark 
of  Nerium  odorum ),  Nalamula  (the  roots  of  Arundo  Karka),  and 
Ananta  (the  bulbous  roots  of  Asclepias  pseudosarsa),  should  be  used 
for  making  a  plaster  (for  application  in  phlegm-born  Erysipelas).  108. 

Khadira  ( Acacia  Catechu ),  Saptaparna  ( Echites  sckolaris),  Musta 
(the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus),  Aragbadha  ( Cassia  Fistula),  Dhava 
{Conocarpus  latifolia ),  Kurantaka  (the  yellow  variety  of  ‘Jhinti’,  i.  e.y 
Barleria  cristata ),  and  Devadaru  (Pinus  deodara)  : 

The  physician  should  apply  a  plaster  of  these — which  proves 
beneficial.  I09 

The  leaves  of  Aragbadha  ( Cassia  Fistula ),  and  the  bark  of 
£leshmantaka  (otherwise  called  ‘Bhavya’  or  ‘£elu’,  i.  e.,  Dillenia 
Indica ),  and 

the  leaves  of  Indrani  (otherwise  called  ‘SindhuvSra’  or  ‘Nisinda’, 
i.  e.,  Vitex  Nigundo),  Kakahva  (otherwise  called  Kakamachi’,  i.  e., 
Solanum  nigrum),  and  the  flowers  of  £irisha  ( Mimosa  sirissa) ; 

£aivala  ( Blyxa  octandra),  Nalamula  (the  roots  of  Arundo  Karka), 
Vira  (otherwise  called  ‘Prigniparni,’  i.  e.,  Doodia  logopodioides),  Gandha 
(sandal  wood),*  Priyangu  ( Aglaia  Roxburghiana), 

Triphala  (the  three  myrobalans),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Vira 
{Doodia  logopodioides)  and  the  flowers  of  £irisa  {Mimosa  sirissa)  ; 


‘Gandha’  has  many  meanings.  Probably,  it  means  red  sandal  wood  here. 


1664 


CH /KITS A  S  THAN  A. 


[VISARPA, 


Prapaundarika  (the  root-stock  of  Nymphcea  lotus),  Hrivera  (other¬ 
wise  Bala,  i.  e.,  Pavonia  odoratd ),  the  bark  of  Darbi  [Berber is  Asiatic a), 
Abhaya*  (chebulic  myrobalans),  and  Bala  (Si da  cordifolia )  : 

Each  of  these  groups,  or  two  of  them  taken  at  a  time,  or  all  of 
them  together,  would  make  a  good  plaster  for  phlegm-born  Ery¬ 
sipelas. f  II0-II3 

All  these  plasters,  mixed  with  a  little  measure  of  ghee,  are  bene¬ 
ficial  in  phlegm-born  Erysipelas. 

Mixed  with  copious  measures  of  ghee,  they  are  beneficial  in  Ery¬ 
sipelas  characterised  by  predominance  of  wind  and  bile.  ll3 

All  these  cooling  plasters  should  be  administered  at  intervals  of 
of  a  kshana%  after  removing  the  previous  application.  ”4 

Or,  the  part  affected  may  be  plastered  over  with  ghee  only  that 
has  been  washed  a  hundred  times. 

Or,  the  part  affected  may  be  repeatedly  sprinkled  over  with  the 
‘manda’  of  ghee,  or  with  cold  water,  or  with  the  (cold)  decoction  of 
Madhuka  (liquorice),  or  with  the  cold  decoction  of  the  group  of 
five  barks  (viz.,  the  barks  of  the  five  varieties  of  Ficus). 

These  are  prescribable  in  Erysipelas  characterised  by  vitiation  of 
wind  and  blood,  as  also  in  that  characterised  by  predominance  of 
bile.  115-116 

The  decoction  may  be  used  (for  sprinkling)  of  those  groups  of 
drugs  of  which  plasters  have  been  directed  to  be  made. 

Those  groups  of  drugs,  again,  boiled  with  ghee,  and  also  their 
pul  vs  may  be  used  for  curing  the  sores  caused  by  Erysipelas.  ll7 

Ghee  boiled  with  the  expressed  juice  of  Durv5  (Panicum  Dactylon), 
forms  a  plaster  for  curing  the  sores  of  Erysipelas.  So  the  pulv  of  the 
bark  of  Darbi  (Berberis  Asiatid),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  Lodhra  ( Sym - 
p  locos  racemosd),  and  Kegara  (the  flowers  of  Mesua  /erred),  constitute 
a  powder  for  curing  the  sores  of  Erysipelas. 

Patola  (the  leaves  of  Trichosanthes  dioica ),  Pichumardda  (other¬ 
wise  called  Nimba,  i.  e.,  Melia  Azadirachtd),  Triphala  (the  three 


*  The  Bengal  and  Bombay  editions  read  Madhuka  (liquorice)  for  Abhay5  which  is  the 
reading  of  Gangadhara.— T. 

f  Each  of  the  five  groups,  or  any  two  of  the  five  or  all  the  five  together,  would  make  a 
plaster  that  is  beneficial  in  Erysipelas. — T. 

X  ‘Kshana’  is  equal  to  a  ‘danda’  which  is  one-thirtieth  part  of  day  and  night,  and  is  thus 
equivalent  to  48  minutes.— T. 


LESSON  XXI.] 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1 6o$ 

myrobolans),  Madhuka  (liquorice),  and  Utpala  (the  flowers  of  Nym- 
phcea  stellata ) ;  the  decoction  of  these  is  used  for  washing  the  affected 
part,  or  sprinkling. 

Ghee  boiled  with  these  is  a  plaster  that  cures  the  sores  ; 

The  pulv  of  these  forms  a  powder,  and 

their  paste  a  plaster. 

Applied  in  these  forms,  they  dry  up  the  sores  of  Erysipelas.  XI9 

All  these  cooling  plasters  should  be  used  at  intervals  of  a  kshana. 
Before  using  them  in  this  way,  the  plaster  applied  before  should  first 
be  taken  up.*  120 

If  the  plaster  cannot  be  taken  up  by  washing  the  part  with  the 
decoctions,  then  thin  plasters  should  be  applied  over  it  repeatedly. 

If  however,  the  plaster,  in  phlegm-born  Erysipelas,  lean  be  taken 
up,  then  thick  plasters  should  be  applied.]-  f&t 

The  drugs  which  have  been  directed  to  be  used  for  purposes  of 
plasters,  should  be  reduced  to  paste  by  repeated  grinding. 

The  thickness  of  a  plaster  should  be  a  third  of  the  thickness  of 
the  thumb. 

It  should  not  be  very  oily,  nor  very  dry. 

It  should  neither  be  solid  nor  liquid,  but  of  sufficient  consistence.  122 

A  plaster  should  never  be  made  of  a  paste  that  has  become  stale 
(z.  e.,  that  has  been  made  the  day  before). 

Nor  should  a  plaster  be,  again,  applied  that  has  been  applied  once 
before.  I23 

For  such  a  plaster,  in  consequence  of  the  heat  it  causes,  generates 
filthy  secretions  and  pain  in  the  part  affected  by  Erysipelas. 

If  the  plasters  are  applied  by  enclosing  the  paste  of  the  drugs 
within  pieces  of  cloth  (like  to  what  is  done  in  the  case  of  poultices), 
the  sores  of  Erysipelas  become  moist  and  perspire.  I24 


*  In  the  second  line,  the  correct  reading  is  ‘purvam’  as  in  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay 
editions,  and  not  ‘Sarvam’  as  read  by  Gangadhara. — T. 

The  decoction  of  those  drugs  which  have  been  directed  to  be  used  as  plasters  should  be 
used  for  washing  the  part  affected. — T. 

f  What  is  said  here  is  this  :  If  the  plaster  applied  adheres  to  the  part  in  such  a  way  that 
even  repeated  application  of  the  decoctions  fail  to  remove  it,  then  thin  plasters  are  directed 
,to  be  applied  over  the  adhering  plaster.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  plaster  can  be  removed, 
then  thick  plasters  should  be  applied,  one  after  another.  This  is  the  course  of  treatment  in 
phlegm-born  Erysipelas. — T. 


16o6 


CHIKITSASTHANA. 


[VISAUPA. 


In  consequence  of  the  sores  perspiring,  pimples  appear,  which 
cause  an  itching  sensation. 

Those  faults  which  arise  from  plasters  laved  over  previously 
applied  plasters,  arise  also  from  applying  plasters  enclosed  within 
pieces  of  cloth. 

If  plasters  that  are  very  oily  or  that  are  very  liquefied  be  applied 
they  do  not  adhere  to  the  skin  and  hence  the  fault  or  faults  excited 
are  not  sufficiently  alleviated. 

The  physician  should  not  apply  plasters  that  are  thin,  for  if  such 
plasters  are  applied,  they  soon  become  dry  and  cracked.  125-127 

Neither  does  the  juice  of  the  drugs  (composing  the  plasters)  then 
penetrate  the  disease.  Indeed,  it  dries  up. 

Those  faults  which  arise  from  plasters  that  are  thin,  arise  also 
from  plasters  that  are  not  oily,  for  these  soon  become  dry  and 
(instead  of  alleviating  the  disease),  enhance  its  painfulness.* 

I  shall  now  lay  down  the  kinds  of  food  and  drink  that  are 
beneficial  in  Erysipelas.  128-129 

Unto  one  who  has  fasted,  ‘mantha’  that  is  dry  and  that  has  been 
mixed  with  honey  and  sugar,  is  beneficial.! 

Or,  ‘mantha’  that  is  slightly  sweet, r  or  that  has  been  rendered 
slightly  sour  by  adding  to  it  the  juice  of  pomegranates  and  that  of 
Amalaka  (the  fruits  of  Phyllanthus  Emblica ),  is  beneficial. 

Or,  ‘mantha’  that  has  been  boiled  with  water  and  Parushaka  (the 
fruits  of  Grewia  Asiatica),  Mridvika  (dry  grapes),  and  Kharjjura 
(Arabian  dates),  is  beneficial. 

Unto  one  that  has  fasted,  linctuses  made  with  ‘Tarpanas’  (cooling 
■draughts)  of  barley  and  ‘9&H’  rice,  mixed  with  oils  and  ghees ,  are 
.beneficial.  130-131 

When  these  have  been  digested,  old  ‘9&li’  rice  boiled  with  the 
.soup  of  seeds,  may  be  given  with  beneficial  results. 

The  soups  referred  to  should  be  of  such  pulses  as  Mudga  ( Pkaseo - 
lus  Mungo\  Masura  (Cicer  lens),  and  Chanaka  {Cicer  arietinum).  ^2 


*  Verses  122  to  128  have  been  omitted  by  Gangadhara.  They  occur  in  the  Calcutta 
and  the  Bombay  editions,  and  have  every  apperance  of  being  genuine.  Hence,  they  are 
translated  here. — T. 

1  t  ‘Mantha’  is  made  by  mixing  the  flour  of  barley,  Sec. ,  with  a  copious  measure  of  water. 
‘Dry’  implies  ‘unmixed  with  ghee  or  any  oily  substance.’— T. 


'LESSON  X'xi.]  CIIARAKA-SAMIIITA.  1607 

These  should  not  be  made  sour  ;  or,  if  it  is  desirable  to  make 
them  so,  the  juice  may  be  mixed  of  pomegranates.  They  should  be 
be  given  along  with  the  fruits  of  Patola  {Tficko5anth.es  dioicci),  and 
those  of  Amalaka  {Phyllanthus  Einilica).  132 

For  such  a  person  (z.  e.,  one  who  has  fasted),  the  meat-juice  pre¬ 
pared  with  the  flesh  of  wild  animals,  unmixed  with  oils,  and  mixed 
with  the  juice  of  Parushaka  {the  fruits  of  Grewia  Asiatzca),  Mridwika 
otherwise  called  Braksha  (grapes),  and  Dadima  (pomegranates),  and 
Amalaka  (the  fruits  of  Phyllathus  Emblica ),  may  be  prescribed.  r33 
Food  that  consists  of  ‘^aii’  rice  that  is  red,  or  white,  or  called 
‘MahS,’  or  that  is  called  ‘Shashtika,’  is  commendable  (for  such  a 
person).  These  should  be  old  and  well-boiled.*  J34 

Amongst  barley,  wheat,  and  ‘£ali’  rice,  that  which  may  be  assimi¬ 
lable  should  be  given  unto  those  who  are  not  accustomed  to  take 
‘£ali’  rice,  or  those  in  whose  constitution  the  phlegm  predominates.f  13s 
One  afflicted  with  Erysipelas  should  avoid  such  food  and  drink  as 
cause  a  burning  sensation,  or  as  are  composed  of  hostile  ingredi¬ 
ents,  as  also  sleep  at  day-time,  indulgence  in  wrath,  physical  exercise, 
and  exposure  to  the  heat  of  the  sun  or  fire,  or  to  the  wind.J  l3& 

Amongst  the  courses  of  treatment  laid  down  above,  that  which  is 
cooling  should  be  adopted  in  Erysipelas  characterised  by  bile  ;  that 
which  is  dry  should  be  adopted  in  Erysipelas  characterised  by 
phlegm  ;  and  that  which  is  oily  should  be  adopted  in  Erysipelas  born 
of  wind.  i37 

That  course  of  treatment  which  is  alleviative  of  wind  and  bile  is 
beneficial  in  Erysipelas  of  that  variety  which  is  called  ‘Agni’  (fiery). 

That,  again,  which  is  alleviative  of  phlegm  and  bile,  is  generally 
beneficial  in  that  Erysipelas  which  is  called  ‘Karddama.’  138 

The  physician  conversant  with  the  requirements  of  the  time  should 
treat  that  variety  of  Erysipelas  which  is  called  ‘Granthf  and  which  is 


*  ‘Supariplutah’  may  mean  ‘well-developed.’  As  "none  but  well-devoloped  grains  of 
ipaddy  are  taken,  the  meaning  of  the  word  here  is,  probably,  ‘well-boiled.’ — T. 

f  Of  course,  those  that  are  accustomed  to  ‘Qali’  rice  should  be  given  ‘Qalf  rice.  It 
is  only  as  regards  those  that  aTe  not  accustomed  to  it,  that  the  ‘physician  should  select 
what'to  give  from  among  barley,  wheat,  and  ‘£ali’  rice.  That  should  be  given  which  is 
assimilable. — T. 

$  Gangadhara  reads  ‘Vyayama’  (meaning  physical  exercise)  for  ‘Vyavaya’  ;  i.  sexnal 
congress.  His  reading',‘pratapa’  for  ‘pravata’  is  incorrect. — T, 

203 


*l6o8  CHIKITSASTHANA.  [visarPA, 

characterised  by  predominance  of  blood  and  bile,  with  such  drugs  as 
are  dry  (that  is,  unmixed  with  oils  and  ghees),  fasts,  sprinkling,  plas¬ 
ters  made  of  the  five  barks,  blood-letting,  leeches,  emetics,  purgatives, 
and  decoctions*  of  drugs  that  are  of  astringent  or  bitter  taste.  139-14° 
Unto  one  that  is  afflicted  with  that  variety  of  Erysipelas  which  is 
called  ‘Granthi,’  treatment  alleviative  of  (excited)  wind  and  phlegm  is 
beneficial,  after  one’s  system  has  been  corrected  by  emetics  and 
.purgatives  and  one’s  blood  let  out  (by  the  application  of  leeches).  H1 
For  persons  afflicted  with  Erysipelas  of  the  ‘Granthi’  variety, 
'accompanied  by  ‘£ula’  pains,  poultices  made  of  hot  ‘UtkSrika,’  as  also 
‘VesavSra’  mixed  with  oils  and  ghees,  is  beneficial. f  142 

In  Erysipelas  of  the  ‘Granthi’  variety,  accompanied  by  ‘£ula’  pain, 
the  part  affected  should  be  sprinkled  over  with  oil  that  has  been 
boiled  with  (the  decoction  as  also  the  paste  of)  the  group  of  ten  roots, 
while  still  (agreably)  hot ; 

Or,  with  the  oils,  heated,  that  have  been  laid  down  as  alleviative 
of  leucoderma,  and  that  have  been  mixed  with  boiled  (alkaline) 
ashes.  *43 

[In  the  text,  ‘Kushtha-tailena’  occurs  in  the  singular.  More  oils 
than  one  have,  however,  been  laid  down  in  the  Lesson  on  Leuco¬ 
derma  as  alleviative  of  that  ailment.  The  alkaline  ashes,  as  ex¬ 
plained  by  Gangadhara,  are  first  boiled  in  water  of  six  times  their 
measure,  and  then  mixed  with  the  oils  mentioned.  The  oil  is  to  be 
sprinkled  over  while  agreeably  hot.] 

I.n  the  same  variety  of  Erysipelas,  the  affected  part  may  also  be 
sprinkled  over  with  cow’s  urine ;  or  with  the  decoction  of  ‘Patra’ 
.(leaves  of  Cinnaiuomum  Tamala),  unmixed  with  oils,  and  while 
(agreeably)  hot ;  or,  plasters  may  be  applied  of  Agwagandha  (Phy- 
■salis  flexuosa )  reduced  to  paste  and  agreeably  heated.  144 

[Gangadhara  notes  that  the  Agwagandha  directed  to  be  used  is 
‘Krishna- AcwagandhS,’  i.  e.,  the  black  variety  of  the  plant.] 

Or,  the  part  affected  by  Erysipelas  of  the  ‘Granthi’  variety,  may 


*  The  Bengal  and  Bombay  editions  read  ‘Ghritaih’  {ghees')  for  Kwathaih.  The  meaning 
'there  would  be  ‘with  ghees  medicated  with  drugs  that  are  astringent  and  bitter.’ 

+  ‘Utkarika,  as  explained  previously,  is  made  of  the  flour  of  wheat  or  barley,  boiled  in 
water.  ‘Vesavara’  is  flesh  divested  of  bones,  reduced  to  paste,  boiled  in  water,  and  mixed 
-with  treacle,  ghee,  and  the  pulv  of  black  pepper,  &c.— T. 


LESSON  XXL] 


CHAR  A  KA  -  SAM  HIT  A 


r6o£ 


b’e  plastered  over  with  the  paste,  heated  on  fire,  oF  dry  Mulaka' 
(radishes),  or  with  that  of  (the  bark  of)  NaktSmala  (otherwise  called1 
‘Dahar-Karanja,’  i.  e.,  Pongamia  glabra),  or  with  that  of  Vibhitaka' 
( Terminalia  Bellerica ).  145 

[The  paste,  in  every  case,  should  be  heated  on  fire,  before  applied 
as  a  plaster  on  the  affected  part.] 

Or,  plasters  may  be  applied  of  Bala  (Si da  cordifolia),  of  Nagabala 
(Sida  alba ),  of  Pathya  (chebulic  myrobalans),  of  the  knotty  portions  of 
the  bark  of  Bhurjja  (Betula  Bhojpattra ),  of  Vibhitaka  ( Terminalia 
Bellerica ),  of  Vansa-pattra  (leaves  of  Bamboo),  or  of  Agnimantha 
(Premna  integrifolia ).  ^6 

Plaster,  made  of  the  root-bark  of  Danti  (Baliospermum  mon- 
ianum),  the  same  of  Chitraka  ( Plumbago  Zeylanica),  the  milk  of 
Sudha  (otherwise  called  Snuhi,  i.  e.,  Euphorbia  nerriifolia),  the  same 
of  Arka  ( Calatropis  gigantea ),  treacle,  the  seeds  of  Bhallataka  ( Seme- 
carpus  Anacardiuni)  and  Kacisa  (sulphate  of  iron),  would  burst  even 
stone. 

Why  would  they  not,  therefore,  burst  the  knotty  boils  of  Erysi¬ 
pelas  of  “the  ‘Grantin'  variety,  that  is  born  of  (excited)  phlegm  and 
that  affects  the  outer  skin  ?  J47 

Even  knotty  boils,  that  are  old  or  of  long  duration,  are  capable  of 
being  burst  by  the  following  drugs. 

The  soup  of  Mulaka  (radishes)  and  Kulattha  (the  seeds  of  Dolichos 
biflorus ),  mixed  with  the  ashes  of  green  barley  shoots  and  the  juice  of 
pomegranates  ;  148 

Boiled  wheat  or  boiled  barley,  mixed  with  the  wine  called  ‘Sidhu,’ 
honey,  and  sugar ; 

The  ‘manda’  of  the  wine  called  ‘Varuni,’  mixed  with  honey  and 
that  variety  of  Citrus  acida  which  is  called  ‘Matulunga’  (Citrus 
medico) ;  J49 

The  paste  of  the  three  myrobalans,  mixed  with  the  pulv  of  the 
fruits  of  Pippali  (Piper  longum),  and  honey.  H9 

That  of  Devadaru  (Pinus  deodara ),  Pangu  salt  and  Vyosha  (the 
three  acrids)  ;* 

*  The  Bengal  and  Bombay  editions  read  ‘Devadaru  Guduchyogh  Prayogaih’  for  ‘Deva- 
darupanguvyoshaprayogaih’  which  is  the  reading  of  Gangadhara. 

The  meaning  of  the  former  is  the  application  of  Devadaru  and  Guduchi  {Tines for  a 
cordifolia ), 


CHI  KITS  A  ST H AHA. 


[yrsARFA. 


1610 

The  pulv  of  Gairika  (red'  earth  brought  from  mountains)  ; 

The  paste  of  Musta  (the  tubers  of  Cyperus  rotundus \  Bhallataka 
(the  seeds  of  Semecarpus  Anacardium ),  and.  the  flour  of  fried  barley  ; 

and  Makshika.*  iSo-*S® 

Besides  the  above  there  are  other  methods  by  which  the  boils  of 
Erysipelas  may  be  caused  to  burst.  They  are  those  sorts  of  fumi¬ 
gation  which  have  been  kid  down  as  possessed  of  errhine  virtues  ; 
those  means  by  which  abdominal  tumours  are  caused  to  burst ;  and 
pessure  caused  by  (heated)  iron,  salts,  stones,  gold,  and  copper.  JS2: 

If  the  knotty  bolls  of  Erysipelas,  which  happen  to  be  strong  and 
durable,  and  as  hard  as  stone,  are  not  removed  by  these  {viz.,  those 
mentioned  above)  diverse  courses  of  treatment  whose  success  has 
been  well-tested  in  various  cases,  then  the  methods  laid  down  below 
should  be  adopted  :  *5? 

For  one  afflicted  with  such  boils,  cautery  by  means  of  alkaline 
ashes,  or  by  (heated)  probes  or  hot  iron,  is  beneficial. 

Or,  by  causing  them  first  to  suppurate  by  means  of  applying  such 
drugs  as  mature  all  kinds  of  boils,  the  physician  should  remove  them 
by  incision.  *54 

The  physician  should  then  repeatedly  let  out  the  blood  which  has 
an  outcoming  tendency,  and  when  the  blood  has  been  completely  let 
out,  the  administration  of  such  medicines  as  conquer  wind  and 
phlegm  is  beneficial.  t55 

The  different  varieties  of  smoke  that  are  regarded  as  cerebral 
purgatives,  fomentations  for  inducing  perspiration,  and  pressure  on 
part  affected,  are  beneficial. 

If  by  those  means  faults  cannot  he  alleviated,  the  administra¬ 
tion  of  ‘pachanas,’  is  commendable.  15& 

When  the  boils  (of  Erysipelas,  of  the  ‘Granthi’  variety)  have 
become  softened  and  wet  by  means  of  cautery  and  medicines  that 
ripen  them,  the  physician  should  then  treat  them  like  ordinary 
boils  by  administering  both  external  and  internal  correctives  andi 
emollients.  *5/ 

Reducing  to  paste  these  drugs,  viz.,  Kampillaka  {Mallotus  phi- 
Mppensis,  syn.  Rottiera .  tinctoria),  the  seeds  of  Vidanga  {Embelia 


*  What  is.  meant  ljy  ‘Makshika’  here  is  difficult  to  make  out.  It  means  honey  as  well  as 
‘Swarnamakshika’  or  iron-pyrites.— T. 


LESSON  XXL] 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA 


i6ij 

Rides),  and  the  bark  of  Darbi  ( Berberis  Asiaticd),  oil  should  be  boiled 
with  them. 

This  oil  is  used  in  the  treatment  of  Erysipelas  of  the  ‘Granthi’ 
type.  !58 

The  learned  physician,  conversant  with  the  distinctions  of  place 
and  time,  should  also  treat  the  boils  of  Erysipelas  according  to  the 
method  laid  down  in  the  Lesson  called  ‘Dvivraniya.’*  J59 

Thus  ends  the  treatment  of  Erysipelas  of  the  ‘Granthi’  type. 

The  course  of  treatment  that  has  been  laid  down  for  the  allevia¬ 
tion  of  Erysipelas  of  the  'Granthi’  type  is  capable  of  alleviating 
Bronchocele  born  of  (excited)  phlegm.  160 

Those  varieties  of  Bronchocele  which  are  born  of  wind  and  in 
which  the  phlegm  is  subsidiary,  are  cured  by  taking  ghee,  milk,  and 
astringent  decoctions.]-  161 

All  those  courses  of  treatment  which  have  been  laid  down  for  the 
alleviation  of  Erysipelas  are  together  equal  (in  efficacy)  to  the  letting 
out  of  blood.  162 

[The  construction  of  this  verse  is  peculiar  to  Sanskrit.  Literally 
rendered,  it  comes  to  this  :  all  the  courses  of  treatment  are  one  side, 
and  blood-letting  is  on  the  other  side.] 

No  Erysipelas  is  seen  existing  unconnected  with  blood-bile. 
(Verily,  every  case  of  Erysipelas  exists  with  blood-bile).  IJgnce,  the 
treatment  that  has  been  laid  down  is  of  a  general  character. 

The  especial  treatment  of  this  disease,  necessitated  by  distinctions 
in  the  measure  of  the  predominance  of  particular  faults,  has  not  been 
expounded. 

The  treatment,  again,  has  not  been  laid  down  in  brief.  On  the 
other  hand,  I  have  expounded  the  treatment  of  this  disease  both  in 
brief  and  in  detail.  The  physician  possessed  of  wisdom  should  be 
guided  by  the  instructions  I  have  laid  down.]  163-164 


*  Lesson  XXV,  Supra,  of  this  division  — T. 

-j-  ‘Kaphanuvala’  means  ‘subsidiarily  accompanied  by  excited  phlegm.’— tT. 

+  Verses  162-4  are  not  very  perspicuous.  The  commentators  do  not  give  the  sense  clearly. 
What  the  author  says  seems  to  be  this,  the  treatment  of  Erysipelas  born  of  wind,  of  that 
born  of  bile,  of  that  born  of  phlegm,  of  that  born  of  blood,  &c.,  have  been  laid  down.  The 
treatment  of  the  varieties  born  of  wind  and  bile,  or  of  wind  and  phlegm,  or  of  bile  and 
phlegm,  has  not  been  expounded,  as  in  the  case  of  the  other  diseases.  It  will  be  noticed 
that  the  author  has  at  first  expounded  the  treatment  in  brief.  After  this,  he  has  expounded 
it  in  detail.— T. 


I6l2 


CrfIKITSA  S  1'HA  N A . 


[VISARPA. 


{Here  are  some  verses  containing  a  summary .) 

The  etymology  (of  t‘he  name  ‘Visarpa),  the  different  names  of  the 
disease,  the  faults  which  vitiate,  those  ingredients  of  the  body  which 
are  vitiated,  the  causes  (of  the  disease),  the  seats  of  the  disease,  the 
violence  or  lightness  of  the  disease  in  consequence  of  the  course  it 
takes  {viz.,  inward  or  outward,  or  both)  :  l65 

The  symptoms,  the  supervening  ailments,  the  particular  indica¬ 
tions  of  particular  supervening  ailments,  curability  and  incurability, 
and  the  treartment  of  those  that  are  curable  :  166 

Even  these  have  been  declared  in  the  Lesson  called  ‘Treatment 
of  Erysipelas’  by  illustrious  Punarvasu  unto  Agnivega  of  great 
intelligence  who  questioned  as  to  the  means  of  success.  l67 

Thus  ends  Lesson  XXI,  called  ‘Treatment  of  Erysipelas’,  in  the 
Division  called  Chikitsa,  of  the  Treatise  of  Agnivega  as  revised  by 
Charaka. 


LESSON  XXII. 

THE  TREATMENT  OF  THIRST. 

We  shall  now  expound  the  treatment  of  thirst. 

Thus  said  the  illustrious  one  of  Atri’s  race,  i 

He  of  Atri’s  race,  celebrated  for  knowledge,  tranquillity  of  soul, 
and  penances,  and  devoted  to  the  good  of  the  universe,  declared  the 
treatment  for  the  alleviation  of  the  five  varieties  of  Thirst.  2 

From  agitation  (of  both  body  and  mind),  fear,  toil,  grief,  wrath, 
fasts,  drinking  (of  alcoholic  liquors), 

through  indulgence  in  food  that  consists  of  alkaline  ashes,  or 
that  is  sour,  or  saline,  or  pungent,  or  heating,  or  unoily,  or  dry, 

through  waste  of  the  ‘dhUtus’ ;  or  affliction  of  disease,  or  excessive 
administration  of  emetics,  and  exposure  to  the  heat  of  the  sun, 

the  bile  and  the  wind,  becoming  provoked,  dry  up  all  the  ingre¬ 
dients  of  the  body  which  are  watery.  3-4 

These  two  attaining  strength  also  dry  up  the  juice-bearing  ducts, 
the  root  of  the  tongue,  the  throat,  the  palate,  and  the  region  joining 
the  throat  and  the  chest,  and  thereby  cause  excessive  thirst  in  the 
bodies  of  men.  S 

Having  become  exceedingly  strong,  they  (z.  e.,  the  bile'  and  the 
wind)  dry  up  the  water  that  one  may  drink  repeatedly. 

Verily,  the  thirst  they  cause  is  not  alleviated  (by  even  repeated 
■  drinks). 

This  thirst  appears  as  a  dreadful  supervening  ailment  in  persons 
that  have  already  been  reduced  by  disease.  6 

The  premonitory  indication  is  dryness  of  the  mouth.  The  symp- 
,  tom  of  the  disease  is  a  constant  desire  for  water. 

The  attenuation  of  the  symptoms  of  all  the  variaties  of  thirst  is 
regarded  as  its  cure  (or  removal  of  the  disease).  7 

[The  general  symptoms  of  the  disease  are  first  laid  down  :] 

Dryness  of  the  mouth,  hoarseness  of  the  voice,  vertigo,  heat  (of 
the  body),  delirium,  constipation  (of  bowels,  of  the  urethra,  and  of  the 
ducts  through  which  perspiration  flows),  roughness  of  the  palate,  lips, 
throat,  and  tongue,  loss  of  consciousness,  the  protruding  of  the 
tongue,  disgust  for  food,  deafness  of  the  ear,  pain  in  the  vital  parts  of 
the  body,  and  langour  of  the  limbs,  are  caused  by  thirst. 


iSi4  CHI  KITS  A  S  THAN  A.  [tRiSHNA, 

Thirst  is  of  five  kinds.  Hear  now  what  those  kinds  are,  according 
to  their  respective  symptoms. 

When  the  provoked  wind  dries  up  the  watery  ingredient  of  the 
body,  the  result  is  that  the  person  dries  up  and  becomes  weak. 

Drying  up,  he  feels  thirsty.*  810 

Loss  of  sleep,  swimming  of  the  head,  dryness  and  tastelessness 
of  the  mouth,  and  obstruction  of  the  ducts,  are  the  symptoms  of  wind- 
born  Thirst.  “ 

If  the  bile,  which  is  regarded  as  related  to  blazing  fire,  be  pro¬ 
voked,  it  heats  (dries  up)  the  watery  ingredient  of  the  body. 

Becoming  provoked,  it  engenders  thirst  characterised  by  pre¬ 
dominance  of  a  burning  sensation  of  the  body.  12 

The  presence  of  a  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  burning  of  the  head, 
pleasure  in  everything  that  is  cold,  swoons,  and  yellowness  of  the 
eyes,  the  urine,  and  the  stools,  are  the  outward  appearance  of  bile- 
born  Thirst.  13 

That  Thirst  also  which  springs  from  ‘ama’  (undigested  food-juice), 
is  fiery  in  consequence  of  its  being  born  of  Sma  as  well  as  (provoked) 
bile.f 

Its  symptoms  are  disgust  for  food,  flatulence  of  the  stomach,  and 
expectoration  of  phlegmonous  matter,  H 

The  (human)  body  results  from  ‘Rasa’  (food -juice).  ‘Rasa’  is  born 
of  water. 

From  loss  of  ‘Rasa,’  one  feels  thirsty. 

When  such  is  the  case,  one  becomes  weak  of  voice,  and  is  sorely 
afflicted,  and  swoons,  and  suffers  from  dryness  of  the  chest,  throat, 
and  palate.{  15 

The  Thirst  that  appears  as  a  supervening  ailment  in  persons 
whose  bodies  are  afflicted  with  fever,  gonorrhoea,  waste  or  consump- 


*  The  original  is  exceedingly  pleonastic.  There  is  a  great  difference  between  the  style 
of  Charaka  and  that  of  Dridhavala.— T. 

-(•  The  original  is  difficult  to  understand.  The  commentators  throw  no  light  upon  it, 
Gangadhara  says, — ‘undigested  food-juice’  is  called  ‘ama.’  That  Thirst  which  arises  from 
‘ama’  is  fiery.  It  is  fiery  because  ama  is  generated  by  bile  and  thus  the  thirst  born  of  ama 
springs  from  ama  as  well  as  bile  which  partakes  the  nature  of  fire.” 

+  In  this  verse  the  author  speaks  of  that  variety  of  Thirst  which  is  born  of  waste  or  loss. 
Of  course,  loss  of  ‘Kasa’  is  meant,— T, 


tfegSON  XXII.]  CHARA&A-SAMlIltA.  16i§ 

tion,  cough,  asthma,  and  other  ailments,  dries  up  the  System  and  is 
difficult  to  cure.*  16 

All  varieties  of  violent  Thirst  that  manifest  themselves  in  persons 
emaciated  by  disease,  or  in  those  that  are  afflicted  with  (violent) 
vomiting, 

and  that  Thirst  which  has  violent  supervening  afflictions,  should 
be  known  as  fatal.  17 

Without  fire,  or  without  wind,  (operating  as  causes),  there  can  be 
no  thirst,  since  these  two,  when  exceedingly  predominant,  are  causes 
of  drying  up  the  watery  ingredient  of  the  body. 

Verily,  when  the  Water  (of  the  body)  is  lost,  one  feels  thirsty.  18 

One  feels  thirsty  when  the  ducts  (of  wind  and  fire)  are  obstructed 
by  heavy  food  and  milk  and  oils  which  mix  with  one  another  at  the 
time  of  the  digestion, 

I  n  the  engendering  of  such  thirst  also,  the  causes  are  the  wind 
and  the  fire.  r9 

[Here  ‘anala,’  meaning  fire,  has  been  used  for  bile.  What  the 
author  says  is  that  heavy  food,  &c.,  mix  together  when  digestion  goes 
on.  They  obstruct  the  passages  through  which  the  wind  and  the 
bile  course.  The  wind  and  bile  thus  becoming  excited  cause  the 
thirst.] 

Alcohol,  in  consequence  of  its  keenness,  heat,  and  drying  virtue, 
provokes  the  bile  and  the  wind.  These  two  dry  up  the  watery  in¬ 
gredient  in  the  bodies  of  those  who  are  accustomed  to  alcohol.  20 

Water  thrown  upon  sand  heated  (by  the  rays  of  the  sun)  dries  up 
speedily  (but  supplies  it  with  moisture),  even  so  cold  drink  (though 
dried  up  supplies  with  moisture  and)  gives  relief  to  those  whose 
systems  have  been  heated  by  alcohol.f  21 


*  In  the  second  line,  for  ‘meha’  (meaning  Gonorrhoea)  Gangadhara  reads  ‘mbha’  Which 
means  swoons  or  loss  of  consciousness.  This  can  scarcely  be  correct.  One  feels  thirsty  Irl 
G®norrhcea,  but  hardly  when  one  is  afflicted  with  swoons.  The  Calcutta  edition  reads 
‘(Jsoha’  for  ‘Raga’  after  ‘Kshaya.’  This  is  not  correct. 

Lastly,  Gangadhara  reads  ‘atyupgrishtadehanam.’  The  other  editions  have  ‘adi’  after 
‘gwasa.’— T. 

-j-  The  original  is  really  unmeaning.  A  simile  or  comparison  is  intended  by  the  use  of 
the  particle  ‘iva’  in  the  first  line  ;  but  the  point  of  the  comparison  cannot  be  seized.  Liter, 
ally  rendered,  the  verse  runs  thus  :  ‘as  water  thrown  on  heated  sand  dries  tip  quickly,  even 


204 


nGi  6 


CHI  KITS  A  S  THAN  A. 


[fRIS»NA. 


Of  one  that  bathes  in  cold  water,  the  heat  of  the  body  becomes 
obstructed  and,  coursing  into  the  stomach,  engenders  thirst. 

Hence,  one  whose  body  has  become  heated,  should  not  suddenly 
have  recourse  to  cold  water  for  purpose  of  bathing.*  22 

In  all  these  varieties  of  thirst  (viz.,  those  which  arise  from  the 
eating  of  heavy  food,  milk,  and  oils),  when  the  wind  becomes  attenu¬ 
ated,  the  symptoms  that  present  themselves  are  those  of  bile-born 
Thirst. 

I  shall  now  explain  what  the  treatment  is  of  the  various  kinds  of 
Thirst,  agreeably  to  the  causes  which  engender  them.  23 

That  Thirst  which  arises  from  loss  of  the  watery  ingredient  in  the 
body,  dries  up  the  person  and  kills  him  speedily. 

Hence,  the  person  afflicted  with  such  thirst  should  drink  rain¬ 
water  mixed  with  honey,  or  any  other  water  possessing  similar 
virtues.  24 

[‘Aindram  toyam’  is  a  beautiful  expression.  Literally,  it  means 
‘water  sent  down  by  Indra,  the  deity  of  clouds.’  As  regards  ‘water 
possessing  similar  virtues,’  the  commentators  note  that  this  means 
water  which  is  exposed  to  the  sun’s  rays  at  day-time,  and  the  moon's 
rays  at  night-time,  and  which  is  stirred  all  through  the  day  and  night 
by  the  wind.  Of  course,  the  water  of  rivers  and  large  inland  lakes  is 
implied.] 

That  water  which  is  slightly  astringent  in  taste,  thin,  light  (in 
Weight),  cool,  possessed  of  good  scent,  and  good  taste,  and  which  is  free 
from  filth  of  every  kind,  is  equal  to  rain-water,  although  it  may  be 
'taken  from  rivers  and  lakes  on  the  bosom  of  the  earth.  25 

Water  that  has  been  cooled  after  boiling,  and  in  which  sugar- 
candy  has  been  dissolved, 

or,  that  which  has  been  boiled  with  the  roots  of  the  five  varieties 
of  grass  beginning  with  Sara  (and  in  which  sugarcandy  has  been 
dissolved),  is  equal  to  rain-water. 


so  happiness  (or  ease)  results  from  the  drinking  of  cold  water  unto  those  whose  systems  have 
been  dried  up  (by  alcohol).’  So  far  as  style  is  concerned,  this  is  nonsense.  Charaka  would 
never  have  written  in  this  way. — T. 

*  The  Calcutta  edition,  in  the  first  line,  reads ‘ushma.’  Gangadhara  reads  ‘ushna,’ but 
explains  it  as  ‘Dehoshma.’  In  the  second  line,  the  Calcutta  edition  reads  ‘klSntah.’ 
GangSdhara  reads  ‘snane.’  The  reading  ‘UshmS.’  seems  to  be  better.  GangSdhara’s 
reading  ‘SnSne’  has  been  accepted  in  our  version, — T. 


tESSON  XXII.] 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


1617 

The  ‘mantha’  prepared  with  rain-water  of  fried  paddy  or  of  the 
flour  of  fried  barley,  mixed  with  sugar,  and  honey  ;*  26 

or  the  cold  ‘vatya’  of  raw  barley,  mixed  with  honey  and  sugar, 
may  be  given  to  the  patient. 

Or,  the  ‘peya’  made  with  ‘£ali’  rice  or  with  rice  obtained  from  the 
variety  of  paddy  called  ‘Koradusha,’  may  be  given.f  27 

Or,  rice  is  prescribable  that  has  been  boiled  with  milk  and  mixed 
with  honey  and  sugar. 

Or,  boiled  rice  may  be  given  with  meat-juice  prepared  from  the 
flesh  of  pigeon,  fried  in  ghee ,  and  even  mixed  with  salt  and  anything 
that  is  sour.  28 

Or,  well-dressed  meat-juice  prepared  from  the  flesh  of  wild 
animals,  and  boiled  with  the  decoction  of  the  roots  of  the  five  varie¬ 
ties  of  grass  (known  by  the  name  of  ‘Trina-panchamula’)  as  also,  with 
that  of  ‘Munjataka’  (a  bulb  from  the  Himalayas),  and  that  of  Piyala 
( Buchanania  latifolia ),  is  commendable  ; 

or,  milk  boiled  with  the  decoctions  mentioned  above,  and  mixed 
with  sugar  and  honey,  is  prescribable.  29 

Or,  the  patient  afflicted  with  thirst,  having  rubbed  his  body  with 
ghee  that  has  been  washed  a  hundred  times  and  having  bathed  in. 
cold  water,  may  take  milk. 

Or,  the  soup  of  Mudga  (the  seeds  of  Phaseolus  Mungo),  or  that  of 
Masura  (the  seeds  of  Cicer  lens),  or  that  of  Chanaka  ( Cicer  arietinum ), 
fried  in  ghee,  may  be  given.  3° 

Or,  milk  boiled  with  the  group  of  drugs  called  ‘Jivaniya’  together 
with  such  articles  as  are  sweet, 

or,  milk  boiled  with  things  that  are  (cooling  together  with  those 
that  are  bitter, 

each  mixed  with  honey  and  sugar,  may  be  given  to  the  patient 
for  drink  or  for  rubbing  or  drenching  his  body  with.  31 

Or,  the  ghee  that  is  raised  from  milk  boiled  as  above,  is  beneficial 
as  drink,  or  for.  rubbing  the  body  with,  or  even  as  an  errhine. 

Or,  the  patient  may  take  as  an  errhine  the  milk  of  a  woman 


*  ‘Mantha’  is  a  thin  preparation,  as  explained  ante — T. 

t  Vatya’ is  a  thin  preparation.  Raw  barley  is  soaked  in  cold  water.  It  is  really  tha 
.infusion -of  barley.— X. 


j6i8  CHIKITSAS  THAN'A.  [trishna. 

mixed  with  sugar  ;  or  the  milk  of  the  camel,  similarly  mixed  ;  or  the 
juice  of  the  sugarcane.  32 

Or,  gargles  of  milk,  of  the  juice  of  the  sugarcane,  of  water  mixed 
with  treacle,  of  water  mixed  with  sugar  etc.,  as  alsa  of  honey,  of  the 
wine  called  ‘Sidhu,’  of  the  wine  called  ‘Madhvika,’  of  water  in  which 
tamarind  has  been  dissolved,  and  of  the  juice  of  Matulunga  {Citrus 
■medico)  remove'ithe  dryness  of  the  palate.*  33 

Plasters  made  of  (the  leaves,  of)  Jamvu  {Eugenia  Jambolana),  of 
(those  of)  Amrataka  {Spondias  mangifera),  of  (those  of)  Vadara 
(jujubes),  of  (those  ofj  Vetasa  {Calamus  Rotang),  and  of  the  group  of 
five  leaves  {viz.y  those  of  mango,  black-berry  AEgle  marmelos ,  Citrus 
Medica,  and  wood-apple),  rendered  sour  (by  adding  sour  juices),, 
applied  ’on  the  chest,  the  mouth,  and  the  head,  cure  supervening 
swoons,  vertigo,  and  thirst.f  34 

Plaster  made  of  the  pastes  of  Dadirna  {Punica  Granatum ), 
Kapittha  {Feronia  Elephantu m\  Lodhra  {Symplocos  racemosa),  Vidari 
( Batatus  Paniculatus),  and  Vijapuraka  ( Citrus  Medica ),  as  also  the 
plaster  made  of  Gaura  {Curcuma  tonga)  and  Amalaka  (the  fruits  of 
Phyllanthus  Emblica)  reduced  to  paste  with  ghee  and  ‘aranfila’  (other¬ 
wise-called  ‘kanji’), 

applied  on  the  head,  are  beneficial  (in  that  variety  of  Thirst  which 
is  accompanied  by  swoons,  &c.  35 

(jlaivala  {Blyxa  octandra),  Panka  (soft  clay  obtained  from  the 
bottom  of  lakes  or  tanks,  &c.),  and  Amvuruha  (flowers  of  the  lotus)  j 
Amla  (kanji),  ghee,  and  the  flour  of  fried  barley  ; 

Plaster  made  of  each  of  these  two  sets  is  beneficial  in  Thirst. 

The  touch  of  cloths,  soaked  in  Mastu  (cream  of  curds),  or  in 
‘Aranala’  (kanji) as  also,  the  touch  of  Kamala  (lotus  flowers)  and  of 
‘Manihara’  (necklaces  made  of  gems),  alleviates  Thirst.  3& 

[Gangadhara  takes  the  first  line  to  mean  plasters  made  of  each  of 
the  six  drugs.  From  the  grammatical  construction,  however,  of  the 
line,  it  seems  that  two  plasters  are  indicated,  viz.y  one  made  of  the 
first  three,  and  the  other  of  the  second  three.} 


*  The  construction  of  this  verse  is  rather  terse- — T. 

+  Gangadhara  reads  ‘samQritSh’  for  ‘saghritah’  of  the  Calcutta  edition. — T. 

+■  ‘Gaura’  is  another  name  of- ‘Haridra’  or  Curcuma  longa.  ‘Aranala’  is  a  variety  of 
‘Kanji.’— T. 


LESSON  XXII.] 


CHAR  A  KA-SA  MBIT  A. 


1619 


The  touch  of  the  bosoms,  or  palms,  or  bodies,  laved  with  dew,  or 
cold  water  or  sandal  paste,  of  beautiful  and  beloved  women,  wearing 
silken  cloths  or  cloths  drenched  in  cool  water,  is  beneficial  in  thirst.  37 
The  contact  of  cool  caves,  forests,  rivers,  lakes,  lotuses,  breezes, 
lunar  rays,  and  dew,  and  of  spots,  containing  beautiful  pieces  of  water, 
as  also  the  recollection  of  these,  and  conversations  bearing  upon 
them,  are  alleviative  of  thirst.*  38 

Food  and  drink  alleviative  of  wind,  as  also  food  and  drink  that 
are  mild,  light  and  cooling,  are  alleviatives  of  thirst  born  of  wind. 

Milk  taken  after  drinking  those  ghees  which  have  been  laid  down 
as  alleviative  of  waste  and  cough  is  alleviative  of  wind-born  thirst.  39 
In  thirst  born  of  wind  and  bile  (excited  together),  milk  or  ghee 
boiled  with  the  group  of  drugs  called  ‘Jivaniya’,  is  beneficial. 

In  thirst  born  of  bile,  the  decoction  of  grapes,  sandal  wood,  date 
fruit,  the  roots  of  Ushira  (Andropogon  muricatus ),  mixed  with  honey 
and  ghee ,  (is  beneficial).  4° 

The  decoction,  cooled,  of  red  ‘(^alP  rice,  date  fruit,  Parushaka 
(fruits  of '  Grewia  Asiatica ),  Utpala  ( Nymphcea  stellata ),  DrSksha 
(grapes),  liquorice,  and  burnt  clods  of  earth,  (strained  through  a  piece 
of  clean  cloth),  alleviates  bile-born  thirst.  4* 

[This  verse  is  omitted  in  Gangadhafa’s  edition.  It  occurs  in  the 
Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions.] 

(The  decoction  of  the  following,  pounded  together,  viz.,)  a  ‘prastha* 
of  red  ‘£sli’  rice,  Lodhra  ( Symplocos  racemosa),  Madhuka  (liquorice), 
Anjana  {Berberis  Asiatica ),  and  Utpala  ( Nymphcea  stellated,  boiled  in 
an  earthen  vessel,  and  mixed  with  clods  of  earth,  honey,  and  J ala 
(otherwise  called  Hrivera,  i  e.,  Pavonia  odorata ),  should  be  given  as 
a  drink.f  42 


*  As  regards  the  second  line,  the  reading  of  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  is 
adopted.  Gangadhara’s  reading  is  different. — T. 

•f-  ‘Kshunnah’  implies,  as  Gangadhara  explains,  ‘kuttitah’,  that  is,  cut  into  small  pieces 
and  pounded  in  a  mortar.  The  articles  named  in  the  first  line  are  pounded  and  then  boiled. 
The  decoction,  thus  obtained,  is  kept  in  an  earthen  vessel.  The  articles  mentioned  in  the 
second  line  are  then  thrown  into  the  decoction.  When  the  silt  falls  down  into  the  bottom, 
the  pure  liquid  is  transferred  carefully  into  another  vessel. 

It  is  difficult  to  understand  what  is  meant  by  ‘Anjana’  in  the  first  line.  Probably  it  is; 

‘Rasanjana’  or  the  juice  of  Berberis  Asiatica.  Ordinarily  it  means  collyrium. 

‘Jala’  In  the  second  line  implies  ‘Bala’  or  Pavonia  odorata. — T. 


1620 


CHI  KITS A  S  THANA . 


[trishna. 


The  leaves  of  Bata  {Ficus  Indica ),  of  Matulunga  {Citrus  Medica, 
variety,  acida )  and  of  Vetasa  {Calamus  Rotang ),  the  roots  of  Kuja 
{Poa  Cynosuroides),  and  those  of  Kaga  {Saccharum  spontaneum ),  and 
the  thing  called  Yashthi  (liquorice) : 

Boil  these  in  a  sufficient  measure  of  water. 

Then  throw  into  the  water  red-hot  black  earth,  or  red-hot  black 
sand,  or  red-hot  pieces  of  an  earthen  jar  (or  other  kind  of  vessel). 
Have  it  cooled  and  give  the  pure  transparent  water  to  drink  when 
the  sediments  have  fallen  down.  This  preparation,  or,  the  decoction 
of  Amritavalli  (otherwise  called  Guduchi,  i.  e.,  Tinospora  cordifolid) 
into  which  has  been  thrown  slightly  heated  gravels,  alleviates  thirst 
(born  of  excited  bile).  43-44 

[The  second  line  of  verse  44  indicates  a  preparation  that  is  al¬ 
together  different  from  the  preparation  indicated  in  43  and  the  first 
line  of  44.  The  fact  is,  black  earthen  clods,  or  black  sand,  grains,  or 
broken  pieces  of  an  earthen  jar  or  vessel,  are  each  directed  to  be 
made  red-hot  by  burning  them  in  fire.  While  red-hot,  any  of  these 
should  be  thrown  into  the  decoction  previously  obtained.  In  this 
way,  three  preparations  may  be  obtained,  any  one  of  which  may 
be  given  to  drink,  when  cooled,  after  the  silt  has  been  deposited  at 
the  bottom.] 

The  cold  infusion  of  milk-yielding  trees  and  plants  (such  as  Ficus 
Indica  and  the  rest), 

or,  the  cold  infusion  of  the  soup  of  drugs  called  Madhura  (such  as 
Kakoli  and  the  rest), 

or,  the  cold  infusion  of  cooling  articles  (such  as  the  fruits  of 
Phyllanthus  Emblica  and  the  rest), 

into  each  of  which  has  been  thrown  burnt  clods  of  earth,  and 
each  of  which  is  mixed  with  sugar  and  honey, 

is  capable  of  alleviating  thirst  born  of  bile.  45 

The  decoction  of  Vyosha  (the  three  acrids,  vis.,  dry  ginger,  the 
fruits  of  Piper  longum,  and  black  pepper),  Vacha  {Acorus  Calamus'), 
Bhallataka  (the  seeds  of  Semecarpus  Anacardium),  and  bitters  (such  as 
Agathotes  Cherayta  and  the  rest),  is  alleviative  of  thirst  born  of 
undigested  food  (in  the  stomach). 

All  those  remedies,  again,  that  have  been  laid  down  as  alleviative 
of  vomiting  born  of  excited  phlegm,  are  equally  prescribable  in  this 
variety  of  thirst.  4$ 


Lesson  xxii.] 


CHARAKA-SAMHITA. 


i&zl 


If  stupefaction  of  the  body,  disgust  for  food,  indigestion,  slothful- 
hess,  and  vomiting  manifest  themselves  as  supervening  symptoms  in 
Thirst  then  such  thirst  should  be  known  as  accompanied  by  excited 
phlegm. 

In  such  thirst  the  administration  is  beneficial  of  emetics  composed 
of  curds,  honey,  ‘tarpana’  (the  flour  of  fried  barley  boiled  in  water), 
salt,  and  hot  water.  47 

The  decoction  of  Dadima  ( Punica  Granatuni)  and  Madana-phala 
(the  fruits  of  Randia  dumetorum), 

or,  the  decoction  of  some  other  drug  or  drugs  that  are  known  to 
be  emetics, 

or,  some  linctus  or  drink  that  is  known  to  have  emetic  virues, 
each  mixed  with  Rajani  ( Curcuma  longa),  honey,  and  sugar, 
should  be  administered  (for  causing  the  patient  to  vomit).  48 
That  gravest  variety  of  Thirst  which  arises  in  wasting  consumption 
and  is  called  waste-born  thirst,  is  regarded  as  equal  to  wasting 
consumption  : 

Hence,  it  should  be  alleviated  by  administering  such  medicines  as 
are  alleviative  of  emaciation,  (pulmonary)  sores,  and  consumption.*  49 
One  that  is  afflicted  with  thirst  born  of  alcohol  (drunk  in  excess) 
should  drink  wines  diluted  with  water  of  half  their  measure,  and 
mixed  with  some  sour  juice  and  salt  and  some  good  scent. 

Such  a  patient  may  also  be  bathed  in  cold  water  and  then 
made  to  drink  wine  largely  diluted  with  water,  or  treacle  copious 
mixed  with  water.  5° 

One  afflicted  with  thirst  caused  by  abstention  from  food  at  a  time 
when  hunger  is  felt, 

or,  one  that  feels  thirsty  in  consequence  of  having  taken  oils 
and  ghees  in  copious  measure, 

should  drink  thin  gruel  of  barley. 

One  that  feels  thirsty  owing  to  having  stuffed  the  stomach  with 
heavy  food,  should  disgorge  the  food  that  has  been  taken.  51 

A  strong  man  afflicted  with  thirst  born  of  gorging,  should  dis¬ 
gorge  by  drinking  wine  diluted  with  water,  or  hot  water. 


*  The  first  line  is  excedingly  terse.  The  comment  of  GangSdhara  is  followed  in  the 
translation.— T. 


CHIRITSA  s  tha  na. 


[TRISHtfA. 


1 f&ii 

After  disgorging  he  should  clear  his  mouth  by  chewing  a  fruit  or 
or  two  of  MagaJhika  {Piper  longuni),  and  then  drink  ‘mantha’  (gruel 
of  barley)  mixed  wth  sugar.  52 

A  strong  man  afflicted  with  dryness  of  palate  should  drink  such 
ghees  as  have  aphrodisiac  virtues,  after  which  he  should  take  wine. 

A  weak  man,  however,  when  afflicted  with  dryness  of  palate, 
should  take  milk  that  has  been  skimmed  of  butter,  or  such  meat- 
juices  as  have  been  properly  oilified.*  53 

The  thirst  that  is  felt  by  weak  men  whose  systems  have  become 
exceedingly  dry  is  quickly  alleviated  by  milk  ;  or  by  the  meat-juice 
prepared  with  goat’s  flesh  and  fried  in  ghee  and  that  is  cool,  sweet, 
and  agreeable.  54 

That  thirst  which  arises  from  one’s  having  taken  oily  food  should 
be  quenched  by  the,  physician  by  administering  water  mixed  with 
treacle. 

The  Thirst  of  one  that  is  afflicted  with  swoons  should  be  allevi¬ 
ated  with  such  medicines  as  alleviate  blood-bile.  55 

The  author  here  lays  down  where  cold  and  hot  water  should  be 
given  and  where  they  should  not  be  given  : 

[This  seems  to  be  an  interpolation  by  some  scribe.  GangSdhara 
omits  it,  though  it  occurs  in  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions.] 

In  vomiting,  in  sour-bile,  in  burning,  in  swoons,  in  vertigo,]-  in 
fatigue,  in  diseases  born  of  excessive  drinking  of  alcohal,  in  vitiation 
of  the  blood,  in  poisons  introduced  into  the  system,  and  in  vitiation 
of  the  bile,  water  that  is  naturally  cool  is  commendable. 

When  all  the  three  faults  are  excited,  boiled  water,  when  cooled, 
is  commendable.  56 

In  hiccup,  asthma,  acute  fever,  inflammation  of  the  schniederian 
membrane,  in  diseases  born  of  excessive  drinking  of  ghee ,  in  pains 
of  the  flanks,  in  diseases  of  the  throat,  in  diseases  bora  of  phlegm 
and  wind,  as  also  in  thickening  of  the  phlegm,  hot  water  is  beneficial. 

In  the  case  of  persons  who  have  taken  correctives,  hot  water 
should  be  given  to  them  on  the  day  they  have  taken  the  correctives.57 


*  Some  editions  have  ‘Sarpirbhrishtam’,  meaning  skimmed.  This  is,  of  course,  the 
correct  reading.  ‘Sarppiryushtam’,  meaning  ‘unskimmed’  is  not  correct. — T. 

t  For  ‘Bhrama’  meaning  ‘vertigo’  the  Calcutta  and  the  Bombay  editions  read  ‘Tamah’ 
meaning  ‘sensation  of  entering  into  darkness.’ — T. 


James  W.  Reese,  Esq.,  Westminister  Maryland  U.  S.  A.: — You  have  undertaken 
a  great  and  difficult  work,  and  one  which,  it  seems  to  me,  deserves  the  approbation-  and 
encouragement  of  all  who  care  to  know  what  wise  men  of  the  past  ages  thought  and 
taught  on  a  topic  so  important  as  the  preservation  of  health  and  cure  of  disease. 

William  Emmecte  Coleman,  Esq.,  San  Francisco ,  California: —  . As  each 

successive  part  is  issued,  the  greater  intrinsic  value  of  the  work  is  apparent.  ...  ...  ... 
there  is  much  in  it  both'of  interest  and  value  to  the  Western  mind,  occidental  medical 
science,  therapeutic.  American  and  European  medical  science  has  much  to  learn . 

Chas.  E.  Sajons,  Esq.,  Philadelphia,  U.  S.  A. : — You  are  entitled  to  the  greatest 
praise.  Next  May  or  June  the  Satellite — a  journal  under  my  editorial  management — will 
begin  to  review  books,  &c.,  and  one  of  the  first  to  be  taken  up  will  be  yours. 

Chas.  O.  Curtman,  Esq.,  St.  Louis,  Ohio ,  U.  S,  A.  : — The  work  interests  me  very 
highly,  and  I  have  already,  on  last  night  taken  it  to  the  meeting  of  one  of  our  medical 
societies,  and  read  extracts  from  it  wich  excited  a  lively  curiosity  and  expressions  of 
interest.  I  will  send  selections  from  it  to  a  medical  journal  and  also  to  a  pharmaceutical 
monthly. 

Professor  E.  B.  Cowel,  Cambridge : — A  careful  translation  of  this  ancient  work 
will  be  very  interesting  and  valuable.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  may  succeed  in  translat¬ 
ing  the  entire  work.  It  will  be  a  great  achievement  when  finished. 

R.  G.  Eccles,  Esq.,  Dean  St.  Brooklyn,  Mew  York-. — Matter  is  certainly  of  great 
interest  to  me. 

E.  P.  Davis  Esq.,  Editor  of  the  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  .Sciences,  Phila¬ 
delphia  :— Thank  you  for  this  erudite  and  interesting  contribution  to  the  Medical 
literature. 

F.  A.  Castle,  Esq., — Even  a  superficial  examination  of  it  impresses  me  with  its 
importance. .  I  shall  certainly  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  for  bringing  it  to  the 
attention  of  the  Librarian  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine. 

H.  C.  Wood,  Esq.,  Philadelphia: — I  have  found  it  exceedingly  interesting  and  sin¬ 
cerely  hope  that  you  will  carry  on  the  work  to  completion  and  that  I  will  be  one  of  the 
happy  ones  who  have  a  copy  in  my  library.  I  have  written  a  long  notice  of  it  which  I 
expect  will  appear  in  the  University  Medical  Magazine,  the  demi-official  organ  of  the 
greatest  Medical  University  in  America. 

Dr.  A.  Mitra,  Chief  Medical  Officer  of  Caskniere : — No  medical  man’s  library  should 
be  without  Charaka  :  for  his  education  cannot  be  completed  unless  he  has  studied  this 
great  work  for  practical  and  philosophical  medicine. 

Dr.  Oscar  Oldeberg,  Professor  of  Pharmacy  and  Dean  of  the  Faculty,  North-  Western 
University,  Secretary  to  the  Congress  of  the  World’s  Columbian  Exposition  : — I  am 
already  deeply  interested  in  the  work,  which  is  a  revelation.  I  shall  take  occasion  to 
speak  of  it  in  the  Apothecary. 

Professor  L.  E.  Sayer,  Dean,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  U.  S.  A.  .•—Be 
assured  I  shall  be  happy  to  aid  you  in  any  way  possible  in  your  noble  undertaking,  I 
regard  it  as  very  important. 

Abbot  H.  Buck,  Esq.,  19,  East  38th  Street,  New  York  /—Wish  you  a  success  in 
your  praiseworthy  undertaking. 

Mons.  T.  Gebbard,  Derselhofber  Praise,  Dramstadt :— The  difficulties  you  speak  of 
in  getting  out  the  translation  I  fully  sympathise  with.  A  German  proverb  says  what 
takes  much  time  conies  out  well. 

Dr.  H.  N.  Whelpley,  Ph.  D.,  G.  M.  D.,  F.  R.  M.  S.,  Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  A. 
Editor,  Meyer  Brothers'  Druggist:—!  shall  take  pleasure  in  noticing  in  our  columns  aud 


advising  our  readers  to  subscribe  for  It.  The  medical  profession  of  the  entire  English 
writing  world  is  under  great  obligations  to  yjffedbr  placing  this  matter  at  their  disposal. 
The  work  is  certainly  scientific  and  as  well  as  of  great  interest. 

Mons.  H.  Le  Soudor,  Librarie  Etrangere,  1J4,  Boulevatse,  Saint  Germain  : — Beg 
to  send  Rs.  32.  Put  me  down  as  a  subscriber  to  your  English  translation  of  Charaka. 

Charles  Rice,  Esq. ,  New  York  : — Wish  you  every  success  that  can  recompense  you 
for  your  laborious  undertaking.  I  will  eventually  send  you  a  copy  of  a  review  I  will  write. 

Geo.  H.  Clark,  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia-. — As  I  go  over  each  fasciculus  I 
arrive  at  one  conclusion  and  that  is  this  : — if  the  physicians  of  the  present  day  would  drop 
from  the  Pharmacopia  all  the  Modern  Drugs  and  Chemicals,  and  treat  their  patients 
according  to  the  method  of  Charaka,  there  would  be  less  work  for  the  undertakers,  and 
fewer  chronic  invalids  in  the  world.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  the  completion  of 
the  work,  for  I  am  anxious  to  have  it  all. 

W.  C.  Bonnerjee,  Esq.,  6,  Park  Street,  Calcutta  : — My  dear  Pandit  Kabiratna 
Mahasaaa, — I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  either  of  the  two  noblemen  of 
whom  I  spoke  ;  when  I  do  so,  you  may  be  sure  I  shall  not  forget  my  promise  to  you 
[about  drawing  their  attention  to  your  excellent  work.  Writing  again,  -sometime  after.— 

As  Ayurvedic  physician  of  note . considerable  praise  is  due  to  you  for  your  efforts 

to  diffuse  a  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  of  your  profession, 

Paul  Burtholum,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia I  have  been  exceedingly  struck  with  the 
profound  meaning  of  many  passages,  which,  indeed,  go  beyond  anything  that  I  ever  met 
before  in  medical  Literature  and  find  their  parallel  only  in  Lord  Bacon’s  reflections. 

H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector,  Mymensing: — The  tran¬ 
slation  would  be  most  useful.  The  contents  are  interesting  even  to  a  layman. 

R.  C.  Dutt,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  C.  I.  E.,  Magistrate  and  Collector : — Your  patriotic 

labours  deserve  every  encouragement.  You  have  so  admirably  begun  . You 

deserve  the  especial  acknowledgments  of  the  medical  profession. 

F.  H.  Skrine,  Esq.,  I.  C.  S.  I  have  read  Charaka-Samhita  with  interest.  It  is 
marvellously  like  Hyppocrates’  maxims  in  spirit  and  form.  It  is  wonderful  to  note 
the  comparatively  advanced  views  held  by  the  sages  of  your  country  and  how  completely 
they  had  anticipated  discoveries  which  we  moderns  flatter  ourselves  are  due  to  the 
enlightenment  of  this  age. 

G.  A.  Grierson,  Esq.,  C.  S.,  Gy  a  : — It  will  supply  a  want  long  felt.  I  shall  be 
obliged  by  your  getting  my. name  down  as  a  subscriber  to  the  work. 

Dr.  Griffith  Evans,  M.  D.,  Brynkynalt,  Bangor,  North  Wales  : — The  book  is 
exceedingly  interesting  and  instructive  for  those  who  are  fond  of  tracing  the  origin,  growth 
and  development  of  medical  science,  and  also  illustrates  some  ancient  customs  of  India,  j 

The  Honorable  Raja  Peary  Mohun  Mukerji,  C.  I.  E.  : — Your  English  translation 
of  Charaka-Samhita,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  has  placed  the  treasures  of  a  great  work  before 
a  large  class  of  readers.  Notwithstanding  the  inevitable  difficulty  of  identifying  a  large 
number  of  plants,  mentioned  in  the  Sanskrit  text,  the  translation  must  be  accepted  as 
possibly  the  best  that  could  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances.  People  are  beginning 
to  find  that  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  Health  should  form  a  prime  element  in  every 
system  of  education.  They  could  look  for  no  better  guide  than  Charaka-Samhita.  It  is 
a  work  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Hindu,  old  or  young. 

The  Hon’ble  Justice  Gooroodas  Banerji,— The  work  is  not  only  of  value  to 
physician  and  the  antiquarian,  but  will  be  of  great  interest  to  the  general  reader  as  well.. 
Your  undertaking  deserves  encouragement  and  support,  I  wish  you  all  success. 


